* 8818927
* Crises, Realism, and War, 1816-1980
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Russell Leng, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1991
* USD 66,683.00

This research is part of an ongoing investigation of the actions and
interactions of nations in disputes that reach the crisis level, that is when
the threat of war is present. The purpose of the investigation is to develop a
better understanding of what types of actions, or bargaining strategies, are
associated with the outbreak of war and what types are most effective in
resolving crises without resort to war. The study also investigates what effects
previous crisis experiences are likely to have on the bargaining strategies
chosen by statesmen when they find their states engaged in successive crises
with the same adversary. This section focuses particularly on the Middle East
and U.S. - Soviet Crises. The researcher employs a random sample of forty crises
occurring between 1816 to 1980. For each of these crises, diplomatic histories
and press accounts have been used to construct verbal chronologies of the
actions of the participants. The verbal chronologies, in turn, have been
converted into machine readable descriptions that may be analyzed. This
facilitates classifying the crises according to distinct behavioral types, which
are based on the patterns of conflict escalation-deescalation and reciprocity
shown in the actions of the participants. Then it becomes possible to consider
which behavioral types are most, or least, war-prone, and what conditions are
most likely to produce those types. It is also possible to analyze the actions
and reactions of states as they use different bargaining strategies in their
attempts to influence the other side in the course of the crisis. This
facilitates the search for answers to questions regarding which bargaining
strategies are most often associated with war outcomes, and which are most
likely to allow statesmen to avoid war without having to pay the price of
submission to the other side. The research completed to date suggests that
statesmen tend to adopt a realpolitik approach to crisis bargaining that
prescribes the use of coercive tactics and a strong demonstration of resolve.
There is also evidence that, particularly among states that are evenly matched
in power, the use of escalating coercive tactics is associated with war
outcomes. In addition, there is some indication that realpolitik reasoning is
applied to the "lessons" that statesmen draw from previous crisis experiences
and that this tends to make each successive crisis more dangerous. Preliminary
findings also suggest that a "reciprocating" strategy combining tit-for-tat
responses with offers to cooperate may be the most effective overall crisis
bargaining strategy. The investigation will take a more thorough and rigorous
look at the validity of these preliminary findings as well as a range of other
questions associated with the behavior of states in crises.