* 8818552
* REU:  Mechanisms of Non-random Seed Paternity in Wild       Radish, Raphanus sativus
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Diane Marshall, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Gregory J. McCants
* 08/31/1992
* USD 187,088.00

Although most plants reproduce as both seed parents and pollen parents,
knowledge of the factors that control the amount of plant reproduction is, in
most cases, limited to understanding of seed production. Because plants
generally produce more pollen than seeds, there is an opportunity for extensive
variation in ability of plants, acting as pollen donors, to sire seeds. The
variation may be produced by differences in pollen grain germination,
differences in pollen tube growth, and differences in embryo growth and survival
depending on the source of the pollen. Which mechanism actually produces
differences in pollen donor success is not known for any plant. This research
will examine the mechanisms that produce differences in fertilization success
among pollen donors of wild radish, Raphanus sativus. The research will involve
experimental crosses using pollen donors of different genotypes followed by
measurement of paternal success and examination of the processes that produce
those differences. This work will increase basic understanding of the neglected
half of plant reproduction, performance of pollen donors. Understanding of the
factors that control plant reproduction is essential to selection for continued
productivity in crop plants.