* 8818831
* Travel to International Meeting of the Society for Social   Studies of Science; Amsterdam, Netherlands; November 16-19, 1988
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1989
* John Wilkes, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/1989
* USD 539.00

This award will enable the winner of the Second National Student Projects
Competition in Science, Technology and Society to travel to the international
meeting of the Society for Social Studies of Science (4S) in order to receive
the award and present the research project for which it was given. The meeting
will be held November 16-19, 1988, in Amsterdam. The first competition was held
in association with the 4S meeting in Worcester, Massachusetts in 1987. From 47
student entries, a top prize and three second prizes were awarded. The event was
successful and the project sponsors, Worcester Polytechnic Institute and the 4S,
decided to continue this effort to introduce promising young talent to the
review process and provide a forum for development of both written and oral
communication of research findings. The ultimate goal is to institutionalize an
international, biennial competition for the best undergraduate paper in science,
technology and society studies. The scope and organization of this activity are
meritorious; it has the potential to evolve into an important element in
undergraduate STS education. The principal investigator was responsible for the
successful first year's effort, and he has made appropriate contacts for the
second year to be successful as well. The project is a very cost-effective
mechanism by which to encourage the development of this research field.
Therefore, support in the amount of $539 is awarded.