* 8818166
* Nonlinear System Design:  Adaptive Feedback Linearization   with Unmodeled Dynamics (Supplement: NSF-UC-NASA Workshop onNonlinear Control, Santa Barbara, CA., April 5-7, 1990)
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1989,04/01/1991
* Petar Kokotovic, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 04/01/1991
* USD 19,200.00

The proposed study of geometric-asymptotic properties of nonlinear dynamic
systems with parametric and dynamic uncertainties is aimed at the development of
a design methodology for robust adaptive feedback linearization. An analysis of
the effects of uncertainties (Section 3) will reveal whether nonadaptive state-
feedback (Section 4) or observer-based (Section 5) designs will guarantee
robustness, and when an adaptive feedback linearization approach (Section 6) is
more appropriate. New problem formulations in each of these areas motivate the
development of a unified geometric-asymptotic-adaptive methodology. It is shown
that the phenomenon of controller and/or observer peaking, which has been
noticed but not thoroughly studied in the linear system theory, is of
fundamental importance for robust nonlinear feedback design. Among the dangers
of nonadaptive high-gain loops is a possible interference of peaking with
uncertain nonlinearities that can result in a drastic decrease of the stability
region. A fuller understanding of geometric-asymptotic properties will show when
this type of interference can be avoided. Adaptive parameter updates reduce the
effects of parametric uncertainties and avoid the need for high-gain loops. At
present they are restricted to systems with known nonlinearities, when a
"certainty-equivalence" form of feedback linearization is applicable. A crucial
trade-off between adaptive and nonadaptive designs is to be made vis-a-vis
unmodeled dynamics, which are known to cause instabilities in some linear
adaptive systems. Robustness of nonlinear adaptive designs will be improved by
algorithm modifications based on current research in linear adaptive control.