* 8818540
* Direct Iron and Steelmaking and Clean Steel Technologies,   Award in U.S. and Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Richard Fruehan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1992
* USD 235,360.00

Description: In a program coordinated by Dr. R.J. Fruehan, ___________ Professor
of Metallurgical Engineering at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU), Pittsburgh,
PA, and Dr. S.K. Gupta, Director, Research and Development Centre for the Steel
Authority of India, Ltd. (SAIL), U.S. and Indian scientists plan to jointly
conduct research on steel making starting from raw material preparation to new
methods for production of clean steel. The six planned projects are: Project
U.S. Scientist Indian Scientist _______ ______________ ________________ 1.
Surface P. Somasundaran R.P. Sharma Characteristics and Columbia Univ. SAIL
Flocculation of Coal Fines 2. Plasma-Solid K.J. Reid S.K. Gupta Interactions
Univ.of Minnesota SAIL 3. Clean Steels in R.J. Fruehan N.B. Ballal Combined
Blowing CMU IIT, Bombay Steelmaking 4. High Alumina Slags D. Gaskell M.N. Thakur
Purdue Univ. SAIL 5. Ladle Refining of R.J. Fruehan P.K. Rao Steel By Synthetic
CMU IIT, Bombay Slag 6. Thermodynamics of R.J. Fruehan Brahma Deo Hot Metal with
Soda CMU IIT, Kanpur and Lime Based Fluxes In these projects basic research will
be carried out to build the knowledge base concerning the generic fundamental
chemistry and processes necessary for future steel making under severe economic
and environmental constraints. In particular development of coal in lieu of coke
as the reducing agent will be studied since this is important to India and the
U.S. Scope: The U.S.-India Program seeks to foster scientific _____
collaboration in areas where both countries can benefit. This case is a prime
example. These projects were developed jointly during and following an Indo-U.S.
Workshop on Steel Research held in India in 1986. The work will be carried
mostly in India, especially large scale tests. The U.S. team will do
supplementary research on their current domestic projects. This activity is
likely to produce significant scientific results. Funding: These projects are
being funded under two grants: INT-8818540 to CMU INT-8818256 to SAIL
FY88-US$70,000 + $51,360 (in Rs.) $112,692 (in Rs.) FY89-US$57,000 (incl.
$45,000 from MSME) $0 FY90-US$57,000 (incl. $45,000 from MSME) $0