* 8818646
* Genetics of Mobile Elements in Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Peter Peterson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1992
* USD 104,000.00

Studies of mobile elements in maize have made considerable progress in the past
few years with the isolation and cloning of several elements and subsequent
cloning of a number of genes. This progress is a result of the combined efforts
of molecular biologists working closely with geneticists. Early results have
elucidated the general structure of the elements, their component parts, and
their genetic effects. This work has generated the development of models to
explain the role of these elements inducing changes in the genome as well as in
individual genes. This project is designed to (a) analyze in En system by
isolating mutants controlling the several specific functions of the En element,
(b) pursue the genetic analysis of mutable alleles at the C1, C2, A1, A2, Bz, P,
and Wx loci in order to isolate mutant derivatives for additional molecular
studies, (c) further the studies of the Cy and Uq systems, (d) analyze corn
breeding populations for the distribution of mobile elements, and (e) trap
master elements at cloned loci for their use in tagging genes. One of the most
important developments in modern genetics has been the discovery that
chromosomes do not have fixed, static structures, but rather that genes can move
from place to place on the chromosomes. The mobility of genes was first
demonstrated in corn by Barbara McClintock in the 1950s, and independently by
Dr. Peterson not long afterwards. Beginning in the 1970s a large number of
investigators began to discover that mobile genes are very widespread in nature;
we now know that they are found in almost all species of living organism.
Beginning in the late 1970s a number of investigators began to study at the
molecular level the mechanisms by which genes move. Dr. Peterson has had a very
productive collaboration with Dr. Heinz Saedler (Cologne, FRG) which has
resulted in many important contributions to our understanding of these
mechanisms. This award will allow Dr. Peterson to continue this collaboration.
The mobility of genes has immensely important consequences for the lives of
individual organisms, as well as for the evolutionary history of populations.
Beyond their intrinsic scientific importance, mobile genetic elements have
formed the backbone of many methods of critical importance for biotechnology.