* 8818255
* Symposium on Molecular Electronics - Biosensors and         Biocomputers, July 19-22, 1988 in Santa Clara, CA
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1989
* Felix Hong, Wayne State University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Queen
* 06/30/1989
* USD 4,000.00

This is a conference grant for the purpose of defraying the travel and per diem
expenses of invited speakers at the Symposium on Molecular Electronics -
Biosensors and Biocomputers. This conference will be held in conjunction with
the 19th Annual Meeting of the Fine Particle Society during July 19-22, 1988, at
the Santa Clara Convention Center, Santa Clara, California. This Symposium is a
major activity planned for the Biotechnology, Health and Environment Division,
which is one of the six divisions in the Society. It is designed to cover
multidisciplinary aspects of materials sciences with a common bearing on
molecular electronics and biosensors. The intended audience is from equally
multidisciplinary backgrounds but with a common interest in biotechnology. This
meeting also serves as a forum for interaction of leading scientists with
diverse expertise. Some of the invited speakers have never presented their work
to the same audience before, and others, while not considering their work in the
context of molecular electronics and biosensors, have nevertheless contributed
significantly in the past to basic research which is relevant to molecular
electronics and biosensors. It is our hope that this meeting will serve as a
stimulus to the audience which may become a major human resource for future
research and development of molecular electronics devices and biosensors. It is
also our hope that the meeting will foster an enhanced interaction among
scientists from diverse backgrounds.