* 8818035
* Sexual Reproduction in Ephedra and its Bearing on the       Evolution of Double Fertilization and Endosperm
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* William Friedman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 06/30/1992
* USD 172,284.00

Flowering plants (angiosperms) constitute the most diverse and successful group
of plants living on earth, yet many aspects of their evolutionary origins from
more primitive seed-bearing plants are poorly understood. Plant biologists have
proposed that much of the evolutionary success of angiosperms can be attributed
to their unusual and highly derived pattern of sexual reproduction. Specifically
this involves a double fertilization process, the egg nucleus fusing with one
pollen-borne sperm nucleus to produce the zygote of the embryo, and a second
fertilization event involving another pollen-borne nucleus. The product of the
second fertilization develops into a highly efficient nutrient-garnering tissue
called endosperm, which functions to nourish the developing embryo inside the
seed. Until now little effort has been devoted to understanding how the
distinctive reproductive process of double fertilization might have evolved. Dr.
William Friedman of the University of Georgia will examine patterns of sexual
reproduction among members of the genus Ephedra, suspected of being the most
closely related living group of seed-bearing gymnosperms. Although most aspects
of fertilization in Ephedra are not well understood, there are indications that
events similar to the process of double fertilization in angiosperms may occur
in this genus. Using modern techniques and apparatus for DNA measurement and for
microscopic analysis, Dr. Friedman will investigate reproduction in several
representative species of Ephedra, analyzing the ontogenetic patterns of gamete-
formation, fertilization, and early development of the embryo. Similarities may
reveal clues about the intermediate steps leading to angiosperm double
fertilization and help in understanding its adaptive significance.