* 8818019
* Thrips and Erigeron glaucus:  Local Adaptation to IndividualPlant Clones and the Role of Sexuality
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Richard Karban, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 02/29/1992
* USD 154,986.00

The question of whether local adaptation by leaf feeding herbivores occurs at
the small scale of individual plant genotypes and how recombination and the
introduction of new alleles through sexual reproduction affect local adaptation
by both plant and insect will be examined. The host plant, Erigeron glaucus, is
a long-lived, mat forming plant that produces both apomictic seeds and
outcrossed seeds. The herbivore, a thrips Apterothrips secticornis, goes through
many generations each year and produces offspring either asexually or sexually.
The mode of reproduction (sexual vs. asexual) of both the plant and the
herbivore can be experimentally manipulated. Previous work showed that
population growth of thrips was very strongly affected by host plant variation.
Conversely, preliminary evidence indicates that thrips can reduce seed
production of their hosts. To determine if thrips show local adaptation to
individual hosts, the population growth of genetic lines derived from thrips on
five different host clones will be compared. If adaptation to individual clones
has taken place, then thrips from each clone may be expected to perform best on
the clone from which their ancestors were taken. A preliminary run of this
experiment suggested that thrips have adapted to individual plants. If thrips
have adapted to host genetic lines, can hosts escape their parasites by
reproducing sexually? This question will be answered by comparing the population
growth of thrips on plants that were produced apomictically versus those that
were produced by outcrossing. Similarly, the role of mode of reproduction, in
the success of thrips on host plant lines by using parthenogenetically-produced
or sexually-produced thrips progeny will be examined.