* 8818612
* REU:  Stability of a Stream Ecosystem to Disturbance by     Flooding and Drying
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Stuart Fisher, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 02/28/1993
* USD 642,645.00

The investigators will study the extent to which a stream ecosystem is a source
or sink for energy and nitrogen in the larger desert landscape. Energy flow will
be summarized as the ratio of primary production to respiration (P/R) and
nitrogen cycling as the ratio of dinitrogen fixation to denitrification (F/D).
Judgments of whether a system is a source or sink will be generated for nested
hierarchys, ranging from the algal assemblage to the entire drainage. Results
will test in part the utility of hierarchical approaches to steam ecology.
Disturbance effects generated by flash flooding and drying, each characteristic
of a different hydrologic extreme, will be studied in the context of the
hierarchy. Stability of subsystems will be evaluated in the face of each
disturbance and combinations of the two. Detailed study of interactions between
surface and hyporheic zones involving organic carbon and inorganic nitrogen will
be used to explore how subsystem interaction influences the stability of each.
The hypothesis is that vertical exchange enhances resilience of both subsystems.
Finally, a simulation model will be used To simulate the effect of disturbance
regimes on the whole drainage system. Results will show how disturbance regimes
of several years length influence the linkage of streams with adjacent
ecosystems: downstream reservoirs, groundwater aquifers, or parallel riparian
communities. The investigators are well qualified to run the proposal research
program, have adequate facilities and have an excellent publication record.