* 8818276
* Finite Strain Consolidation of Soft Clays
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,03/01/1992
* Robert Schiffman, Zagreb University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/01/1992
* USD 0.00

The principal objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research
project in solid and geomechanics between Antun Szavits-Nossan at Zagreb
University's Faculty of Civil Engineering and Robert L. Schiffman, University of
Colorado is to develop and validate a theory for multidimensional, nonlinear,
finite strain consolidation of soft soils by testing physical models in the
laboratory and field. This a trilateral project, involving the expertise of the
Zagreb, Colorado research teams and an Italian team at the University of Rome
and Naples. The U.S. team will develop an uncoupled theory and centrifuge model
tests (laboratory). Field data and soil samples will be provided by the Italian
group; and the coupled theory, soft clay testing, and computer program will be
devleoped by the Yugoslav group. Field verification will take place at test
fills at the Leonardo Da Vinci airport at Rome. Finite strain consolidation of
soils has a major impact on the behavior of offshore structures, highway
embankments and protection of deltaic lands (Mississippi delta, for example) by
sea dikes. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on
Cooperation in Science and Technology and is funded through a joint fund of
matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The U.S.
contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds are
involved. Grants are made to the principal Yugoslav institution. Dollar funds
are included for U.S. scientist travel to Yugoslavia and for Yugoslav
scientists' living expenses in the U.S. The Italian research component of this
grant will be supported from other sources.