* 8818704
* Synthesis and Reactivity of Dimetallic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Paul Knochel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 01/31/1992
* USD 202,357.00

This research of Dr. Paul Knochel will be supported by the Organic Synthesis
Program at the Department of Chemistry at the University of Michigan. Studies
will be made of organometallic reagents which have the potential for producing
new types of synthetic reagents. These will provide the synthetic organic
chemist with more sophisticated reagents required for the synthesis of the more
complex molecules. New classes of 1,1-, and to some extent 1,2- and 1,3-
diorganometallics will be studied which have two carbon-metal bonds in close
proximity so they can interact. As a result, the properties of the carbon-metal
bonds will be essentially different from those of the isolated carbon-metal bond
and special reactivities and structural properties may be observed (planar
tetracoordinated carbon atom, unusual bridged structures). Efforts will be made
to obtain X-ray structures of these sensitive compounds. However, the new
synthetic possibilities of these diorganometallics will constitute the major
part of the research. The possibility to have two carbanionic centers in a 1,1-,
or 1,3- relationships will open unique synthetic possibilities in organic and in
organometallic chemistry (synthesis of new reactive transition metal
organometallics and new approaches for the formation of carbon-carbon bonds). A
controlled and high yield oxidation of 1,1- diorganometallics has been
established and will be extensively studied.