* 8818606
* Neutral Hydrogen in Elliptical and Star-Burst               Spherical (SO) Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1990
* Linda Dressel, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 07/31/1990
* USD 25,100.00

Observational research to gain an understanding of the evolution of the
interstellar medium in galaxies will be carried out. This evolution is far more
complex and catastrophic than the once accepted notion of slow accumulation of
gas shed by evolving stars. It may involve accretion or expulsion of large
masses of gas. In some cases, it leads to massive bursts of star formation. The
research will lead to a better understanding of early-type galaxies and the
process of star formation. To provide a larger statistical data base of
sensitive neutral hydrogen gas (HI), mass measurements and upper limits for
elliptical galaxies (especially the most luminous galaxies), a 21-centimeter-
wavelength-line survey at Arecibo Observatory will be extended to include a
total of 201 elliptical galaxies. This data base may reveal relationships
between HI content, other galactic properties, and characteristics of the
environment. The spatial distribution and kinematics of neutral hydrogen in
elliptical galaxies will be studied to test several theories of internal and
external origins of the gas. The 21-centimeter- wavelength-line radiation of
several normal, giant elliptical galaxies detected in the survey will be mapped.
To elucidate the role that the interstellar medium plays in producing nuclear
starbursts as it evolves or when it is disturbed, 21-centimeter- wavelength-line
observations of a number of starburst spherical galaxies will be made.