* 8818266
* REU:  Collaborative Research:  Influence of Rhizosphere-    Mycosphere Chemistry on Phosphorus Dynamics in an Arid      Ecosystem
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Edith Allen, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* James R. Gosz
* 08/31/1993
* USD 183,249.00

Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of mycorrhizae in utilizing P
from "stable" inorganic pools and implicated CO2 and oxalate in differential use
of ortho-P pools. Moreover, the ability of some early colonizing species (e.g.
Halogeton glomeratus, Salsola kali) to produce oxalate has led to the hypothesis
that interactions of plant or associated fungal exudates with the soil matrix
plays a pivotal role in P dynamics in arid ecosystems. The proposed research
focuses on two weathering agents, CO2 and oxalate, which act to enhance P
release from the inorganic pool. In turn, the induced shift in P partitioning
among pools influences succession. The hypotheses will be tested through a
series of experiments at theoretical and ecosystem levels. The experiments are a
logical progression toward evaluation of the hypotheses. Specifically, the
project will determine: 1. The existence of oxalate in archived soils from a
past successional study, in lysimeter and in field soils; 2. The effect of
oxalate driven Ca-phosphate mineral weathering on succession; 3. The rates of
oxalate production in systems of varying P availability; 4. The rate of reaction
of CO2 or oxalate with soil minerals involved in P release; 5. The potential
rate of oxalate degradation; 6. Models of dynamic and equilibrium conditions for
CO2 and oxalate reactions with Ca-phosphate minerals; 7. Laboratory, lysimeter
and field tests of P chemistry models. The results of these experiments will
provide a mechanistic model of some processes which affect P cycling and early
succession in a semiarid ecosystem. The investigators are well qualified to
perform this type of research and the facilities are adequate.