* 8818167
* In situ Analyses of the Distributions and Phylogeny of      Cultivatable and Non-cultivatable Planctomycetales Using    Phylogenetic Group-Specific RNA Probes
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Stephen Giovannoni, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* James R. Gosz
* 06/30/1991
* USD 108,900.00

The majority of directly countable bacteria in microbial ecosystems cannot be
identified or cultivated using traditional microbiological techniques thus,
cultured bacteria may not be representative of actual microbial diversity. The
Planctomycetales are one of the ten major eubacterial divisions defined by 16S
ribosomal RNA. the unusual ribosomal RNA signatures of this group make them
exceptionally well-suited for microbial ecology studies using ribosomal RNA
probe technologies. The recent development of phylogenetic group-specific DNA
probes has made it possible to study the distribution and diversity of the
Planctomycetales in natural habitats without the biases of cultivation
requirements. Two probes for the Planctomycetales (PL1R and PL2R) and a
"universal" rRNA probe will be used to measure the fraction of Planctomycetales
ribosomal RNA genes in DNA extracted from mixed microbial populations.
Flourescently labeled DNA probes will be used to measure the contribution of the
Planctomycetales to attached microbial populations adhering to contact slides.
Phylogenetic group-specific gene amplification primers will be used to identify
particular constituents of the Planctomycetales population by the cloning and
sequencing of rRNA genes. These results will be compared to a data base of known
Planctomycetales sequences to determine whether previously uncultivated species
are present in the population.