* 8818302
* REU:  Biotic Regulation of Soil Organic Matter Accumulation and Loss in Subtropical Agroecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1995
* Paul Hendrix, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Richard F. Dame
* 02/28/1995
* USD 1,883,228.00

The proposed research will focus on mechanisms of soil organic carbon and
nitrogen dynamics in agroecosystems in the warm, humid southeastern U.S. where
highly weathered Ultisols present unique problems for soil organic matter (SOM)
management. Studies of OM dynamics in Piedmont soils have shown rapid losses of
SOM under conventional cultivation and reduced or even reversed SOM losses under
conservation management. These patterns appear to vary with soil texture,
landscape position and management practices. The investigators hypothesize that
the activities of soil biota are important in regulating the turnover and
stabilization of SOM through their effects on water-stable aggregates. The
objectives are to investigate the regulatory role of plant roots, saprophytic
fungi, microarthropods and earthworms on turnover and stabilization of C and N
in water-stable soil aggregates, and on transformations of C and N from plant
litter to soil pools and plant biomass in SOM aggrading and degrading
ecosystems. Specifically, the project will quantify the effects of each biotic
manipulation on: 1) particulate OM decomposition and biotic abundances 2)
aggregate formation and stabilization 3) aggregate associated and bulk soil
pools of particulate, active- unprotected, active-protected, passive and soil
solution organic C and N and 4) transfer rates between pools using C-13 and N-15
tracers. The investigators have been very productive on their previous grants
and institutional support and facilities are more than adequate for running the
project.