* 8818018
* Domesticated Chenopodium of Mexico:  Genetic Variation and  Systematic Relationships
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1994
* Hugh Wilson, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1994
* USD 178,244.00

Concerns with human nutrition and with potential large-scale climatic changes
have reinforced arguments for broadened study of new crop plants and their wild
taxonomic relatives in the Americas. The grain chenopods (family Chenopodiaceae,
genus Chenopodium), ancient crops of the Inca and Aztec, show great promise.
They also provide a living record of American Indian agriculture. However, basic
taxonomic information is meager regarding geographic distributions,
morphological and genetic variation among species and among cultivated and weedy
forms, suspected areas of crop origins, and genealogical relationships among the
several taxa involved. Using both molecular and morphometric approaches of
comparative biology, Drs. Hugh Wilson and James Manhart at Texas A&amp;M
University are investigating species, cultivars, and weed races of Chenopodium
subsection Cellulata in Mexico and the United Sates. Results will be integrated
with their prior studies of South American "quinoa," another indigenous crop
complex. New analyses of chloroplast DNA mutational differences will provide
data bearing on phylogenetic relationships among these plants. The results will
help clarify taxonomic boundaries between taxa, delimit ranges of variation in
domesticated and weedy forms, and test ideas about the pre-Columbian origins of
these crops and their routes of dispersal.