* 8818807
* Foodweb Dynamics of Mangrove Habitats in Pakistan
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1988,09/30/1993
* Saiyed Ahmed, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 09/30/1993
* USD 403,603.00

Description: This project supports cooperative research by Dr. Saiyed I. Ahmed,
School of Oceanography, University of Washington, Seattle, and Dr. G.S.
Quraishee, Director, National Institute of Oceanography, Karachi, Pakistan, on
the foodweb dynamics of mangrove habitat. The research objective is to determine
the relative flow of carbon and energy from mangrove and algal detritus to the
aquatic foodweb. This information would help identify the relationship between
environmental and anthropogenic disturbances and these fluxes and the mangrove
foodweb. The study will: 1. Examine the phenology of Pakistani mangroves with
emphasis on leaf-litter production 2. Study decomposition of mangrove leaves and
determine the availability of the resulting particulate and disolved organic
carbon to bacteria and other aquatic foodweb components such as benthic
invertebrates 3. Determine the relative contribution of mangroves and algae to
the primary productivity of this estuarine ecosystem and 4. Determine the
distribution and productivity of bacteria and phytoplankton and their
relationship with nutrients and other chemical factors. Scope: The project will
involve extensive field work in the deltaic area of the Indus river near Karachi
in Pakistan. The work will involve several U.S. scientists and graduate students
from the University of Washington, Scripps Institute of Oceanography, University
of Georgia and University of Miami, and from Pakistan's NIO with logistical
support provided by the NIO, and the Pakistan Navy, through its research vessel
as needed. The Indus delta provides a suitable field for this research by
allowing for studies in the dry season (pre-monsoon), during the rainy season,
and subsequent to the cessation of rains, thus permitting study of the changes
in a variety of physical and chemical factors. Laboratory work in microbiology
and physiology will be done in the U.S. and will allow for training of NIO
staff. This will enhance the capabilities for the field work. The Office of
Naval Research is partially supporting this research by providing Pakistani
currency funds.