* 8818319
* Support of the LSU Collection of Frozen Tissues
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1989,03/31/1995
* Herbert Dessauer, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard Krishtalka
* 03/31/1995
* USD 159,395.00

Many recent advances in biological sciences have resulted from biochemical
studies focused at the molecular level. The source of these molecules is frozen
tissue. The Frozen Tissue Collection at the Louisiana State University Museum of
Natural Science is the largest of its kind. It contains tissue samples of over
30,000 vertebrate animals, each preserved at -70 C. Ultracold preservation
insures that proteins and the hereditary information itself, DNA, remain in a
physiologically active (viable) state. The collection is used for studies of
comparative biochemistry, physiology, genetics, forensics and evolution.
Researchers throughout the United States and Canada regularly use the
collection, which clearly constitutes a national resource, one not replicated in
the U.S. or elsewhere. Frozen tissue collections are costly to maintain and
operate. Expensive freezers are required for ultracold preservation.
Manipulation of samples is very labor intensive, because each specimen must
remain frozen (specimens must be sorted on dry ice). LSU currently supplies a
Ph.D. level curator, a graduate curatorial assistant (50% time), and utility
costs for freezers. This project provides funds for needed equipment and labor
to manage and computerize the collection and make it a fully functional national
resource, one capable of accepting and dispersing tissue samples to the research
community. The project will ensure that these irreplaceable research materials
are well maintained and made readily available to the research community.