* 8818725
* International Engineering Research Technical Briefing via   Satellite Delivery
* ENG,ENG
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Bill Cooper, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Norman Caplan
* 09/30/1990
* USD 30,060.00

In 1987, the National Academy of Engineering issued a report entitled
"Strengthening U.S. Engineering through International Cooperation." The report
emphasizes that technology in the United States tends to flow out of the country
to scientists and engineers abroad, but that few mechanisms exist to enhance the
flow of technology from foreign countries to the U.S. engineering community. The
NAE report recommends that NSF, NAE, and other organizations "organize and fund
lecture tours by distinguished foreign experts to present reviews of, and
perspectives on, their nations' developments in engineering and technology to
U.S. universities and industry." Oklahoma State University proposes to organize
these lectures, but plans to bring the foreign experts to the television studios
at OSU and televise the live lectures to universities and industry throughout
the United States. It is proposed that each lecture be approximately one to two
hours in length followed by a telephone call-in question-and-answer period of
approximately one hour. OSU is supported in this proposal by the National
Technological University and its 200+ Ku-band receiving sites located in U.S.
industry and government facilities. Also, OSU proposes to advertise the lectures
to some 600+ U.S. universities that presently have satellite receiving equipment
and that regularly organize teleconference events. The OSU proposes to organize
and produce one briefing in Phase 1 and then continue with five additional
briefings in Phase 2. The results of Phase 1 will be reviewed on the basis of
technical merit; i.e., topic interest and importance, qualifications of the
speaker, and overall presentation. A VHS cassette of the Phase 1 lecture will be
used for evaluation by selected users. Phase 2, which provides for five
additional briefings will be awarded based on obtaining satisfactory results
from PHase 1 and the availability of funding to continue Phase 2.