* 8818958
* Mechanism of Histone Variant Swithing
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Donald Sittman, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1992
* USD 100,000.00

The multigene histone family displays a number of fascinating properties; cell-
cycle regulation, transcriptional and post- transcriptional control, coordinate
regulation and differential gene expression of individual members within a
family. The objectives of this proposal concern determination of the level of
regulation of partially replication-dependent (PRD) to fully replication-
dependent (FRD) histone gene switching during differentiation of murine
erythroleukemia (MEL) cells. We will begin to identify the signals involved in
this regulation. We propose several approaches to determine the extent to which
transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation are involved in histone gene
switching. These approaches include: 1) Testing of PRD and FRD genes in DNA-
dependent transcription extracts for differential changes in transcription
efficiency. 2) Establishment of gene constructs which are regulated, after
transformation, in a PRD or FRD manner. 3) Determination of the changes in
transcription rates of individual histone genes during differentiation, using in
vitro nuclear transcription. 4) Measurement of the half-life of different
histone mRNAs during differentiation. We will then extend these approaches to
map the signals involved in this regulation. The histones are known to be
essential to the structural integrity of chromatin but their role, if any, in
the regulation of gene expression is obscure. A better understanding of the
histone gene switching which occurs during differentiation of the murine
erythroleukemia cells may give some insight into the effect upon gene expression
if such exists.