* 8818714
* Evolution of Dimorphic Sex Chromosomes
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,09/01/1989
* William Rice, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 09/01/1989
* USD 20,682.00

The proposed research will experimentally test predictions from recent theory,
concerning the mechanisms that lead to the evolution of dimorphic sex
chromosomes. Most animal species, and a smaller percentage of plant species,
have a special pair of chromosomes, the X and Y sex chromosomes, that determine
gender. The typical pattern is for males to carry two types of sex chromosomes,
and X and a Y, and for females to carry two of the same type (X) of sex
chromosome. Several lines of evidence now indicate that sex chromosomes are
derived from a pair of chromosomes which formerly were not associated with the
determination of gender. This transition first involves the evolution of a major
sex determining gene, followed by the evolution of a sex-determining chromosomal
segment, and finally in the evolution of sex-determining chromosomes. During the
evolution of sex chromosomes, one chromosome, the X, evolves enhanced
biochemical activity (dosage compensation) while the partner chromosome, the Y,
is degraded and loses virtually all genetic activity. The sex chromosomes also
lose their ability to exchange genetic material during this transition. An
understanding of the genetic mechanisms responsible for the formation of sex
chromosomes is the focus of the proposed research. The investigator will use a
Drosophila melanogaster (common fruit fly) model system to experimentally create
a new pair of sex- determining genes and chromosomes. The investigator will then
use this model system to explore the mechanisms that lead to the breakdown in
genetic exchange between the sex chromosomes, and to the mechanisms that lead to
the deterioration (accumulation of mutations) of the genetic activity of the Y
sex chromosome. An understanding of the evolution of dimorphic sex chromosomes
has many practical applications. First, the presence of sex chromosomes causes
males (more generally the heterogametic sex) to be far more susceptible to
hereditary disease. Dimorphic sex chromosomes are the physical basis for sex-
linked inheritance and cause males to inherit many hereditary diseases thousands
of times more frequently than females. The evolution of dimorphic sex
chromosomes also results in the phenomena of dosage compensation (a modified
level of gene expression for the hereditary material located on the sex
chromosomes). Biochemical irregularities with dosage compensation are
responsible for some forms of hereditary disease. The proposed experiments will
also monitor the accumulation of deleterious mutations on both the sex
chromosomes and on ordinary chromosomes. An understanding of this accumulation
process is important in understanding the risk to human populations of
increasing levels of exposure to radiation (e.g. that produced from nuclear
waste and the thinning of the ozone layer of the atmosphere). Recent applied
theoretical work by the investigator also suggests that data from the
experiments will be useful in determining the genetic risk (due to inbreeding
depression and natural levels of background radiation) to wildlife populations
that are maintained to small effective population size, such as occurs in parks
and game refuges.