* 8818648
* Stochastic Reliability Metholdology for Complex Structures  with Uncertainties
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Adriene Jefferson, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 10/31/1992
* USD 126,000.00

This project is to formulate a stochastic finite element procedure to study the
static and dynamic behaviors of complex structures, with emphasis on thin shell
structural uncertainties under random earthquake load. Structural uncertainties
such as initial geometric imperfections, material properties, boundary
conditions, and structural damping coefficients, etc. and random loads are
considered. The main objectives are: (1) to extend the formulation of an
existing curved quadrilateral thin shell element with deterministic
imperfections and geometrical and material nonlinearities to include random
imperfections and other structural uncertainties; (2) to codify the formulation
to study the combined effects of several structural uncertainties on static
analysis; (3) to develop a solution procedure within the framework of stochastic
finite element approach and equivalent linearization technique, which
simultaneously accounts for the effects of several structural uncertainties in
spatial domain and temporal random loadings; (4) to study the dynamic response
and dynamic buckling behaviors of thin complex structures subjected to
earthquake load. The effort will lead to the development of a design methodology
reliability analysis of practical complex structures with structural
uncertainties subjected to random earthquake load.