* 8818345
* Application of Surface Vibrational Spectroscopies to        Reactive Electrochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Michael Weaver, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 01/31/1993
* USD 284,555.00

This project is in the general field of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of electrochemical catalysis and spectroscopy. Fourier transform
infrared and surface-enhanced Raman vibrational spectroscopies will be used as
in situ probes of interfacial electrochemical reactions on noble and transition
metal electrodes, especially organic oxidations, with the objective of
discerning interfacial composition and molecular transformations underlying the
observed electrochemical kinetic behavior. Both aqueous and nonaqueous
electrolytes will be employed. Surface crystallographic effects upon adsorbate
structure and electrocatalytic reaction pathways will be determined. Real-time
methods will be employed to obtain infrared spectra during the voltammetric
evolution of irreversible electrode processes. The utility of surface-enhanced
Raman spectroscopy as a probe of adsorption at related metal-gas interfaces will
also be investigated. Fourier transform infrared and surface-enhanced Raman
vibrational spectroscopies, utilized in a complementary way, enable
characterization of interfacial electrochemical systems at a molecular level
under actual reaction conditions. The results of these studies will yield a more
detailed understanding of the mechanisms of electrocatalytic reactions and will
provide a basis for the development of improved catalysts for technological
processes.