* 8818317
* ROW:  Trophic Diversity in Ancient and Modern Predator      Guilds:  An Ecomorphological Analysis
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Blaire Van Valkenburgh, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Althea Ball
* 05/31/1993
* USD 95,006.00

The study of fossil comunities has much to offer ecologists, as well as
paleontologists. The fossil record can provide communities undisturbed by human
influence over a time scale that chronicles the influence of historical
processes, such as extinction and immigration, on community structure. Trophic
diversity within the guild of large, terrestrial mammalian predators in North
America over the last 37 million years will be explored. The paleoguilds,
separated in age by two to four million years, will be compared over time to a
sample of four previously analyzed Recent guilds. The sampled paleofaunas
include some which precede or follow mass extinction events, and some that are
missing such typical modern carnivores as cats and hyaenas. Using an
ecomorphological approach, trophic diversity will be assessed by body size and
previously demonstrated, functional measurements of canivore teeth. Measurements
include estimates of slicing, grinding and bone-crushing abilities and reflect
the relative proportion of meat, bone, and non-vertebrate foods in the diet. A
principal component analysis will be applied to these data to create a
multivariate morphospace in which to view the distribution of species within
guilds. Species packing, as measured by Euclidean distance between taxa, will be
compared among guilds with hypothetical, randomly generated guilds. In addition,
the number and body size distribution of prey species will be quantified for
each time period to explore the influence of resource characteristics on guild
composition. Results should suggest general rules, if they exist, of predator
guild structure that are likely to have broad implications for community
ecology.