* 8818437
* Effects of 3-Trophic-Level Interactions on Sex Ratios of an Herbivore and Parasitoid
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Laurel Fox, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* James R. Gosz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 71,781.00

Three-trophic-level interactions among cruciferous plants, one of their major
herbivores, the diamondback moth Pluetella xylostella and its major parasitoid
Diadegma insulare will be studied. Sex ratios and population sizes of both the
moth and the parasitoid are correlated with differences in food plants; and the
trophic levels are likely to have major effects on the regulation of population
size and the dynamics of interactions between these insect species and other
components of the community. The variations in the sex ratios of the herbivore
and its parasitoid, using both wild and cultivated crucifers will be explored.
Selection of species from both wild and cultivated habitats will allow the
scanning of a large array of plant properties, from individual variation in such
factors as nitrogen, defensive chemistry and morphology, up to population
variation in patch size and density. The primary goal of the research is to
identify factors affecting both moth and wasp sex ratios within population and
community contexts. The secondary goal is to compare these interactions on wild
vs. cultivated crucifers. Together, these different systems cover an array of
community situations from the high density, agricultural environments in which
population interactions and sex ratio variation are usually studied, to the low
density, patchy communities in which these interactions and insect behaviors
probably evolved.