* 8818269
* Response of a Temperate Grassland Ecosystem to Climate      Change:  Importance of Biotic Interactions and Feedbacks
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1995
* James Detling, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1995
* USD 2,012,185.00

Atmospheric carbon dioxide levels have been increasing since the industrial
revolution. There is agreement among general circulation models of the
atmosphere that elevated CO.2 will cause increased temperatures. Predicted
effects for precipitation are much less certain, but changes in the total and
seasonal distribution of precipitation seem likely. The effects of temperature
and precipitation on grassland ecosystems have been studied extensively, and
there is considerable information about the short.term response of individual
plants to elevated CO.2. However, ecosystem level responses to climate change
are hard to predict because of biotic interactions and feedbacks: (1) effects of
elevated CO.2 may interact with effects of altered temperature and moisture, (2)
plants may undergo physiological changes in response to long.term exposure to
elevated CO.2, (3) changes in the quantity and quality of primary production may
affect decomposition and mineralization, which in turn affect nutrient
limitation. This research will determine the dynamics of the response of
shortgrass steppe over several growing seasons to elevated CO.2 and altered
climate (different combinations of temperature and water). Experiments will be
carried out in the field and at the Duke University Phytotron, using large
intact soil cores to preserve natural relationships among plants, microbes,
fauna and soil. The system level effects of climate change will be examined in
relation to primary production, decomposition, soil organic matter, and the soil
detrital food web. Research of this nature is essential to the resolution and
management of pressing modern problems of CO.2 increase and global warming. The
products of this project should be of significant interest to basic scientists
as well as resource managers and political decision makers. The research team is
excellent. Institutional facilities are first.rate and the use of the Duke
phytotron facility is completely appropriate.