* 8818960
* U.S.- FRG Cooperation>in Research and Development of Video- tape Courses in Manufacturing Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Keith Carver, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1992
* USD 58,767.00

This award provides partial support for an innovative educational and research
collaboration in manufacturing engineering between the University of
Massachusetts at Amherst and the universities of Baden- Wurttemberg, West
Germany. (These include Stuttgart, Karlsruhe, Esslingen and the Technical
Academy of Esslingen.) The project coordinators are Dr. James E. A. John, Dean,
College of Engineering, University of Massachusetts, and Karl-Heinz Kammerlohr
of the Ministry of Science and Art of Baden-Wurttemberg. The initial major
objective of their collaborative program is to develop and produce a series of
prototype videotape courses in manufacturing engineering. These will be
postgraduate level courses, intended primarily for use by practicing engineers
in industry. Over time, the partner institutions also expect to identify and
implement a number of cooperative research projects in this field. The
participating institutions bring complementary strengths to their joint effort.
West Germany has impressive manufacturing engineering research programs in the
areas of machine tools, automation, and robotics. U.S. strength lies with the
application and use of computers in manufacturing, especially integration of
design and manufacturing. Manufacturing engineering education in the U.S. is
only beginning to develop, whereas in West Germany it is already well
established with many excellent university programs that have produced a large
number of PhD level graduates. The Technical Academy at Esslingen is the primary
provider of technical continuing education in West Germany. The University of
Massachusetts at Amherst has been a leader in the production of and use of video
courses in the U.S., and is the leading supplier of coursework to the National
Technological University network. To take advantage of these complementary
strengths, the courses will focus initially on topics of U.S. technical
expertise, such as control technologies and computer integrated manufacturing.
Benefits of this collaborative arrangement include 1) promotion of international
cooperation in an area critical to U.S. industry, 2) increasing U.S. capacity
for gathering and disseminating international research and educational
developments in this area of engineering, and 3) strengthening U.S. research and
educational programs in manufacturing engineering by making them more responsive
to international developments.