* 8818929
* Poly(A) and mRNA Metabolism During Flagellar Regeneration   in Chlamydomonas
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Ellen Baker, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 03/31/1992
* USD 160,000.00

Stretches of poly(adenylic acid) are added post- transcriptionally to most
eucaryotic messenger RNAs. This modification is thought to be involved in the
regulation of stability and/or translation of mRNAs. Poly(A) chains are subject
to both shortening and lengthening in the cytoplasm, but little is known about
the mechanisms for, and significance of, changes in poly(A) length on messenger
RNAs. This research is directed at understanding the role of poly(A) and its
complex metabolism in the function of messenger RNA. The metabolism of the
poly(A) tail on tubulin mRNAs can be altered by manipulating protein synthesis
in the flagellated eucaryote, Chlamydomonas reinhardii. Newly developed methods
for nuclear transformation of Chlamydomonas permit an analysis of mRNA
structural features which affect poly(A) metabolism. The role of the 3'
untranslated end (3'UT) of mRNA in conferring differential sensitivity to
poly(A) loss is being investigated by the introduction of tubulin (and other)
genes with altered 3'UT's into cells by transformation. The hypothesis that
poly(A) loss is influenced by ribosome distribution on an mRNA is being tested
by introducing upstream stop codons into tublin genes. The protein composition
of the poly(A)-ribonucleoprotein complex on tubulin mRNAs is being characterized
by crosslinking poly(A) chains and their associated proteins with ultraviolet
light. It will be determined whether this structure is altered at times when
poly(A) metabolism is altered. The role of altered poly(A) metabolism in the
stability and translation of tubulin, and other, mRNAs will be explored, using
both in vivo (transformation) and in vitro methods.%%% This project investigates
how the living cell regulates the levels of important structural and
"housekeeping" proteins. Protein synthesis is a complex and highly regulated
cell activity about which much research is centered. Very little is known about
how the cell controls the breakdown and repair of its essential proteins. This
research begins to fill that gap.***//