* 8818931
* Nonaggregated Fatty Acid Synthetase of Chloroplasts
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Mary Lou Ernst-Fonberg, East Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1992
* USD 208,600.00

The lipid composition and expression of lipogenic enzymes in Euglena gracilis
vary depending on the presence or absence of light, a feature that raises many
questions with regard to development and regulation. Euglena is unique in having
2 de novo fatty acid synthetases (FASs). In addition to a true multienzyme
complex aggregated FAS in the cytosol, there is a nonaggregated FAS located in
the pure chloroplasts. The activity of the nonaggregated FAS seems to be
dependent upon transient but crucial interactions among the enzymes and acyl
carrier protein (ACP). Calcium ion and/or ACP acylation state may influence the
capacities of the proteins to interact. In limited respects, the system of ACP-
enzymes interaction may resemble the calmodulin-interactive proteins situation.
The nature and regulation of the interactions among the proteins of the
nonaggregated FAS will be proved with observations made on both intact pure
chloroplasts or purified proteins. The following methods will be used to observe
interactions between or among proteins: chemical cross-linking and
electroimmunoblot analysis; chemical cross- linking and limited cleavage of
cross-linked proteins; low angle laser light scattering spectrometry; and
fluorescence and UV spectroscopy. Fatty acids are imporant building blocks of
cell membranes and are fuel for living cells. This project seeks to determine
how the several enzymes involved are regulated.*** //