* 8818191
* Advanced Study Institute on Energy Optimization in          Manufacturing and Materials Processing, January 2-13, 1989, Madras, India, Award in U.S. and Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1989
* R Srinath, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1989
* USD 9,104.00

Description: This project provides partial support for eight U.S. scientists to
participate in an advanced study institute (ASI) on energy optimization in
manufacturing and material processing to be held at the Indian Institute of
Technology (IIT), Madras, January 2-13, 1989. Several scientists from Japan, UK,
Switzerland and the USSR are also expected to participate. Topics to be covered
include casting, metal joining, metal forming, metal cutting, laser processing,
electron beam processing and non-metal topics. Research needs will be discussed
and possible joint U.S.-Indian collaboration will be examined. The Indian co-
organizer of the ASI is Dr. L.S. Srinath, Director and Professor of Mechanical
Engineering at IIT, Madras. Scope: The U.S. P.I. is an active scientist in heat
transfer research and in applications in industry. The U.S. participants have
solid background in the various topics of the ASI. It is highly likely that the
U.S. scientists and the Indian scientists will benefit considerably from the
interaction during the institute and especially from participation by scientists
from Europe and Japan, and that future cooperative research will result. The
publication of the ASI proceeding should be quite beneficial to those working in
academic institutions and to industrial concerns.