* 8819598
* US-France (INRIA) Cooperative Research:  Type Theory and    Interactive Development of Proofs and Programs
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Carl Gunter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1993
* USD 62,250.00

This award will support a group research effort in computer science to be
carried out by researchers based at the University of Pennsylvania, Stanford
University and Cornell University in collaboration with the French National
Institute for Information Science and Automation (INRIA) and the Ecole Normale
Superieure, Paris. The U.S. group will be led by Dr. Carl Gunter and Dr. Val
Breazu-Tannen, University of Pennsylvania. On the French side the project will
be led by Dr. Thierry Coquand, INRIA Rocquencourt. The three year program of
joint visits and workshops will focus on the theory and applications of type
systems. This group of U.S. researchers and their French counterparts have
produced important results at the interface between the theory of programming,
logic and algebra. Researchers are presently witnessing a convergence between
logic, mathematics and computer science, in which, for example, deep connections
between types, proofs and programs are being discovered. However, much remains
to be done and discoveries of further connections and parallels are anticipated.
As in any other rapidly advancing field, many alternative systems and models are
being investigated, whose interrelationships are only partly understood.
Improved collaboration between some of the foremost U.S. and French researchers
in this area is likely to lead to important results in the classification and
unification of those alternatives. Improved semantic models supporting the
combination of parametric polymorphism and type inheritance would be of
particular interest to the development of semantically more coherent object-
oriented programming languages, a question of undoubted interest for software
engineers. In a different area, the interaction between U.S. work on higher-
order logic programming and French work on logic-based language definition
systems promises to be very productive and lead to better prototyping
environments for program-proving and language-definition systems.