* 8819444
* Spectroscopy and Dynamics of Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1994
* William Lineberger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew P. Baronavski
* 06/30/1994
* USD 1,177,440.00

Professor Carl Lineberger is supported by a grant from The Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program to continue his research in the structure and
dynamics of ions and ionic clusters. Dr. Lineberger will use state-of-the-art
molecular beam, laser spectroscopic, and mass spectroscopic methods to obtain
information which is of fundamental importance in the understanding of molecular
bonding. Tunable laser photodissociation in a coaxial beam machine will be
employed as a probe of the vibrational spectra of ionic complexes and the rate
of energy coupling between an ionic chromophore and the weak ion-cluster bond. A
supersonic expansion ion source connected to the coaxial beam machine will
enable the production of moderate-sized cluster ions, whose infrared
dissociation will be probed in high resolution. Other experiments will expand
our experimental knowledge of dipole bound states of negative ions by observing
unstable molecules via their presumed dipole bound states. Ultraviolet
photoelectron spectroscopy will be used to study a number of organic diradicals,
as well as to investigate the electronic structure of neutral metal clusters. In
addition, evaporative loss of monomers from cluster ions following
photoabsorption will be used to obtain low resolution infrared absorption
spectra of mass-selected cluster ions.