* 8819183
* A Proposal to Construct a 1 to 5 Micron Infrared Array      Camera for the NASA Infrared Telescope Facility
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1989,09/30/1994
* Mark Shure, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Van Citters
* 09/30/1994
* USD 601,080.00

A 1-5 um array camera for use as a facility instrument at the NASA Infrared
Telescope Facility (IRTF) at Mauna Kea will be constructed. It will use a 58x62
InSb array, providing both the mulitiplex advantages of a 3596 element array and
also matching or fully exploit the excellent seeing and low background at the
IRTF. Its primary features will be: 1) three quickly selectable platescales, 2)
1-3% spectral resolution or broadband filters from 1 to 5 um 3) a cooled
coronagraph and 4) an imaging polarimetry mode. Using these questions. INcluded
are surveys that range from a search for substellar companions around nearby
stars to a search for protogalaxies. Images of bipolar outflows will help
elucidate the interaction of these winds with the surrounding molecular cocoon.
Imaging in the 3.3 um emission feature will serve to identify the emission
mechanism and will be employed as a tracer of star formation in galaxies. An
investigation of the stellar density and population distribution at the center
of our own Galaxy will test suggestions of a massive black hole. Broadband and
emission line maps of active galaxies will allow us to probe into heavily
obscured regions with high spatial resolution. Studies of the surface geology
and atmospheric structure of planets in our solar system are made possible by
the wealth of molecular and solid-state features in the 1-5 um range.