* 8819246
* U.S.-Korea Long-Term Visit for Cooperative Research on      the Kinetics of Catalyst Sintering
* O/D,OISE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1990
* Hong Lee, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1990
* USD 9,250.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Hong H. Lee, Department of Chemical
Engineering, University of Florida, to pursue with Dr. Sang Heup Moon,
Department of Chemical Engineering, Seoul National University, during a five-
month visit to Korea, a program of cooperative research on the kinetics of
catalyst sintering. The collaborators will investigate the kinetics of sintering
that accounts for the effects of support pore size on the sintering rate of
supported catalysts. Results of this investigation will be utilized in the
design of catalyst pellets to maximize catalyst life. In addition to the
importance of the project as a basic research study, this research may have
important applications in industrial catalysis, where the effectiveness of the
catalyst is inversely related to the extent of sintering. This project will add
an international cooperative dimension to Dr. Lee's ongoing research at the
University of Florida supported by the National Science Foundation's Kinetics
and Catalysis Program under Grant No. CBT8601884. The collaborators are highly
respected scientists in the field of this research. Dr. Lee is primarily
concerned with developing the kinetics of sintering for porous, supported
catalysts, while Dr. Moon's primary research interest is the design of support
so as to minimize sintering and maximize catalyst life in fixed-bed systems. The
present project will allow them to combine their talents and interests for
mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project is supported
by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).