* 8819346
* Hemodynamic Model of Skeletal Muscle Microcirculation
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Geert Schmid-Schoenbein, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 02/28/1993
* USD 204,141.00

In the proposed research Dr. Schmid-Schoenbein is concerned about blood flow in
skeletal muscle and its engineering analysis. The long term objective is to
develop a theory of transport in skeletal muscle which explains in full detail
how nutrients are carried to the muscle cells, metabolites are controlled and
under what conditions muscle is subject to injury by our own white blood cells.
The PI's original objective was to develop a quantitative biomechanical model of
the microcirculation in skeletal muscle as a keystone to an understanding of
transport and organ function. In the past the following objectives were met: the
micro-anatomy in a selected muscle was defined in a complete and quantitative
way; the passive vessel and blood properties were established, and a new theory
of blood flow was formulated and critically tested against independent
microvascular and whole organ measurements. The PI now proposes to expand the
scope of the theory to include myogenic autoregulation with experimental
verification and a detailed analysis of leukocyte mediated microvascular
resistance. Dr. Schmid-Schoenbein's previous theory and recent measurements
showed a surprisingly high microvascular resistance in rat skeletal muscle
perfused with deactivated granulocytes. More specific measurements for activated
granulocytes and other leukocytes are needed in light of their importance in
pathophysiology. The PI's approach constitutes a systematic analysis of
microcirculation in skeletal muscle; it serves to unify numerous physiological
observations, and it sets the basis for eventual analysis of problems in muscle
exercise.