* 8819527
* Integration of Unidata Interactive Computing into UW-La     Crosse Classroom and Research Program in the Atmospheric    Sciences
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Paul Stoelting, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Robert W. Taylor
* 01/31/1991
* USD 30,000.00

The objective of this award is to improve understanding of Midwest mesoscale
atmospheric processes. Program initiatives are organized to bring about
improvements in classroom, research, interactive computer, and application
areas. All initiatives derive substance from UNIDATA, a national program
designed to help universities use communication and computing technologies to
analyze scientific data. Definition, assembly, testing, and evaluation of PC-
McIDAS within a local area network provides the vehicle for achieving program
goals. Research aspects of the award will focus on a better understanding of
local weather in the hilly Driftless area. In this area, severe storms, often
with heavy precipitation totals, lead to high flash flood potential. New GOES
sounding capabilities coupled with Doppler radar (La Crosse is a Doppler site)
promise to yield data for better identification, tracking, and characterization
of severe weather events. Weather and climate students, approximately 750 per
year, will gain interactive computer experience at ten workstations in case
study and near real-time weather analysis. Creative analyses of the PC-McIDAS
product stream presents faculty, staff, and advanced students with significant
challenges.