* 8819627
* Structure and Reactivity of Epitaxial Metal Films
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Thomas Engel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 07/31/1992
* USD 298,100.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of structure and growth of thin films and heterogeneous catalysis.
Variation of the electronic properties and structure of thin metal and metal
alloy films will be investigated and correlated with their catalytic activity.
The films will be grown epitaxially on metal and mica substrates. Their growth
mode and structure will be characterized by low energy electron diffraction,
Auger electron spectroscopy and helium scattering. Chemical rections to be
studied include the dissociation of carbon monoxide, atomic exchange reactions
of molecular hydrogen and deuterium, and the reactions of hydrocarbons with
atomic hydrogen. Molecular beams will be employed to avoid wall effects.
Ensemble effects will be investigated using gold-palladium alloy films,
employing ion surface scattering spectrometry to determine the alloy surface
layer composition. The results of these catalytic studies with thin films will
provide a correlation between chemical reactivity on large metal single-crystal
surfaces under very low pressure conditions and reactivity on supported metal
crystallites, with characteristic diameters 20- 100 Angstroms, of the type
commonly employed as comercial catalysts under high pressure conditions. Effects
of dimensionality on electronic properties will be assessed.