* 8819713
* RNA Metabolism in SV40 Infected Cells
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Jay Gralla, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 01/31/1993
* USD 268,200.00

Dr. Gralla plans to develp and apply methods that alow in situ probing of SV40
DNA-protein regulatory complexes. Enzymes and chemicals will be introduced into
transcriptionally active mammalian cells so that the active DNA becomes modified
or broken. After isolation of the DNA the pattern of modification is determined
by primer extension analysis, and this may be interpreted in terms of in situ
interactions when compared to appropriate controls. Comparisons will be made to
patterns from disrupted, transcriptinally inactive cells, and to SV40 genomes
inactivated by mutation. In this way, a model will be constructed to describe
the state of functional SV40 nucleoprotein complexes in vivo. The changes in
these complexes that accompany the programmed switch from SV40 Early to Late
transcription will also be probed. Particular attention will be paid to the role
of DNA replication in allowing new factors to bind DNA as part of this genetic
program. Overall, then, the goal is to describe how SV40 regulatory DNA is used
in vivo as part of the transcriptional program of the virus. This research
provides the perfect complement to in vivo experiments probing DNA - protein
interactions ongoing in many labs. Various methods have been developed and
authenticated for probing DNA - protein interactions in situ in living cells. It
is crucial to know whether the in vitro experiments truly minimize the in vivo.