* 8819576
* Evaluating the Effects of High Particulate Fluxes on Chemi- cal Processes Occurring at the Amazon River/Ocean Boundary
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Brent McKee, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 06/30/1992
* USD 42,745.00

This research is part of the AmasSeds Project (A Multi- disciplinary Amazon
Shelf Sediment Study), which seeks to understand the physical, chemical and
geological processes that affect, or are affected by, particle fluxes on the
Amazon shelf. High particulate fluxes occur on the Amazon shelf as a result of
the enormous sediment discharge from the Amazon River and the extensive
resuspension of fine-grained shelf sediment by tidal processes. This component
examines several chemical processes occurring at the Amazon River/ocean boundary
which are affected by particle fluxes. The specific topics of research describe:
(1) the release of uranium and radium from the particulate phase to the
dissolved phase during river/ocean mixing: (2) scavenging of particle-reactive
elements from continental shelf waters; and (3) evaluating the effects of
suspended sediment concentration on the biological uptake and regeneration of
carbon and silicon. This research is part of the AmasSeds Project (A Multi-
disciplinary Amazon Shelf Sediment Study), which seeks to understand the
physical, chemical and geological proceses that affect, or are affected by,
particle fluxes on the Amazon shelf. High fluxes occur on the Amazon shelf as a
result of the enormous sediment discharge from the Amazon River and the mixing
of fine- grained sediment with river water by the tides. This component of the
overall project examines several chemical processes occurring at the Amazon
River/ocean boundary which are affected by particle fluxes. An understanding of
these processes will help investigators to interpret observations from other
river/ocean systems throughout the world.