* 8819304
* Molecular and Biochemical Characterization of Microtubule-  Associated Proteins from Zea mays
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1989,09/01/1989
* Donald Fosket, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 09/01/1989
* USD 41,600.00

This laboratory has isolated four putative MAPs from cultured cells of Zea mays
(corn) by copolymerization with purified maize microtubules. These proteins will
be characterized at several different levels. Antibodies will be raised against
each of the proteins, and will be used in immunofluorescence studies to
determine the tissue and subcellular localization of each. They will be
characterized biochemically and in in vitro functional assays, to determine
their effects on microtubule polymerization, stability, and morphology, and
their possible enzymatic or mechanochemical activities. The molecular
interactions of the MAPs with microtubules will be investigated in a series of
experiments designed to determine microtubule binding sites on the MAPs and MAP
binding sites on the microtubules. Finally, cDNA clones will be isolated and
characterized for use in experiments that will test MAP function in vivo.
Microtubules are one of the major kinds of cytoskeletal elements in all
eukaryotic cells. They represent the structural basis for a wide variety of
crucial motility functions in cells, including the physical separation of
chromosomes during mitosis or meiosis, ciliary and flagellar movements, muscle
contraction, intracellular transport of subcellular particles, etc. The
activities of microtubules are presumed to be mediated by microtubule-associated
proteins, or MAPs. However, in plants, no such proteins have yet been
demonstrated. Plant microtubules have proven far more difficult to work with
than animal microtubules, and techniques and procedures that work readily with
animal-derived material do not work at all for plants. This laboratory has
recently developed procedures for isolating pure microtubules, which was a
necessary first step toward approaching the problem of microtubule organization
and function in plants at the molecular level. The proposed work has the
potential to turn into a major breakthrough in the understanding of plant
cytoskeleton at the molecular level.