* 8819520
* Knowledge-Based Expert Systems for Civil Engineering,       Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Steven Fenves, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1992
* USD 36,328.00

Description: This project supports cooperative research by Dr. Steven J. Fenves,
Department of Civil Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University and Dr. C. S.
Krishnamoorthy, Department of Civil Engineering, Indian Institute of Tehnology,
Madras in the area of knowledge-based expert system (KBES) in civil engineering
design. The aim is to provide a synergistic merger between U. S. research
results in the development of KBES for engineering design and Indian research on
local civil engineering design practice, thus producing a set of computer tools
that can substantially improve the efficiency and economy of structural design
in India and other developing countries. The specific area of research planned
is that of KBES for structural design including preliminary design analysis and
detailed component design. The three KBES to be developed are to deal with
multistory reinforced concrete buldings, concrete bridges, and single-story
steel industrial structures. The resulting KBES will be exstensively evaluated
by leading designers and practicioners. Scope: The area of this research is of
great interest because of the wide range of knowledge-based programming
strategies that need to be incorporated and the variety of local expertise that
must be collected, organized and formalized. The U. S. scientist is a pioneer
reasearcher in KBES with a very good reputation in artificial intelligence
application in civil engineering. The Indian scientist has broad experience in
research and practice, and the joint effort should lead to a fruitful product.
The project is being funded under two grants: Carnegie Mellon Univiversity
INT8819520 ________________________________________ FY89 $3,960 Indian Currency
FY90 $3,960 Indian Currency +U.S.$17,784 FY91 $3,960 Indian Currency +U.S.$7,020
Indian Institute Technology, Madras INT8913816
_______________________________________________ FY89 $88,907 Indian Currency
FY90 $24,407 Indian Currency FY91 $28,614 Indian Currency