* 8819845
* Topic-Related Variation in Discourse:  A Sociolinguistic    Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Deborah Schiffrin, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 02/29/1992
* USD 59,841.00

ABSTRACT Although most scholars agree that "topic" may be defined as "what a
message is about", topic is still one of the least understood concepts in
linguistics. The general objective of this study is to integrate different types
and levels of topic: entity, proposition, text, speaker, and interactive topics.
The method will be to analyze how variation in language use is related to topic.
The focus will be on variation in clause order (between main and subordinate
clauses), and variation in referring terms, and how such linguistic variants are
situated in discourse and interaction. Because topic realization depends on
communicative processes that are social and expressive, as well as referential,
there will also be an analysis of how topic- related variation in clause order,
and in referring terms, is related to speakers' social identity (social class
and gender). The study differs from past analyses of topic in several ways: 1)
the study aims to integrate five different types and levels of topic; 2) the
study includes an analysis of the information status, as well as the topic
status, of entities and propositions; 3) the data are diversified in terms of
discourse mode; 4) the discourse in which topics are encoded is itself analyzed;
5) the study examines social differences in the encoding of topic. The project
is relevant to the study of topic, information status, linguistic variation,
syntax and discourse, and social differences in language use. It also has
implications for variation theory and analysis, and our understanding of
discourse coherence. Finally, it will provide connections between interactional
and correlational sociolinguistics, and help align the concerns of formal and
functional linguistics.