* 8819952
* Consistent Criteria for Seismic Design of Weak Column StrongBeam Steel Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 06/30/1991
* USD 150,000.00

This project investigates the use of weak column-strong beam (WCSB) moment
frames for seismic resistant design. A recent analytical study of such a steel
frame indicates that WCSB frames may have greatly increased ductility demand and
reduced available ductility over that obtained in comparable strong column-weak
beam (SCWB) structures. This raises a question as to whether these recent
changes are conservative. In this study rational guidelines for the design of
frames with the WCSB configuration will be developed. The inelastic seismic
behavior of steel building frames of different heights and geometry subjected to
different seismic design criteria and acceleration records will be analyzed. The
analyses will consider and compare the response for WCSB frames, comparable SCWB
frames, and frames with weak columns at isolated stories or single column lines.
The ductility demand will be computed and compared for the various conditions,
and the comparison will isolate a few conditions for further experimental
evaluation. The results will provide a better understanding of the behavior of
weak column frames and form a basis for improved design procedures. This
research proposal has received the support of the Structural Engineers
Association of California (SEAOC) Seismology Committee in a resolution passed
June 18, 1988, and formal approval of this support by the SEAOC State Board of
Directors is pending. It is also supported by the American Iron and Steel
Institute (AISI) Seismic Building Codes Committee, and this committee will
establish an Advisory Panel for the conduct of the research. Several
professional engineering associations and code committees including the
Structural Engineers Association of California (SEAOC) endorsed this study due
to the practical significance of the subject.