* 8819657
* Understanding and Using Non-Literal Language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Sam Glucksberg, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 08/31/1991
* USD 154,996.00

Ambiguity is an inherent characteristic of natural language use and
comprehension. Many words, for example, have multiple meanings, e.g., the word
PORT can mean a wine, a harbor, the left side of a ship, etc. Sentences can also
have multiple interpretations, e.g., who is doing the visiting in the sentence:
"visiting enemies can be dangerous"? Despite the ubiquity of such lexical and
syntactic ambiguities in natural language, people are able to understand one
another quite well. How people use context to decide among alternative meanings
has been studied extensively and is now fairly well understood. There is,
however, an additional and important type of ambiguity that remains unexplored
and is not well understood: the ambiguity between literal and nonliteral
meanings. How do people use context to choose among the several possible
interpretations of an utterance? Traditional theories of nonliteral language use
do not go beyond the notion that people will search for a nonliteral
interpretation whenever a literal interpretation does not make sense in context.
How this search is accomplished remains to be discovered. This research will be
concerned with how people arrive at nonliteral interpretations in various
contexts. The research will focus on three important types of nonliteral
language: metaphor, irony, and idioms. The central question is how people
combine the literal meanings of utterances with conversational context so that a
speaker's intended meanings are correctly understood? The first step will be to
determine the communicative functions of these types of nonliteral language use.
With respect to metaphors, for example, why should speakers use a metaphor form,
such as "my job is a jail" instead of the presumably simpler literal form, "my
job is like a jail"? The communicative functions of metaphor, irony, and idioms
will be assessed by determining what people understand and remember when various
forms of communication are used. Information transmission wil be assessed as
well as connotations and perceptions of speakers' intentions and attitudes. The
second step will be to identify the linguistic and contextual cues that people
use to understand utterances as literal or nonliteral. Prior work has already
shown that people will arrive at nonliteral interpretations even when literal
interpretations are perfectly acceptable. This finding suggests that the
traditional "literal-first" theory is incomplete, at best. The overall goal of
the research is to develop a more adequate description of how people understand
nonliteral language. This is a necessary component of the theory of language use
and comprehension. Such a theory, in turn, is necessary for developing more
effective educational methods and materials, and for developing workable machine
recognition and comprehension devices for natural language.