* 8819095
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on the Development of       Digital Computer Load-following Control Techiques for       Power Plants
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,08/31/1992
* George Miley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1992
* USD 21,330.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. George H. Miley, Professor of Nuclear
and Electrical Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, to
pursue with Dr. Gwi Tae Park, Associate Professor of Electrical Engineering,
Korea University, Seoul, Korea, for a period of 24 months, a program of research
on the development of digital computer control techniques for use in pressurized
water reactor nuclear power plants. An adaptive control technique using a self-
tuning method is sought for the load-following control. A new algorithm of a
self-tuning control is to be developed for this purpose by combining a pole-
assignment method with a reference concept. Simulation studies will be performed
to evaluate this control system using an analog mock-up of an operating plant.
Because of low fuel costs, nuclear power plants usually are run at full power at
all times while more expensive plants are operated to handle the daily load
cycling. The larger the fraction of nuclear generation in a power system,
however, the more necessary it is for the nuclear units to be able to respond
quickly to load changes to balance the power load of a network. In this project,
the collaborators will study the application of a new self-tuning digital
computer control method for holding the average coolant temperature in nuclear
reactors as close as possible to a desired but changing reference value in a
load-following mode. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. The U.S. and Korean collaborators
are highly respected scientists with extensive research experience and
productive publication records in the field of the proposal. They have
collaborated successfully in the past.