* 8819874
* Mechanisms of Human Color Vision
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1989,11/01/1989
* Carol Cicerone, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 11/01/1989
* USD 19,462.00

Color vision depends on the activity of certain photoreceptors called cone
cells in the retina of the eye. Humans generally have three cone types,
classified by the sensitivity of their absorbing pigment to short-, medium-, and
long-wavelengths of light. The relative numbers of different cone types in the
retina has been difficult to determine by direct methods, but is fundamental to
our understanding of human visual sensitivity and color vision. This information
is essential for any quantitative model of human color vision. In this project,
Dr. Cicerone will continue her novel work using precise psychophysical
techniques rather than anatomy to obtain numerical estimates of the relative and
absolute numbers of different cone types. Tests for discrimination of colored
target signals allow calculation of thresholds for color perception, which may
differ in different parts of the visual field if different parts of the retina
contain different ratios of cone types. Certain kinds of color blindness are
found where only two kinds of cones are present in the retina; people with this
trait are called dichromats, in contrast to the normal retina of trichromats.
Colored stimuli can be used to test for the properties of mid- and long-
wavelength sensitive cones in different parts of the human dichromatic and
trichromatic retinas. She will use this information to constrain and extend
models of human color vision, and these models will be important for both
perceptual psychologists and neuroscientists.