* 8819969
* Characterization of a Seasonal Neuropeptide
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* M. Margaret Prechel, Loyola University Stritch School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 07/31/1991
* USD 100,000.00

The mammalian pineal gland receives information concerning the external
environment via the nervous system and this is translated to the endocrine
system. This function serves to coordinate the adaption of internal bodily
response to the outside environment. The best known environmental signal
received by the pineal gland is photoperiod. The pattern of daylight versus
darkness characterizes the time of the year and predicts external, seasonal
changes. Dr. Prechel has discovered a seasonal cycle of a neuropeptide in the
pineal gland. This arginine vasotocin-like neuropeptide increases dramatically
for a short time during mid-August each year in a number of species. Dr. Prechel
will collect this peptide during August and then characterize and chemically
identify it so that studies of its biological usefulness can proceed. In
addition, she will determine how the animals "sense" when it is August by
determining which component of our surroundings is capable of causing changes in
hormones in the brain. An understanding of biological rhythms provides new
insights into how humans adapt to changes in their external environment and will
lead to the development of better treatments for problems such as jet lag,
rotating work shifts and Seasonal Affective Disorder or "winter depression."