* 8819469
* Metabolic and Ultrastructural Adaptations to Chronically    Cold Body Temperature in Antarctic Fishes
* O/D,OPP
* 01/01/1990,12/31/1993
* Bruce Sidell, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 12/31/1993
* USD 246,000.00

Thermal conditions under which the evolution of Antarctic fish species occurred
are unique among the the waters of the globe. Sea temperatures in the Antarctic
are severely cold (near -l.0 degrees C) and vary little seasonally). This
project will characterize adaptations to chronically cold body temperature in
metabolism and subcellular organization of muscle tissues from Antarctic fishes.
Major objectives are: (1) to assess the catabolic capacity of tissues for
breakdown of abundant neutral lipid fuels; (2) to determine the relative roles
of mitochondrial and peroxismal beta-oxidation and the substrate preferenda of
each; (3) to evaluate the possible adaptive significance of high corporeal lipid
content of Antarctic fishes in the movement of oxygen through muscle tissues,
and; (4) to identify unique aspects of subcellular organization of tissues in
Antarctic fishes. Experiments will focus upon two red-blooded (Notothenia
gibberifrons, Trematomus newnesi) and one hemoglobinless (Chaenocephalus
aceratus) fish species that are abundant in waters of the Antarctic Peninsula.
Results will better define the significance in Antarctic fishes of high
corporeal fat content which represents an important caloric resource in the
Antarctic ecosystem. Findings may also apply to the physiology and biochemistry
of less easily studied muscle systems which show similar characteristics, for
example, endurance training in mammalian species, including man.