* 8819377
* IIIrd Regional Conference on Mathematical Physics,          Islamabad, Pakistan, February 18-24, 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/1989,03/31/1992
* Qaisar Shafi, Bartol Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1992
* USD 20,000.00

Description: This project provides support for eight U.S. scientists to attend
the Third Regional Conference on Mathmatical Physics planned to be held February
18-24, 1989 in Islamabad, Pakistan at Quaid-i-Azam University. A primary aim of
the conference is to discuss current research in high-energy physics and
cosmology, and to promote cooperation between physicists from the region
(countries in South Asia and the Middle East) and with physicists from the
Western World. Participation of younger physicists from the region is especially
encouraged. Topics to be discussed include: 1. The Standard Model and Beyond 2.
Superstrings: superstring compactification and phenomenology, multi-loop
amplitudes, two dimensional conformal field theories, four dimensional
superstrings, and new aspects of virasoro-algebras and 3. Cosmology: inflation,
cosmic strings, quantum cosmology, blackhole radiation, and large scale
structure. Both lectures and seminar sessions will be organized. Scope: Eight
eminent U.S. physicists are scheduled to participate. Others are expected from
CERN in Switzerland, from France, Ireland, Japan and from China. Partial support
has been provided by the International Center for Theoretical Physics, and local
arrangements are covered by the Pakistani hosts. This conference follows a
highly successful conference by the same organizers held in Adana, Turkey in
September, 1987.