* 8819750
* Electrical and Pharmacological Properties of Freshly        Isolated Single Smooth Muscle Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Joshua Singer, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 178,800.00

The long term goals of this research program are to understand the function of
ionic channels in the membrane of smooth muscle cells and their regulation by
transmitters, ions, metabolites, second messengers, and membrane potential.
Since ionic channels control the membrane potential, serve as one of the
principal targets of neurotronsmitters and second messenger mechanisms, underlie
the action potential, and govern calcium entry into the cell, they play a
central role in the regulation of smooth muscle contraction. The experiments
employ freshly dissociated cells from the stomach of the bullfrog, Bufo marinus.
Emphasis will be placed on patch-clamp techniques to record both whole-cell and
single-channel currents. The specific goals for which support is requested are
studies of the mechanism of potassium channel activation by arachidonic acid and
related fatty acids which has been observed in preliminary experiments. Studies
will will be carried out to determine whether potassium channel activaton is
caused by arachidonic acid and other fatty acids themselves or by metabolites
derived from these fatty acids. A variety of compounds structurally related to
arachidonic acid and other fatty acids will be examined to establish which
structural features are required for the molecules to be effective in inducing
potassium current. Possible endogenous agents that may be releasing the fatty
acids will be sought and identified, and any additional effects of fatty acids
on channels will be studied. The role of arachidonic acid and other fatty acids
as second messengers in transmission of external signals to the biochemical
machinery within cells has recently become the focus of attention in a number of
cell systems. The preliminary observations of Drs. Singer and Walsh that these
agents appear to affect ion channels in the membranes of smooth muscle cells
suggest a previously unexpected mechanism by which the excitability and
contractile activity of these cells may be modulated. The further analysis of
these new observations may lead to important insights into the mechanisms of
regulation of contraction of smooth muscle, and more generally into the
mechanisms by which the permeability of cell membranes is regulated.