* 8819197
* Analysis of VirB Proteins of A. Tumefaciens Required for    T-DNA Transfer
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Andrew Binns, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 09/30/1992
* USD 248,400.00

Ward Virulent strains of Agrobacterium tumefaciens initiate tumors on plants by
transferring the T-DNA from its resident Ti plasmid into plant cells. A
productive interaction between bacterium and plant cell requires the appropriate
attachment of the bacterium to the plant cell, and expression of a series of
virulence (vir) genes in the bacterium. While the functions of several vir
proteins are known, the mechanism by which the T-DNA is transported across two
sets of cell walls and membranes is not known. Recent data supports the
hypothesis that the mechanism of DNA transfer is analogous to that of bacterial
conjugation, suggesting that a DNA transfer apparatus, such as the conjugal pore
encoded by the F plasmid of E. coli, is involved. The virB operon is the logical
candidate to encode the proteins of such a pore. The possible role of virB
proteins in the transfer of T- DNA from the bacterium to the plant cell will be
investigated using in vitro mutagenesis and recombinant DNA techniques,
immunocharacterization and immunolocalization of the proteins, and biochemical
approaches to determine whether or not the proteins are involved in physical
interactions with bacterial membranes or DNA. Currently, plant biotechnology is
heavily dependent on gene transfer based on Agrobacterium. Some plants are
readily transformable by this vector, while others are not. Thus, elucidating
the mechanism of DNA transfer in this system will be of great importance to
plant genetic engineering.