* 8819801
* RUI:  Calcium Regulation of Brain Gangliosides
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Louis Irwin, Simmons University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1991
* USD 104,000.00

The proposed study will test the hypothesis that chronic changes in
extracellular calcium levels will alter the relative concentration or turnover
of selected ganglioside species. In the first in vitro phase, extracellular
calcium will be manipulated in incubating tissue slices in a physiological
medium containing variable calcium (and control) ion concentrations after
preloading the tissue with radiolabeled ganglioside precursors. In a subsequent
in vivo phase, animals will be injected to maximally label gangliosides, then
chronic serum calcium levels will be manipulated by a combination of endocrine
surgery and diet control. Gangliosides will be extracted from membranous
fractions of cerebrocortical, hippocampal, and thalamic tissue, then purified
and separated by two-dimensional thin-layer chromatography. The content of
individual gangliosides will be determined by scanning densitometry coupled with
computer-assisted image analysis. Turnover of individual ganglioside species
will be determined by scanning densitometry of autoradiograms. The ultimate aim
of this research is to shed light on the role of gangliosides and their
interactions with calcium. This question is of fundamental importance in basic
neuroscience, but heightened public interest in dietary calcium gives the topic
timely relevance as well.