* 8819581
* ROW: Quantification of Gross Spinal Morphology &amp; Prediction of Limb Use in Fossil Reptiles
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1991
* Emily Buchholtz, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan H. Fink
* 08/31/1991
* USD 45,002.00

The research objective is the development and use of an accurate predictor of
limb sophistication in fossil reptiles using gross spinal anatomy. Such a tool
will allow augmentation of functional inferences based on limb osteology alone
and allow predictions of limb use when appendicular data is inadequate or
absent. A method of quantifying and standardizing variations in segmental spinal
cord area in living reptiles and birds has been accomplished with a spinal
index. Predictions of cord size based on neural canal size are presently based
on size relationships in subadult Alligator specimens. Improved ability to
predict cord size in extinct reptiles will be accomplished by dissection and
measurement of both cord and canal in additional ontogenetic stages and taxa.
Preliminary correlation of size of spinal index and sophistication of limb use
suggests that the index may be a sensitive indicator of limb function.
Measurement of a much larger number of taxa displaying a greater spectrum of
limb adaptations will allow finer calibration of the spinal index. Application
of data from living genera to the fossil record will be obtained from museum
collections. Although applications of the technique are wide and varied, only
three specific questions of limb function in fossil reptiles are covered by this
proposal. These involve forelimb use in theropods, role of torso and limb as
propulsive organs in aquatic tetrapods, and hindlimb/tail use in armored
dinosaurs.