* 8819354
* The Effect of Hormones and Other Trophic Factors on Pigment Cell Determination and Expression In Vitro and In Vivo
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Joseph Bagnara, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 12/31/1992
* USD 196,953.00

One of the fundamental pigment patterns seen among most vertebrate species
including mammals is one wherein the back is darkly colored while the belly is
whitish. Generally speaking, dark pigmentation among vertebrate species is
brought about by the action of melanocyte- stimulating hormone (MSH) produced by
and released from the intermediate lobe of the pituitary gland. This hormone
stimulates the expression of melanin-containing pigment cells (melanophores,
-cytes) and inhibits the whitish pigment cells (iridophores) on the back. It has
been shown recently that the white belly pattern of frogs is partly due to the
absence of melanin pigment in the belly skin because melanophores in this region
are inhibited by the localized presence of a melanization inhibiting factor
(MIF) present in belly skin. This MIF from frogs inhibits melanization of mouse
melanoma cells in cell culture and a similar acting MIF from the pale belly skin
of a pigmented mouse inhibits melanization of frog melanophores. This lends
credence to the concept that an MIF or a family of MIF molecules is responsible
for normal pigment pattern formation among all vertebrates. The proposed
investigation is directed toward understanding the interaction between MSH and
the putative MIF in the establishment of vertebrate pigment patterns. Most of
the work will study the effects of these protein molecules in pigment cell
cultures. A third little known factor, serum melanization factor (SMF), will
also be involved in these experiments. The interactions among all three will be
assessed. The basic knowledge to be derived from this study will have practical
implications beyond that of "knowledge for its own sake." For example, the
localized elaboration of MIF molecules could explain the greying of hair or the
blanching of skin as in human vitiligo. Possible implications of MIF in
diagnosis and treatment of human malignant melanoma are also possible.