* 8819812
* Preferences, Selection, and Evolution of Complex Vocal      Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Kim Derrickson, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 70,000.00

Bird song has intrigued people for a long time. Besides occasionally being very
musical, it is acoustically very complex and shows much variation among species.
Males of some species sing only a single song their entire life, while males of
other species possess extremely large repertoires of different songs. For
example, male Northern Mockingbirds can sing over 250 different songs during any
particular day, and they continue to learn new songs throughout their life.
Further, they combine these songs in predictable ways, thus providing much
information about their current behavior, motivational state, and reproductive
status. Why particular species, such as the mockingbird, possess such complex
singing behavior has long perplexed evolutionary biologists. The possibility
that females may be distinguishing among males on the basis of their singing
behavior and selectivity mating with males which have a particular singing
behavior has been suggested by several researchers. Unfortunately, this
possibility remains controversial and, to date, inadequately tested. Dr.
Derrickson will conduct an integrated series of experiments to test if female
mockingbirds can distinguish among different singing behaviors. In each
experiment, tapes of different singing behaviors will be presented to captive
females. How females respond behaviorally and physiologically to these different
tapes will allow Dr. Derrickson to determine if they do indeed distinguish among
singing patterns and if this capability might have caused such complex singing
to have evolved.