* 8819398
* A Study of the Abundance and 13C/12C Ratio of Atmospheric   Carbon Dioxide and Oceanic Carbon in Relation to the Global Carbon Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Charles Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Jarvis L. Moyers
* 12/31/1992
* USD 1,227,700.00

During the International Geophysical Year (IGY) in 1957-8 Professor Keeling of
Scripps Institution of Oceanography initiated a high precision atmospheric
carbon dioxide measurements program at Mauna Loa, Hawaii to study the
biogeochemical carbon cycle. This measurement program has been continued and
expanded since that time. In the early 1960's the data set available from this
program demonstrated conclusively that the carbon dioxide concentration in the
atmosphere was increasing at a rate of approximately a third of one percent per
year. This increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide is caused primarily by the
combustion of fossil fuels. Since carbon dioxide is a "greenhouse gas" it is
expected that within a few decades its increased atmospheric concentration will
lead to climatic changes. Among the central issues of the carbon dioxide
question is the reliability of predictions of future concentrations. Such
predictions require an understanding of the biogeochemical carbon dioxide sink
and source strengths. In this research project emphasis will be on the
measurement of the carbon isotopic composition of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere and oceans as a function of space and time. Additionally, high
precision measurements of dissolved carbon dioxide will be made at key locations
in surface and subsurface ocean water. These, and supporting chemical
measurements, will be used to help evaluate the oceans ability to absorb carbon
dioxide released to the atmosphere by the combustion of fossil fuels.