* 8819820
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Spin-Isospin Excitation  in Nuclei by Tagged Photons
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Kongki Min, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1991
* USD 24,850.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Kongki Min, Department of Physics,
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, to pursue with Dr. Jong Chan Kim, Department
of Physics, Seoul National University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative
research in medium energy nuclear physics. The scientists and members of their
research groups will collaborate in a study of + spin-isospin excitations in
(gamma,pi ) reactions, using monoenergetic photons. The investigation is
directed at obtaining nuclear structure information especially related to the
spin and isospin quantum numbers in the nuclear excitation modes. Previous
studies have made use of a photon source with a continuous energy distribution,
which has introduced rather large uncertainties in the determination of cross
sections for the reactions studied. By using high energy monochromatic photons
(gamma rays), the determination of cross sections becomes more direct and less
dependent on theoretical models. At present, there is no operating monochromatic
photon facility in the United States with the high energy needed for photopion
experiments. The collaborators, therefore, will perform their experiments at the
Saskatchewan Accelerator Laboratory at the University of Saskatchewan, Canada.
The proposed research should provide unique information on the basic excitation
modes of atomic nuclei and should contribute to the understanding of nuclear
structure. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly respected scientists who
have records of successful research in electro- and photonuclear physics
research. The present project will allow them to combine their talents and
interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the
U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project
is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).