* 8819120
* Structure/Function of G-Proteins: A Symposium, September 6- 10, 1989, Woods Hole, Massachusetts
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Neil Nathanson, Society of General Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 07/31/1990
* USD 5,000.00

The obligatory role of guanine nucleotide regulatory proteins (G- proteins) in
many transmembrane signalling events is now clearly established. While this has
been elucidated most clearly for retinal phototransduction and for hormonal
regulation of adenylate cyclase, similar mechanisms apparently are important for
regulation of phospholipase C-catalyzed phosphoinositide hydrolysis, for
neurotransmitter receptor-mediated modification of ion channel activity, for
various secretory events, and for regulation of cell growth and differentiation.
Although evidence for the involvement of a G-protein in most of these phenomena
is strong, unambiguous identity of this protein has been established in only a
few cases. The application of molecular cloning technology to studies of
G-proteins in the last two years has resulted in major advances in knowledge of
the structure of G- protein subunits and has resulted in the identification of
new G- proteins, the functions of which are not yet established. This symposium
proposes to bring together leaders in the field of G- protein research. A major
goal is to provide a forum for interaction between individuals who are actively
studying G- protein function using model systems and investigators who are
actively pursuing the identity and structure of G-proteins with technologies
evolved from molecular cloning. The broad areas to be covered in the symposium
include: (1) regulation of ion channels by G-proteins; (2) G-protein regulation
of second messenger production; (3) receptors that interact with G- proteins;
and (4) structure, function and expression of G- proteins. There will be five
sessions, one each on topics 1-3, and two sessions on topic 4. The meeting will
also include a major keynote address and an afternoon poster session related to
the general themes of the symposium. The published proceedings from the
symposium are expected to make a timely and important contribution to this
rapidly expanding field. This symposium on guanine nucleotide regulatory
proteins (G- proteins) will provide a unique opportunity to bring together
biochemists, physiologists, pharmacologists, cell biologists, and molecular
biologists who are leaders in the multidisciplinary approaches being taken in
this field. The critical comparisons possible in such an interaction should
provide an important boost to our understanding of G-protein structure and
function, and more generally to understanding of cellular signaling mechanisms.