* 8819912
* Gordon Research Conference on Neural Plasticity;            July 17-21, 1989; Wolfeboro, New Hampshire
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1990
* Carla Shatz, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Steven C. McLoon
* 03/31/1990
* USD 5,000.00

The Gordon Research Conference on Neural Plasticity has been held every
alternate year since 1977 in July at Brewster Academy, Wolfeboro, New Hampshire.
Gordon Research Conferences were established to stimulate ideas in an informal
setting. Uninhibited discussion is fostered by GRC strictures on the
publications, proceedings, or indeed the citation of presentations. The format
has proved particularly useful in the conference on Neural Plasticity--a highly
interdisciplinary meeting in which the subject of modifiability of the nervous
system is examined at the molecular, cellular and systems levels and in which
the participants come from broadly different backgrounds (biochemical,
pharmacological, anatomical, electrophysiological, behavioral). One evening is
set aside for a keynote speaker and poster session. The remaining eight sessions
will focus on specific issues, with 3 or 4 scheduled speakers so that
significant time is preserved for discussion. The discussion tends to continue
informally during the afternoon, when no formal sessions are scheduled. It is
the experience of participants that these informal interactions are often more
fruitful than the extended sessions characteristic of other meetings. The formal
program includes sessions on: cellular and molecular models of learning,
learning in the adult cerebral cortex, genetic and hormonal models of neural
development and plasticity, regulation of neuronal receptors, oncogenies and
neural plasticity, neural grafting, NMDA receptors and long term potentiation,
and the role of ion channels in neural plasticity.