* 8819133
* Molecular Mapping of the Chlamydomonas Genome
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Paul Lefebvre, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 07/31/1993
* USD 258,749.00

The unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii has several unique
characteristics that make it the model system of choice for molecular genetic
studies of genes involved in eukaryotic flagella, chloroplasts, cell-cell
interactions, and a number of biochemical pathways. We will develop a molecular
map of the Chlamydomonas genome to complement the extensive genetic map that
currently exists. Restriction fragment length polymorphism that distinguish the
DNA from two interfertile strains will be used to follow the segregation of
molecular markers in genetic crosses. Molecular markers will be mapped with
respect to phenotypic markers on each of the nineteen linkage groups. Sets of
linked molecular markers will be ordered on each linkage group. The ends of
linkage groups will be mapped using molecular markers associated with telomere.
Precise correlation between the molecular map and the genetic map will be sought
by carrying out a "chromosome walk" in one region of the genome. This project
will greatly facilitate molecular and genetic analysis of Chlamydomonas nuclear
genes currently underway in many laboratories including our own. The single-
celled green alga Chlamydomonas has become an important model organism for the
study of a number of problems of fundamental biological interest. This is a
proposal to develop a detailed and comprehensive map of the DNA and genes of
this organism. Such a map will be a valuable resource to workers in the field,
and will greatly facilitate their work.