* 8819707
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Political Science
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1990
* Jeffry Frieden, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 02/28/1990
* USD 3,400.00

The Federal Reserve is one of the most powerful institutions involved in the
formation of national and international economic policy. It has the formal power
to manipulate interest rates and the money supply, which are crucial
determinants of inflation, unemployment, and the value of the dollar. Moreover,
the Fed can act without the approval of the president or congress, and in this
way is insulated from the pressures of electoral politics. With such enormous
power and scope in this politically sensitive area, it is all the more
paradoxical that the Fed, and central banking more generally, receives such
little attention from political scientists. In this investigation the researcher
will explore the origins of the Federal Reserve. The techniques of modern
political economy are applied to the topic to trace the change from the National
Banking System to the Federal Reserve System. First, why did modern central
banking come to the United States when it did? This question is particularly
relevant since many other countries possessed central banks by 1913, and the
theory of central banking had been widely understood since at least the 1870s.
Second, why was the organizational structure of the Federal Reserve so different
from the structure of other central banks and other agencies in American
government? What explains, for example, its level of decentralization and its
peculiar mixture of public and private control? Public choice theory and the new
institutional economics provide the analytic tools for examining these
questions. The proximate objective is to present a comprehensive explanation of
the origins of the Federal Reserve, from the shift in the institutional
preferences of powerful social actors to the final legislative outcome. Support
allows the investigator to gather statistical and literary data from archives in
New York, Cambridge, and Washington, D.C.