* 8819332
* Control of Antifreeze Gene in Winter Flounder
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Ru-Chih Huang, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Bruce L. Umminger
* 03/31/1992
* USD 148,500.00

During the late fall and winter, the winter flounder produces a family of unique
antifreeze proteins (AFP) to prevent the lethal formation of ice crystals in its
blood. Winter flounder possess the ability to induce AFP mRNA synthesis in vitro
by lowering the ambient temperature of the fish from 18 degrees centigrade in
the summer months (when AFP synthesis is at a minimum) to 4 degrees centigrade.
More importantly, this cold induction of AFP mRNA synthesis has been
investigated by the PI in vitro in isolated liver tissue and in nuclear
preparations isolated from liver tissue. In addition, the PI has sequenced a
cDNA clone of an AFP mRNA and with it, demonstrated a family of AFP genes in the
winter flounder genome. The cloned AFP genes have been transferred to a variety
of fish cell lines. Expression of AFP genes in transgenic cells has been
established. Future studies will be focused on generation of cyprinid loach
transgenic fish with cloned AF gene by several transfection methods including
electroporation. Tissue-specific expression of the AF genes in offspring of
transgenic fish following various acclimations will be extensively studied.
Basic studies such as these are of the greatest importance to our facing global
problems of biodiversity. They investigate the survival of species under less
then maximal conditions.//