* 8819569
* Mathematical Sciences: Singularities of Harmonic Function inCn
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Dmitry Khavinson, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1992
* USD 33,101.00

The main theme of this work, to investigate the holomorphic continuation of
solutions of holomorphic partial differential equations in domains within the
space of several real or complex varibles, will employ techniques from three
areas of mathematical analysis. They are partial differential equations, complex
analysis and potential theory. The extent to which solutions of elliptic
equations extend from hypersurfaces to surrounding domains is believed to be
directly related to the maximum extension of the Schwarz potential. It should be
mentioned that the question of maximal extent of solutions of equations of
hyperbolic type (wave equations) has been thoroughly investigated. In the case
of equations of elliptic type, such as Laplace's equation, conjectures of what
the maximal extent should be have not even been formulated. Present work will
focus on very specific questions regarding homogeneous equations with
holomorphic boundary values. The first objective will be to determine whether or
not the maximal domain of analyticity of a solution depends only on the
differential operator and the boundary, but not the specific Cauchy data. A
simple device which has proved valuable in the cases of equations in two real
dimensions is the Schwarz function of an analytic curve. The domain of
regularity of the Schwarz function plays a crucial role in determining the
maximal region of analyticity for solutions of elliptic initial value problems
with analytic data. A reasonable extension of the Schwarz function has been
formulated which will be examined to determine whether the basic two-dimensional
results can be expanded to higher real dimensions and (any) complex ones.
Preliminary analysis will be done on problems where the Cauchy data consists of
polynomials, with later goals to include entire functions.