* 8819954
* Symposium on Vision in Elasmobranchs, Note Marine           Laboratory, Florida, April 28-29, 1989
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1990
* Robert Hueter, Mote Marine Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 03/31/1990
* USD 12,953.00

Structural and functional diversity directly contribute to an animal's sensory
abilities. Receptor, processor and effector units allow an animal to utilize
sensory information as an environmental resource. Comparative study of sensory
systems is important because it may help explain the relative evolutionary
success of certain species. This interdisciplinary conference takes this
integrative perspective to examine vision in elasmobranch branch fishes, which
include the sharks and rays. Elasmobranchs represent a relatively small but
evolutionarily very important group of vertebrates. While some species of these
animals have relatively primitive organization of certain systems, other species
have remarkably specialized adaptations; vision is one sense showing such
diversity. A variety of recent studies have explored visual biochemistry,
anatomy, physiology, and behavior in these animals. This conference will
coalesce this recent information around the functioning of the visual system of
elasmobranchs, its relation to ecological factors, and its importance to
understanding vision in the vertebrates. This conference is novel for
neuroscience because instead of using different animals to look at functions
from a subcellular or cellular perspective, it uses one animal group to look at
sensory function from perspectives ranging from the subcellular to the
ecological. The work will have impact on work on visual science, on other
sensory systems, on ecology and on marine biology.