* 8819836
* Cognitive Busyness, Cognitive Recovery, and Social Inference
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Daniel Gilbert, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 06/30/1993
* USD 153,654.00

During social interaction, people must devote considerable attention to the
execution and regulation of their own behavior, and thus are often "cognitively
busy" while drawing inferences about others. Past research suggests that
cognitive busyness makes people temporarily unable to use certain kinds of
important information .. despite the fact that they have noticed, understood,
and stored this information in memory. As such, cognitively busy perceivers are
particularly likely to draw erroneous inferences about others (the so.called
"undercorrection error"). The undercorrection error results when people fail to
use information that they do, in fact, possess; as such, the error should be
reversible. This research addresses four basic questions regarding the
reversibility of the undercorrection error. First, precisely what cognitive
mechanism enables the error to be reversed? Second, how can the prospect of
future interaction with the person about whom one has made an erroneous
inference sometimes activate and sometimes inhibit this mechanism? Third, are
there factors that render the error truly irreversible? Finally, are there
effects other than the undercorrection error that result from being cognitively
busy and that are also irreversible? Social psychologists consider the
undercorrection error to be the most fundamental and pervasive mistake that
people make when trying to understand each other. Such errors often serve as the
grounds for interpersonal and inter.group conflicts, and it is important for us
to learn how they can be corrected or undone. This research will clarify the
mechanisms by which the undercorrection error may be reversed, and will
explicate the situational factors that facilitate or inhibit such reversals.