* 8819245
* Biophysics of Cardiac Rhythms
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1994
* Teresa Chay, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 06/30/1994
* USD 104,300.00

This proposal addresses three major aspects of research to elucidate the
mechanisms underlying cardiac rhythms: (1) single channel gating mechanisms, (2)
reconstructing caridac action potentials, and three effects of pharmacological
agents on the propagation of action potentials. The general approach is
mathematical modeling and correlation of the models with experimental data
derived from the physiological studies of others. Specifically, the first part
of this proposal deals with the ionic channel activity in heart cells from the
viewpoint of non-Markovian Weibull kinetics. Markovian models will be compared
with non-Markovian models to determine their relative merits and to determine
whether the non-Markovian Weibull model can be classified as a "fractal" model.
The second part of the proposal deals with the construction of a minimal unified
model for cardiac action potentials using experimental data on action currents
obtained by others, so as to study the dynamic role of compartmentalized calcium
ions under spontaneous beating conditions, and to construct a mathematical model
for the cardiac action potential. The third part of this proposal deals with
elucidation of the effect of calcium channel blockers on the action potential
propagation. To acheive these objectives the cardiac impulse initiation and
propagation will be simulated using the Cray X-MP/48 supercomputer and study how
changes in the ionic channel properties would alter the properties of the
propagating waves. The availability of advanced scientific computers has greatly
expanded the possibility for using mathematical modeling as an approach to study
physiological processes. Although models of the heart action potential have been
of interest for many years, experimental advances have provided new information
that can now be incorporated into more sophisticated models which, in turn, may
point to more refined experiments. The ultimate goal of these approaches is to
develop a thorough understanding of the electrical phenomena that underly the
rythmic activity of the heart.