* 8819523
* Seismic/Wind Masonry Building Design Handbook
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1988,03/31/1990
* Charles Lindbergh, Citadel Military College of South Carolina
* Standard Grant
* William A. Anderson
* 03/31/1990
* USD 15,000.00

Like some other national regions, communities in the Southeastern United States
face a significant seismic risk without sufficient earthquake engineering
technology base for mitigation. Prudent building practices and code standards
are impeded by this technology inadequacy. This shortcoming is particularly
important in South Carolina and other southeastern states due to the companion
natural hazards of high winds. Masonry structures are common and most vulnerable
to both of these natural hazards. Masonry building design practices often do not
incorporate state-of-the-art engineering technology and, in most cases,
established building code standards regarding seismic and wind forces. This is
due to inadequacies in the engineering technology base as described above and a
long term disregard of the serious eastern earthquake threat. Relevant masonry
engineering procedures, data and experience are available to remedy this
technical shortfall. However, the sources are somewhat fragmented and
widespread. Consolidated engineering guidelines are necessary for the
multihazards design of masonry structures. This project will produce an
engineering design handbook for unreinforced and reinforced masonry structures
to withstand the integrated effects of earthquakes and high winds. The handbook
will feature provision of the new earthquake and wind provisions of the 1988
Standard Building Code which apply to the South and Southeastern United States.
The handbook will focus on the threats, building types and construction
practices of the southeast region, and would be of use nationwide. It will
provide integrated design guidelines formed through a survey and consolidating
analysis of existing design technologies and methodologies, including those
recently developed, involving anchorages, diaphragms, existing unreinforced
masonry buildings, mixed construction (prefab steel frame with masonry walls)
and potential liquefaction damage. The guidelines will be presented through
specific detailed design applications to building types typical of construction
in the southeast region.