* 8819302
* Theory of Electronic Transport in Disordered Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Dietrich Belitz, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1993
* USD 108,900.00

It is proposed to study transport properties of disorderd electron liquids, both
normal and superconducting. The first project is to study inelastic electron
scattering in normal conducting thin films and wires. Taking into account
realistic phonon spectra, this will make possible a parameter-free comparison
with experiments on free-standing structures. For superconductors, the
quasiparticle lifetime will be studied as a possible source of experimentally
observed pairbreaking. They will also explore further experimental consequences
of the recently proposed coorelation gap mechanism for the disorder dependence
of the critical temperature. The third project is to obtain a better
understanding of the metal-insulator transition of interacting electrons. This
will be done by a careful renormalization group analysis of the model derived by
Finkelshtein. It is argued that the renormalization procedure is much more
subtle than has previously been recognized. Very recent evidence suggests that
for the properly treated model renormalizability can be established. This will
guarantee that the resulting flow equations are physically meaningful. The
results of this project will make it possible to study the breakdown of
screening and the destruction of superconductivity at extremely strong disorder,
thus making contact with the first two projects.