* 8819367
* Mechanisms and Regulation of Integumental Organic Solute    Transport
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Stephen Wright, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 07/31/1992
* USD 225,852.00

It is increasingly apparent that the integument of aquatic animals can play an
active role in mediating the exchange of organic compounds between animals and
environment. In this project, the PI will compare the mechanisms of integumental
and intestinal nutrient transport. This will represent the first study
integrating the characteristics of organic solute transport in these nutrient
gathering organs; and include an expansion of their observation of an apparent
homology between glucose transporters in invertebrate integument and vertebrate
intestine. They will also examine for the first time the regulatory influence of
two significant environmental factors, salinity and nutrient availability. This
is particulary exciting given the recent observation that the quaternary
nitrogenous compound, betaine, is avidly transported by the integument;
characterization of this transporter, which has not been reported in any
epithelial system, could have an important impact on current studies of the role
of betaine and related compounds in vertebrate and invertebrate osmoregulation.
Finally, the PI proposes to begin study of the development of integument
transport, including the mechanism of transport activation that occurs upon
fertilization. The approach in all these studies will be to combine the use of
intact animals, isolated tissues, and preparations of subcellular membranes,
along with the introduction to this work of several recently introduced
molecular probes for transport proteins as well as use of NMR as a tool for
studying changes in the physical nature of intracellular solutes. The proposed
work also includes a comparative examination of integumental and intestinal
nutrient transport in two major phyla, the Mollusca and Echinodermata. The
proposed work examines the regulation of nutrient uptake by several different
organ systems in aquatic organisms. The studies include the first examination of
the molecular basis of the activation of nutrient uptake into newly fertilized
eggs, and then follows the development of particular aspects of these processes
from egg to the nutrient acquiring organs of the adult. These results should be
directly applicable to the understanding if optimal growing conditions for
several species of commercially important shellfish.