* 8819718
* LTER:  Carbon and Nutrient Relations Among Oligotrophic     Forest Communities in the North Central Amazon Basin
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* Christopher Uhl, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 07/31/1991
* USD 191,686.00

Nutrient limitations appear to be widespread in the oligotrophic rainforest
ecosystems of the Rio Negro portion of the Amazon basin. This research will test
several hypotheses regarding carbon-nutrient relations and nutrient-use
efficiency for these forests. Four discrete primary forest communities (each on
different soil type) will be studied, along with a successional community.
Species overlap between these communities is minimal, even though all five
communities are located within 1 km from each other at San Carlos de Rio Negro,
Venezuela. Individuals from 5 species in each community (25 species total) have
been monitored for six years, providing baseline data on leaf production and
leaf duration. Now nutrient and carbon relations will be studied with respect to
leaf longevity and leaf aging and soil nutrient availability. The main
hypotheses are that distinct differences will emerge among communities (and
species): 1) in leaf morphology and nutrient content, as a result of variation
in habitat resource availability and species successional niche, 2) in CO2
assimilation capacity, as function of leaf nutrient content and photosynthetic
nitrogen- and phosphorus-use efficiency, 3) in long-term carbon gain and
nutrient-use efficiency, as a result of variation in photosynthetic nutrient-use
efficiency, leaf longevity, and leaf nutrient retention and retranslocation over
time.