* 8819325
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of the Dominant Mutations    that Define the Kn1 Locus in Zea Mays
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Sarah Hake, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 01/31/1992
* USD 284,801.00

The knotted mutation in maize disrupts normal leaf development by altering the
timing of differentiation and growth pattern of certain leaf cells. The
phenotype ranges from a clearing of the photosynthetic cells that normally
surround the lateral veins, to sporadic knots along the lateral veins which grow
out of the plane of the leaf. Lastly, the ligule is displaced and found parallel
to the veins in the leaf blade. There are four Kn1 mutations that differ in
their severity and timing although they all map to the same location on the long
arm of chromosome 1. We have cloned one of the mutations using Ds2 as a
transposon tag. This particular mutation requires a trans-acting Ac for
expression and the phenotype increases in severity with an increase in Ac
dosage. The Ds2 mutation, Kn1-2F11, has enabled us to begin a molecular analysis
of another Kn1 mutation, Kn1-0. Kn1-0 appears to be a duplication, the
breakpoint of which falls within 1 kb of the site of the Ds2 insertion in
Kn1-2F11. DNA 5 kb distal to the region altered in these two mutants is highly
conserved. We will isolate and analyze cDNA and genomic clones of the different
knotted mutations and their wildtype alleles. In situ hybridization techniques
will be used to determine when and in what tissues the Kn1 and wildtype genes
are expressed. The nature of the Ds-Ac interaction in the Kn1-2F11 mutation will
be determined. Our long range goal is to determine how the development of the
leaf involves Kn1 or "kn" expression. The use of recombinant technology has made
it possible to study plant development at a molecular genetic level. However, as
yet, only a few laboratories have started doing so. Corn, because it has been
genetically studied extensively, is an excellent experimental organism. The
results of this study should provide greater insight into how plants form
leaves.