* 8819837
* Biobehavioral Consequences of Placentophagia
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Mark Kristal, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 04/30/1992
* USD 120,000.00

Dr. Kristal's research is directed towards understanding the physiological,
particularly opioid-mediated, processes involved in mammalian birth and
postpartum behavior. Perhaps one of the most enigmatic components of the
mammalian birth process has been the ingestion of the afterbirth by the mother.
This placentophagia is present in virtually all nonhuman, nonaquatic, mammalian
species. Recently, with NSF support, Dr. Kristal found that ingestion of
amniotic fluid or placenta by rats experiencing opioid-mediated analgesia
significantly elevates that analgesia. These data indicate that the placenta and
amniotic fluid contain a substance(s) that enhances opioid-mediated analgesia
but does not by itself produce analgesia. The importance of the existence of
such a factor, referred to as Placental Opioid-Enhancing Factor (POEF), is that
during labor and delivery, pregnancy- mediated analgesia can be maximized
without so massive a release of endogenous opioids. This is very important since
too high a level of opioids during and immediately after birth can interfere
with maternal behavior. Dr. Kristal is continuing to characterize the effects of
the analgesic enhancing effects of POEF during parturition and on maternal
behavior. The findings will enhance our knowledge of the physiological
mechanisms of birth and postpartum behavior. Moreover, the research points the
way toward a new class of non-narcotic analgesics and sheds light on fundamental
processes involved in pain and the body's reaction to it.