* 8819140
* New Forms of Liquid Crystals of Lubricants
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Stig Friberg, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 147,717.00

The recently introduced non-aqueous lyotropic liquid crystals have been
investigated for their lubrication properties under a previous NSF grant
(MSM-8716928). They demonstrated performance as lubricants far superior to
commercial greases with respect to the friction coefficients, which were as low
as 0.02. In addition, they are able to accommodate additives of such a nature
that they cannot be used in conventional greases. These factors indicate
potential for non-aqueous lyotropic liquid crystals to develop into a new class
of advanced lubricants. The project funded under this grant is one part of a
coordinated basic research program to probe the mechanism for the ultralow
friction coefficients and to synthesize and incorporate new additives into the
formulations. The new additives, adjusted to the properties of liquid crystals,
will be synthesized at the University of Turin, Italy. Characterization of the
liquid crystal lubricants using various state-of-the-art techniques from colloid
chemistry will be performed at Clarkson University (this grant). Tribological
analysis will be performed at the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor (funded by
the Tribology Program). Travel funds for coordination of the research have been
provided by the Italian National Research Council. The program at Clarkson will
emphasize three points: (1) An explanation of the low friction coefficients. (2)
exploitation of the structure of the liquid crystal lubricant to incorporate
lubricant additives with structures incompatible with hydrocarbon based
lubricants. (3) The integrity of the liquid crystal structure against
decomposition products of the original components, which could potentially move
the multicomponent system into a region of the phase space where liquid crystals
do not form.