* 8819219
* Molecular Biology of Fungal Reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Bruce Miller, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Brady
* 07/31/1992
* USD 231,500.00

The specific aims of this proposal are directed toward a molecular
characterization of the stunted (stuA) gene, a modifier of conidiophore
development in Aspergillus nidulans. The stunted gene is a member of a group of
potential regulatory genes that are arranged in a hierarchical order and that
control normal development during conidiation. Mutations in this gene have a
profound affect upon conidiophore structure, a result of aberrant progression
though the normal developmental program. Molecular genetic techniques will be
used to clone and physically characterize the stunted gene in order to begin an
investigation of the gene product's biochemical function; to elucidate the
temporal expression of this gene during development in the wild type strain and
in other developmental mutants; to investigate the affects of experimentally
altered stunted gene expression upon conidiophore development and to isolate
novel stuA alleles. Double mutants will be generated for the purpose of
investigating potential interactions, at the molecular level, of genes
responsible for normal asexual reproduction and to relate these interactions to
structure formation. %%% A fundamental problem in biology is the elucidation of
molecular mechanisms that mediate cell differentiation and the organization of
cell types during morphogenesis. The filamentous fungi are an important group of
organisms that have been extremely useful for studies that address development
in eucaryotes. Although many of these fungi are propagated by asexually produced
and aerially dispersed conidia (spores), very little is known about the
biochemical and genetic mechanisms that mediate coordinately regulated gene
expression and cellular differentiation during asexual reproduction.