* 8819366
* The Thymus and T Cell Differentiation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Martin Flajnik, University of Miami School of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 182,800.00

The role of the thymus in the positive and negative selection (tolerance) of T
lymphocytes is currently a subject of intense interest in the immunological
community. Many of the models used to study this problem entail considerable
perturbation of normal physiology. Xenopus offers an opportunity to examine this
selection by the production of embryonic head/body chimeras in which the thymus
anlagen and the precursors of all hematopoietic cells are transplanted across
major histocompatibility (MHC)- disparate barriers. The work to date suggests
that the thymus epithelium itself positively selects T cells that can recognize
antigen in association with the thymus's MHC, but cannot make tolerant cells
which are reactive with the thymus's MHC. T cells are present within the
chimeras that are reactive in the mixed leukocyte reaction (MLR) with stimulator
cells bearing the thymus's MHC-type, but these cells do not reject the anterior
region of the chimera or subsequent skin grafts from normal animals with the
MHC-type of the thymus (split tolerance). The goal of this work is to test
certain models pertaining to positive and negative selection. Specifically, the
MLR against the thymus's MHC will be further studied to determine which MHC
antigens, and possibly which form of the antigens, are recognized by the anti-
thymus T cells. Several in vivo protocols involving the transfer of lymphocytes
from chimeras into normal animals, primed cells from normal frogs into chimeras,
and the examination of an "autoimmune" antibody response to the thymus's class I
molecules, will be performed in the hope of determining whether the in vitro
reactive T cells can be revealed in vivo, and whether a potent suppressive
system down-regulates the cells in vivo. Lastly, antibodies will be raised
against the Xenopus T cell receptor, and isoelectric-focusing experiments will
be performed to determine directly the impact of the thymus on the maturation of
the T cell repertoire. Although studies of the immune response in mammals and
the human have received much attention, studies in lower vertebrates have been
pursued less actively even though these organisms provide some unique
opportunities to advance our understanding of the evolution and development of
mechanisms of self recognition and self defense. This research takes advantage
of some unique features of the development of the frog to approach the question
of how amphibian lymphocytes are programmed genetically and developmentally to
distinguish appropriate (foreign) target cells from inappropriate (self) target
cells. The results of this study will enhance our basic understanding of defense
responses in a diversity of organisms.