* 8819659
* Possible Condensation Laser
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* John Fenn, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 02/28/1990
* USD 29,973.00

1. Summary of Proposed Research: Experiments to be carried out will consist in
exposing various gas mixtures to a corona discharge in a source chamber and then
expanding the excited gas through a small nozzle into vacuum as a supersonic
jet. Of particular interest are species whose excited states radiate in the
infrared such as CO and CO2. Their radiation from the jet will be analyzed by
Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry as well as by total radiation detectors.
In some preliminary experiments the intensity of the radiation showed as much as
a fivefold increase when the initial temperature and pressure of the source gas
were such that condensation would be expected during the free jet expansion. The
question thus arises as to whether this observed "superradiance" was due to a
population inversion caused by clustering of the ground state molecules which
would shift their absorption wavelength so that they could not absorb photons
radiated by excited monomers. The objective of the research is to determine with
what species and under what conditions the superradiance can be made to occur,
the nature of the underlying mechanism, and whether that mechanism offers an
effective new approach to useful lasers in the infrared regime. 2. Novelty: The
sine qua non of laser operation is a population inversion in which the number
density of molecules in an upper excited state exceeds the number density in the
lower state produced when the excited molecule radiates a photon. Many kinds of
processes have been used to populate an upper state in a laser system and/or to
depopulate the corresponding lower state. To our knowledge inversions have not
previously been achieved by the use of condensation to depopulate the lower
state. In principle it should work and preliminary experiments with supersonic
free jets indicate that it can occur in rapid adiabatic expansion of a gas
containing vibrationally excited species. 3. Technological Impact: Preliminary
experiments have shown remarkable superradiance from free jets containing
vibrationally excited CO and CO2. The tentative explanation is a population
inversion due to clustering or condensation of molecules in the lower state. If
this conclusion is confirmed by the proposed research, the way would seem open
for the development of new "condensation laser" systems. Because this approach
should be applicable to almost any gaseous species that is infrared-active,
there looms the prospect of a wide range of laser systems covering a large part
of the infrared spectrum. Relatively complex molecules should offer tunability.
Quantum efficiencies should be high because the lower state must have little or
no remaining internal energy in order to condense.