* 8819763
* Regulation of Sympathetic Ganglion Development in Vitro
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1990,05/31/1994
* Karen Greif, Bryn Mawr College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 05/31/1994
* USD 198,586.00

Dr. Greif will investigate factors which help regulate the development of the
sympathetic nervous system, using the rat superior cervical ganglion (SCG) as a
model system. The principal investigator will grow SCGs in a cell culture
system, permitting a detailed analysis of how interactions between cells across
synaptic junctions can alter the biochemical development of neurons. Dr. Greif
will study how the levels of two proteins associated with synaptic vesicles,
which package neurotransmitters, are changed when cells are depolarized
electrically or when cells are grown in the presence of target tissue. Once the
patterns of response are determined, she will examine how such factors can
signal a cell to alter its production of a protein. She will focus on chemical
signals found in cells known as "second messengers", which are important in
regulating many cellular functions. SCGs will be treated with agents which
directly change the level of second messengers. Dr. Greif will then study how
well such treatments can mimic the effects of electrical depolarization or other
factors. These studies will help us understand how cell-cell interactions can
direct the normal development of the nervous system, and may provide important
insights into factors responsible for disorders of neural development.