* 8819372
* Construction, Representation, and Retrieval Processes in    Impression Formation
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1989,12/31/1992
* Bernadette Park, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jean B. Intermaggio
* 12/31/1992
* USD 172,033.00

This research will look at how impressions of others are formed. An analysis of
any particular social event, be it juror decision making, attraction and liking,
attitude formation, or stereotyping processes, involves the dynamics of person
perception. This process of moving from observable behaviors to inferences about
someone's underlying personality has important implications for nearly every
aspect of the social world. This research looks in detail at this process of
constructing impressions, at the storage of impressions in memory for use at a
later point in time,and at the retrieval of these impressions for making
subsequent judgments about the person. In earlier work, the researcher has found
that the ability of a group of judges to agree on their impression of a target
depends on the trait dimension considered, on the information available, and on
differences among the judges in the frequency with which various trait
dimensions are routinely used in describing others. In particular, judging how
extroverted or sociable someone is turns out to be much easier than a judgment
of intelligence, responsibleness, or honesty. This research will investigate
whether this difference remains when more narrow definitions of the traits are
provided (e.g., intelligence in a given context), when the acquaintance takes
place over a longer period of time, when the outcome judgment has some important
consequences for both judge and target (e.g., admission to graduate school), and
if the task is to disconfirm an existing impression rather than to form a new
one. In addition, differences in the ease of judging these traits are related to
theories of how we make attributions for the causes of others' behavior.
Finally, a series of studies will explore the representation of impressions in
memory. Specifically, these studies look at how closely tied are memories for
the actual behaviors performed by someone to inferences based on these acts
about the person's underlying personality. To the extent that inferences are not
"bound" to the evidence on which they are based, errors in perception are
difficult to correct, and change in impressions is unlikely to occur.//