* 8819981
* Conditioned Changes in Reactivity:  The Variables           Which Determine the Direction and the Form of the           Conditioned Response
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/1989,08/31/1991
* James Grau, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 08/31/1991
* USD 74,651.00

Considerable evidence now exists that exposure to an intense event, such as
electric shock, a noise, or even mere physical confinement, can elicit a strong
form of analgesia in humans and in animals. More recently, it has been shown
that an initially neutral or "meaningless" stimulus paired with this event can
subsequently acquire the ability to produce an analgesia on its own. For
example, a tone which has previously been paired with an electric shock has been
reported to invoke a strong form of analgesia. In many situations this analgesia
appears to be mediated by the release of endorphins, the body's own morphine-
like substances. In other situations, a different, non-opiate mechanism appears
to be involved. As a further complication, some investigators have failed to
find either of these forms of conditioned analgesia. In fact, some researchers
have reported exactly the opposite-- that this pairing of stimuli leads to an
increase (rather than a decrease) in pain reactivity. In the present set of
experiments, Dr. Grau is exploring the variables which determine whether
analgesia or hyperalgesia is produced. These studies are examining two sets of
factors which influence pain reactivity. The first is a determination of how and
when an opioid versus a non-opioid form of analgesia is produced. The second is
examining the role of environmental factors (such as time of day, testing in the
training location versus in a novel location, and whether the subjects are
tested during the dark or the light portion of the light/dark cycle) in the
modulation of algesia. The results of these experiments are helping to answer
very fundamental questions about the nature of pain responses, and providing
insight into currently existing and potential pain management regimens.