* 8819725
* Archaeology of Ceren, El Salvador
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1991
* Payson Sheets, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 01/31/1991
* USD 90,201.00

In ca. AD 600 a catastrophic eruption by the Laguna Cladera volcano in El
Salvador completely buried a Mayan homestead and the fields which surrounded it.
Preliminary excavations at this site of Ceren in 1978 indicated that the
volcanic ash packed around and throughly preserved structures, wooden artifacts,
trees, corn plants, a field with footprints, and human bodies. Subsequent
geophysical prespection in 1979 confirmed the existence of intact houses which
remain buried under five meters of ash. Dr. Sheets and his colleagues will
return to this site and conduct extensive excavation. Through judicious use of
heavy equipment a transect will be cut and overburden removed to allow easy hand
excavation of features. Floral and faunal materials will be recovered and
analyzed to reconstruct household subsistence and expected skeletal materials
will provide insight into family composition. Field excavation will allow
reconstruction of agricultural techniques. Ceren is unique, even in comparison
to Old World sites such as Pompeii, because the volcanic ash matrix is so fine
that it preserves organic materials down to the cellular level. This virtually
complete material culture record will allow for a detailed reconstruction of
functioning households and important insights to human behavior, demography,
nutrition, agriculture, and economics. Anthropologists have come to realize that
in many societies the "household" . a group in individuals who live together in
one place and closely cooperate on a daily basis . form a essential unit.
However, archaeologically households are usually difficult to isolate and study.
At Ceren it appears that just such a unit exists. This research is important
because it will shed a new and important light on the development of complex
Mayan society and help us understand how complexity develops and is maintained.