* 8819399
* Targeting of Nodulins and Biogenesis of the Endosymbiotic   Compartment
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1993
* Desh Verma, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/1993
* USD 398,000.00

Legumes form a unique subcellular compartment to house nitrogen- fixing
endosymbiotic bacteria (Rhizobium species). Integrity of the membrane enclosing
this compartment, the peribacteroid membrane, is essential for the maintenance
of the symbiotic state. However, little is known about the nature, function and
biogenesis of this membrane. Originally derived from the plasma membrane, the
peribacteriod membrane incorporates a number of nodule-specific proteins
(nodulins) which play new roles imposed on this subcellular compartment. Several
soybean genes that encode peribacteriod membrane nodulins have been identified
and characterized. The peribacteroid membrane nodulins are specifically targeted
to this compartment and are not integrated into the plasma membrane of the
infected cells. The goal of this research is to identify sequences and the
properties of the peribacteroid membrane proteins necessary for correct
targeting of nodulins to the peribacteroid membrane. Deletion analysis of
soybean nodulin sequences followed by fusion to reporter genes and
transformation of a heterologous legume, Lotus corniculatus, will be used to
determine the mechanism of targeting. The effect of integration of complete
soybean peribacteroid membrane nodulins into the Lotus peribacteroid membrane
will be studied using specific antibodies raised against individual nodulins,
either synthetic peptides or nodulins from cDNA clones expressed in E. coli.
This study will shed light not only on the cellular mechanisms that permit
nitrogen fixing bacteria to live in nodules on the roots of legumes, but more
generally on the mechanisms by which cell membranes differentiate to allow
compartmentalization of vital cellular functions.