* 8819233
* Organization and Regulation of Muscle Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1989,06/01/1991
* Charles Emerson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/01/1991
* USD 185,000.00

The objectives of this proposal are to investigate the molecular genetic and
developmental mechanisms that regulate myosin heavy chain (MHC) isoform
structure and function in Drosophila. Unlike other organisms studied, Drosophila
has only a single muscle MHC gene, but this single gene encodes multiple MHC
protein isoforms by a process of complex, developmentally regulated alternative
RNA splicing. The Drosophila MHC gene has five sets of alternatively splice
exons that are differentially expressed in different larval and adult muscle
types. These alternatively spliced exons are particularly interesting because
they encode defined protein domains in the MHC head and hinge regions as well as
the carboxyl terminus. These domains are hypothesized to be important
determinants of the distinct contractile activities of specialized muscle types,
including control of ATP binding and ATPase activity, actin/myosin cross bridge
formation, myosin light chain binding, MHC head movement, and myosin filament
assembly. Genetic, biochemical and transgenic experiment are proposed to
investigate the muscle-specific functions of the variant protein domains in MHC
isoforms generated by alternative exon splicing. These approaches will also be
used to investigate the roles of intron and exon DNA sequences and RNA and
protein splicing factors in the regulated splicing of specific exon sequences
into MHC isoforms expressed in functionally specialized muscles such as the
indirect flight muscle. %%% The proposed studies undertake to reveal the
functions of specific variants of MHC in specialized contractile activities of
different skeletal muscle types and to define fundamental developmental and
molecular mechanisms that control alternative RNA splicing. This alternative
splicing gives rise to a family of proteins with different properties from a
single gene.