* 8819144
* Mechanisms of Spontaneous and Induced Deletion
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Elias Balbinder, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1992
* USD 263,300.00

Major genetic rearrangements are at the basis of major biological processes and
constitute a major class of disease related genetic events. This proposal is
concerned with the origin of deletions, which are the most extensively studied
rearrangements. Spontaneous deletions are explained by misalignment mutagenesis
models, which postulate that during DNA replication single stranded regions can
undergo slippage followed by interstrand mispairing between direct repeats or
formation of hairpin structures between inverted repeats, but leave open the
question of how these transient intermediates are resolved as deletions by
enzymes for DNA metabolism. We know very little about deletions induced by
mutagens and it is possible that many of them are untargeted, i.e. occur at
sites not containing mutagenic lesions. The overall objective of this proposal
is to gain a better understanding of the various factors responsible for
spontaneous and induced deletions. Specific objectives are: (1) examine some
novel sequences capable of stabilizing deletion intermediates, (2) extend
earlier observations showing that induction of the SOS response can stimulate
some deletions, (3) determine to what extent mutagen-induced deletions can be
untargeted as the result of SOS induction, (4) attempt to recover deletion
intermediates (5) analyze mutations which increase deletion frequency in the
absence of the recA function. The experiments proposed are based on the use of
preconstructed plasmids derived from pBR325 on which deletion of presequenced
fragments within the EcoR1 site of the CAT (chloramphenicol acetyl transferase)
gene can be measured as the frequency of Cms- --Cmr (chloramphenicol sensitive
to resistant) revertants, and a variety of strains carrying mutations in SOS
genes. This is a proposal to study the mechanisms by which genetics information
is lost from the chromosomes of an organism, either spontaneously or as the
result of environmental factors (such as chemicals). Virtually nothing is known
about these mechanisms because they have been difficult to study. The proposed
work makes use of methods newly developed by the P.I, which should shed new
light on these mechanisms, Apart from its intrinsic scientific interest, loss of
genetic information has many important medical consequences, among them genetic
diseases, cancer, and possibly spontaneous abortion and birth defects.