* 8819665
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Effects of Rotation on   Density Stratified Flows: Basic Flow Problems in CylindricalGeometries
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1990,11/30/1993
* Daniel Valentine, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1993
* USD 18,750.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Daniel T. Valentine, Department of
Mechanical Engineering, Clarkson University, to pursue with Dr. Jae Min Hyun,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and
Technology (KAIST) for a period of 24 months, a program of cooperative research
on the effects of rotation on density stratified flows: basic flow problems in
cylindrical geometries. The collaborators will investigate the time-dependent
motions of liquids confined within cylindrical tanks that are induced by imposed
thermal gradients and rotational speed changes at the walls of these containers.
The principal goal of this research is to further the understanding of the
dynamics of rotating flows of density stratified fluids. The following three
computational problems will be addressed, namely, predicting (1) the effect of
the "bathtub" or drain vortex on the draining of density stratified fluid from a
cylindrical tank, (2) the three-dimensional vortex interactions that aid in the
spin-up of a stratified fluid in a rotating cylindrical container initially at
rest, and (3) the phenomena associated with the mixing of a stratified fluid in
a cylindrical container by a centrally located rotating disk. The PI will extend
his 4th-order computational algorithm to handle flows with rotation and
stratification. The Korean collaborator will conduct a series of experiments
that will include the configurations of the three problems posed. He also will
apply his computational method to some of the cases computed in the U.S. to
establish more strongly the validity of the predictions. The problems to be
addressed are of technological importance in thermal energy storage tanks, flow-
through reservoirs, and mixing devices designed to mix miscible fluids of
different densities. The collaborators have considerable experience in the field
of this research. The solution to the problems addressed by this project would
be beneficial to the United States and Korea. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation is
supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).