* 8819974
* Modeling Exposure, Stereotyping and Rationalization Effects on the Evaluation of Political Candidates
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Milton Lodge, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 12/31/1990
* USD 99,461.00

The theory and research design for this research represents an effort to
uncover the psychological underpinnings of candidate evaluations. The goal of
the research is to integrate previous findings on candidate evaluation into a
new theoretical framework which treats candidate evaluation as information
processing. The research occurs in two, inter-related waves: First, a series of
three studies will be undertaken to discover regularities in the content of
information about political candidates. These initial, base-line findings will
then serve as the basis for the second part of the study - - an attempt at
constructing, by way of specific psychological and political frameworks,
evaluations and images of political candidates designed for the investigation.
The first step of the research project requires an indepth study of what
political information means to individuals. In particular, the researchers will
investigate various facets of information about specific political issues, as
well as that for personal characteristics of the candidate and relevant
political groups. To what extent is certain information about a candidate
"salient," or important to people? Would they be very much interested in knowing
one particular thing about a candidate, but not another? Next, the researchers
will ascertain whether this information has certain connotations, implications,
or interpretations that reach beyond the simple, surface meaning of the
information. For example, does one particular type of information lead people to
believe that the candidate has other relevant characteristics? Having thus
obtained data about what information tends to be important and "meaningfully
rich," the second part of the study deals with how information, which differs in
terms of its importance and interpretation, is combined into a candidate
evaluation. A crucial factor at this stage of the study is the order in which
the candidate information is presented. Results will indicate how different
orders of information is integrated into an evaluation, as well as how "on-
going" evaluations of the candidate alters the extent to which subsequent
information influences a final evaluation. Altogether, this study will
disentangle three influences of information upon candidate evaluation: salience,
interpretation, and order. The design of the research project requires two
related studies; the first to ascertain the importance and interpretations of
candidate information, the second to systematically manipulate the order in
which individuals receive the pre-tested information. The study will not only
indicate how information salience, interpretation and order jointly influence
the impact of one another upon candidate evaluations, but also how importance
and interpretation can be altered to "fit" a person's prior evaluation of the
candidate.