* 8819034
* RUI: Control Mechansims in Sperm Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1993
* Charles Lindemann, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 10/31/1993
* USD 370,200.00

A technique allowing fully motile sperm to be studied in the absence of an
intact plasma membrane ("sperm models") will be used to study the chemical and
mechanical events involved in flagellar movement. Micromanipulation and
microdissection of sperm cells will be conducted to explore the mechanical
responses of the intact flagellum and its isolated parts. The importance of
cyclic AMP and intracellular calcium in the sliding interaction between outer
doublet microtubules of the axoneme will be explored. The role of calcium in
flagellar curvature will be examined to determine which component of the axoneme
mediates the curvature and what role curvature may play in coordination of the
beat cycle. The effects of pH on cAMP dependent phosphorylation and calcium
dependent dephosphorylation of axoneme proteins will be investigated for
possible biochemical links between pH and sperm activity. Finally, an
explanation of the events in a cycle of flagellar beating is proposed and
experiments will be conducted to test this hypothesis. In this proposed view,
energy from the sliding tubule mechanism is stored in calcium-regulated internal
elastic elements of the axoneme. Recoil from release of the stored energy is
used to power one stroke of the flagellar cycle and trigger the next cycle of
microtubule sliding. The objective of this project is to better understand the
events producing the rhythmic beating of a flagellum and the role of cyclic AMP
and calcium in regulating this process. These investigations are expected to
enhance our knowledge of processes that underlie motility in cilia and flagella.