* 8819374
* Automated Methods for Runtime Performance Optimization for  Sparse and Irregular Numeric Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Joel Saltz, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Maxine Hynson
* 01/31/1993
* USD 141,963.00

Scientific computational problems exhibit substantial data level parallelism.
The PARTY run-time system is an attempt to obtain efficient parallel
implementations for scientific computations, particularly those where the data
dependencies are manifest only at run-time. This can preclude compiler based
detection of certain types of parallelism. The automated system is structured as
follows: A high level language interface is employed in which annotations are
used to select an appropriate level of granularity. A directed acyclic graph
representation of the program is generated on which various aggregation
techniques may be employed in order to generate efficient schedules. These
schedules are then mapped onto the target machine. Work clustering and
scheduling heuristics are evaluated by 1) using sparse representation of regular
problems with well studied multiprocessor mappings, 2) comparing scheduling and
clustering methods using a varied and realistic workload of sparse matrix
problems, 3) generation, analysis and modeling of synthetic workloads. The
aggregation, mapping and parallel schedule execution methods and software
modules developed in the context of the PARTY system are used to implement a
system that schedules and executes preconditioned Kryolov space sparse iterative
algorithms and explicit PDE solution methods for non uniform meshes on the
Encore Multimax, the Intel iPSC and Thinking Machine's CM-II. Finally, a Fortran
based interface to the PARTY system will use annotated Fortran to facilitate
transparent programmer access to PARTY.