* 8819342
* Transcription of Class II Genes: Mechanisms of Activation
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Danny Reinberg, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1992
* USD 298,000.00

A long range goal of this laboratory is to be able to detail the events that
occur during the initiation of transcription of protein coding genes class II
genes through the characterization of the proteins involved and their various
protein: DNA and protein:protein interactions with the intent of formulating and
understanding some of the mechanisms that operate in the regulation of
expression of class II genes. The specific aims are to understand the
mechanism(s) by which a transforming gene such as Ela can regulate the
expression of other viral and cellular genes. These include studies on the
isolation of the factors required for transcription of genes whose expression is
regulated by the products of the Ela gene. The factors will be purified from
adenovirus infected and uninfected cells using functional transcription assay.
The interaction of the gene specific factor with Ela protein, other
transcription factors and promoter sequences will be analyzed through the use of
techniques. Understanding the mechanisms by which transcription is regulated is
extremely important. A number of studies report obtaining putative transcription
factors on the basis of DNA binding assays. While this approach has yielded
important information continued progress is going to depend on detailed
biochemical analysis of functional in vitro transcription systems. Because of
the complexity of eucaryotic pol III transcription and the myriad of protein
factors involved in modulation there must be a large number of purified or
partially purified components. Dr. Reinberg is one of the few investigators
dedicated to this task.