* 8819375
* Correct Derivation and Analysis of the Lidar Equation:  BothDirect and Coherent Detection
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Rod Frehlich, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 09/30/1991
* USD 117,591.00

Remote sensing of the atmosphere using lasers is referred to as lidar, an
acronym for "light detection and ranging" and is analogous to radar. The
transmission of short pulses of laser light is followed by reception of
backscattered signals from atmospheric constituents such as aerosols, dust,
clouds or molecules. Information about the composition and physical state of the
atmosphere can be deduced from the lidar data. In addition, the time lag of the
received signal determines the range of the scattering species. This research is
to derive and calculate the received power from a lidar system, both coherent
and direct detection. The effects of pulse shape, turbulence, transmitter,
receiver and local oscillator will be determined; the effects of the motion of
the atmosphere will be investigated; and physics of the important mechanisms
will be identified. There is a regime where turbulence is the dominating
physical mechanism. The feasibility of estimating turbulence levels from lidar
measurements in this regime will also be investigated. The theoretical results
will be obtained from a recent series solution for statistics of waves
propagating in random media. This provides a solution for very general
conditions with a minimum of approximations. Based on these results, comparison
between coherent and direct detection will be performed and an apparent error in
the lidar equation for coherent detection will be investigated. The feasibility
of deducing turbulence profiles from lidar measurements will also be
investigated.