* 8819911
* Reporter Epitope Technique for Determining the TransmembraneOrientation of a Membrane Protein Polypeptide Chain
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1990,07/15/1990
* Jon Lindstrom, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/15/1990
* USD 17,000.00

To understand how a membrane protein, such as the cholinergic works, it is
important to know which parts of its polypeptide chain are oriented across the
membrane. The best way to do this would be x-ray crystallography, but this has
not yet been possible for membrane proteins as large as nicotinic receptors.
Sequencing of cDNA clones for membrane protein subunits provides a great deal of
structural information. One approach to determining the transmembrane
orientation of a polypeptide chain is to make antibodies to synthetic peptides
with the sequence of an interesting part of the polypeptide chain thought to be
exposed on one side of the membrane or the other. Then, if these antipeptide
antibodies are highly specific, and if they recognize the native protein,
determining to which side of the membrane antibodies bind determines the
transmembrane orientation of that sequence. The Dr. Lindstrom has developed
libraries of monoclonal antibodies to nicotinic acetylcholine receptors from
fish electric organs. The amino acid sequences to which some of these antibodies
bind, their epitopes, have been precisely determined. This research project will
use monoclonal antibodies to a epitope sequence inserted into the membrane
protein to determine the transmembrane orientation of the epitope when the
modified DNA is expressed into Xenopus oocytes. The method will allow Dr.
Lindstrom to study nicotinic acetylcholine receptors from human muscle and
chicken and human brain. If the technique is successful, it should allow rapid
determination of the transmembrane orientation of parts of the polypeptide chain
of any membrane protein for which the cDNA is available without the cost, time,
effort, and risk of failure of synthesizing peptides, making antibodies to the
peptides, and determining their specificity, before testing with the native
protein.