* 8819747
* Growth and Protein Expression of Saccharomyces Cerevisiae
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Friedrich Srienc, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 09/30/1991
* USD 128,317.00

Flow cytometry and slit scanning measuring technology will be developed and
applied to analyze growing populations of Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells at the
single cell level. While conventional flow cytometry provides data on the joint
distribution of specific single- cell properties at rapid rate, the slit
scanning measuring technique can provide information on low resolution spatial
distribution within individual cells of certain properties such as cell size,
DNA, or protein content. With this technique, properties of mother cell and
growing daughter cell can be quantitated during the cell cycle and during
asymmetric cell division. In particular, with this novel experimental approach,
information is obtained on frequency distribution functions of properties within
the total cell population, within the subpopulation of dividing cells, and
within the group of cells that has been formed by cell division. These
experimental data, in combination with population balance equations, allow rapid
determination of single-cell rates of accumulation of any component detectable
by flow cytometry. The work includes refinement of the measuring technique,
refinement of cell preparation, and immunofluorescence staining procedures to
detect specific intracellular components in Saccharomyces cerevisiae cells. In
particular, an immunofluorescence technique suitable for flow cytometric
quantification of bacterial >- galactosidase is used as a model system to study
the dynamics of expression of a single protein in S. cerevisiae at the single
cell level and under varying environmental conditions. In addition, single cell
growth models are being developed to support the experimental work. For the
design of a production process that utilizes microorganisms, it is important to
know the composition of the microorganism and how this composition changes over
time. Flow cytometry represents a sophisticated, laser based measuring
technology that permits determination of the composition of single cells at
rates up to 5000 cells per second. Within a fraction of time one obtains the
information on how the single cell composition is distributed within a cell
population. Knowledge of such distributions provides a detailed insight into the
properties of entire cell populations that are determined by the contribution
from each individual cell present in that population. For instance, cell to cell
heterogeneities are particularly pronounced in the case of unstable recombinant
cell populations because of genetic differences and because of different
developmental stages of individual cells.