* 8819532
* ROA/RUI: Use of Stable Isotopes of Carbon in Vegetation and Soil Organic Matter to Assess Vegetation Change in North    American Prairies
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1993
* Larry Tieszen, Augustana University Association
* Standard Grant
* Jethro Moorefield
* 03/31/1993
* USD 366,260.00

Organic matter produced by C3 and C4 grasses in North American prairies
possesses distinct isotopic signatures. These labels show genetically and
environmentally based variation which is fairly well understood theoretically
but not characterized well ecologically. The labels are transmitted in a
quantitatively predictable manner to higher trophic levels and, in a less
understood manner, to soil organic matter (SOM). Prairies comprising C4 and C3
systems will be studied to establish quantitative relationships among
composition, proportional productivity, biomass delta 13C, biochemical
composition, and SOM delta 13C. Analysis of particle size fractions and soil
aggregates will indicate whether SOM and vegetation are in a steady state or
successional. Comparisons among many prairies may show the presence of any
consistent directional change in composition during the recent past and last
1,000 years. Fine and course grained soils in shortgrass and tallgrass systems
will be compared and it will be determined whether or not phytoliths can be used
to distinguish between shortgrass and tallgrass components. The range of
naturally occurring delta 13C values in plants and compartments will be
documented and related to growth forms and environmental factors. Studies of
prairies and old fields with known land use histories will allow an estimation
of rates of turnover of particle size fractions and soil aggregates. An analysis
of several late Pleistocene and Holocene paleosols will be undertaken.