* 8819335
* Immunomodulation of Neuroactive Peptide Hormones
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Siraik Zakarian, Wistar Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Vincent P. Gutschick
* 09/30/1992
* USD 387,400.00

In the past few years, a large body of work has been published implicating a
specific bidirectional communication between the neuroendocrine system and the
immune system. Neuropeptides are biosynthesized by immune cells and immune
factors with biological activity are biosynthesized by nerve cells. Furthermore,
neuropeptides and in particular opiate peptides are known to activate
lymphocytes to secrete Interleukins, and Interleukins have been found to
specifically modulate the biosynthesis and release of peptide hormones by the
cells of the neuroendocrine system. The focus of research in this laboratory is:
(A) on the ability of normal and activated lymphoid cells to biosynthesize,
process and secrete Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) related peptides; (B) on the
modulation of POMC expression in lymphoid cells by neural signals; and (C) on
the modulation of POMC expression in neuroendocrine cells by known immune
factors. Experiments in this area of research have provided good evidence for
neuroimmune signaling that leads to physiologically relevant hormonal responses.
Dr. Zakarian has demonstrated for the first time, that the regions of the
pituitary can be modulated by T cell dependent and T cell independent immune
mechanisms giving rise to contrasting B-endorphin processing patterns in each
region. Thus transplantation immunity seems to modulate B-endorphin activation
in the pars intermedia while Interleukin-1 modulates the activation and release
of B-endorphin and ACTH from the anterior pituitary. With these studies, an
understanding may be gained of the coordinate activation of multiple signals,
"neuro or immuno", that may be essential for the generation of biologically
active peptide hormones in the immune system and in the neuroendocrine system.