* 8820666
* Conference on the Relationship of Feminist Theory to Ethicaland Value Issues in Organizational Science, October l989
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1991
* Reba Keele, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/1991
* USD 18,760.00

The Studies in Science, Technology and Society program supports research that
examines the structures and processes that influence the direction and use of
science and technology in their social, political, and economic contexts. Ethics
and Values Studies supports research that examines the social, professional and
individual values and mutual obligations and responsibilities that arise in
interactions of science, technology and society. This project addresses a very
important issue for EVS ..whether and how assumptions in scientific disciplines
contain unexamined ethical and value implications. For instance, notions such as
"objectivity" and "subjectivity" may be used in scientifically unjustified ways,
as a rhetorical and political strategy to advance a questionable assumption,
method, or conclusion. This project uses new developments in feminist theory and
thought as a means to examine these issues for sciences that study organizations
and organizational behavior. Thirty six people including feminist scholars,
organizational scientists, other social scientists and philosophers will gather
for a three day conference, October 19. 21, 1989 at Alta Lodge in Utah. Prior to
the conference, background papers will be distributed so that participants can
come prepared to discuss gender assumptions in organizational science and their
ethical and value implications for its direction and use. Products from the
conference are expected to include published papers, a book and follow.up
activities in professional societies and at their meetings. This project will
contribute to advancing professional discussion of normative implications of
unexamined research assumptions in organizational science. Since organizational
science wishes to understand organizations better, and thereby to provide advice
that can improve them, this conference can make an important contribution to
these ends. The co.investigators are very well qualified; they have assembled a
very impressive list of participants; results from the project are likely to be
stimulating and useful. Institutional support is very, very good; the project
budget is most reasonable. Therefore, support in the amount of $18,760 is
recommended.