* 8820990
* Synthesis of Non-Sharp Complex and Thermally Coupled        Separation Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1992
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/1992
* USD 232,302.00

Chemical processes frequently include multicomponent separation sequences which
produce more than two products. Such separation systems are used for feed
preparation, product separation, product finishing and waste treatment. The
separation process of a chemical plant has a large effect on the total capital
investment and the annual operating cost - in some cases it might be the major
cost contributor. Therefore efforts to develop systematic automated approaches
that will produce near-optimum separation sequences are of great interest to
industry. The goal of this research is to use mathematical programming
techniques to obtain a better understanding of the general problem of separating
several multicomponent sources into several multicomponent products.
Specifically, the work is directed toward solving the general problem:
synthesize such separation sequences with "non-sharp" (meaning neither overhead,
bottoms, or side exit streams contains any one pure product), complex, and
thermally coupled units. The work plan includes: (a) Performing a systematic
study on the synthesis of separation systems that involve "non-sharp" units,
using mathematical programming approaches. (b) Investigating the synthesis of
"complex" columns that may involve several feed streams, several side streams
and pump- around systems. (c) Developing systematic approaches for coupling
goals (a) and that is, the synthesis of thermally coupled systems that involve
"non-sharp" prefractionators associated with several "complex" columns. (d)
Investigating the simultaneous consideration of heat integration and
optimization of the systems that invlove "non-sharp" and "complex" columns. (e)
Developing software for the automation of the approaches described in the above
goals. In addition to generating column design criteria, this work should also
provide information on whether separator units are required at all for the
generation of the desired multicomponent products. Other alternatives may result
in substantial savings.