* 8820027
* Numerical Competence in the Chimpanzee (Pan troglodytes)
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1990
* Sarah Boysen, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

Chimpanzees are well known to be our closest non-human relatives, but the
surprising extent to which they share cognitive abilities with human beings is
still being discovered. Drs. Boysen and Berntson are investigating the numerical
competence of chimpanzees. Their preliminary research with young animals has
demonstrated numerical skills including rudimentary counting and addition.
Further studies should contribute to our understanding of the similarities and
differences in cognitive capabilities across species and toward clarifying those
processes that may support numerical skills in non-human primates. Besides these
contributions to basic scientific knowledge, these studies may yield sharper
tests for and understanding of numerical competence in children and, more
generally, provide a better understanding of non-verbal intelligence. Thus, the
present project may provide insights into the cognitive abilities of language-
impaired or otherwise developmentally-challenged children. Motor tagging
(touching or pointing to items) during counting will be evaluated for its
functional significance relative to similar behaviors of children in the early
stages of learning to count. This study will clarify whether or not these
behaviors, which appeared spontaneously in one animal, serve as an organizing
strategy for keeping track of those items that have already been counted and
those that remain to be counted. Another study will explore subtraction, by
presenting the animals an array of 2 to 6 pieces of fruit, covering it, and then
removing 1 to 4 items out of the animal's view. Early results suggest that the
chimpanzees are able to indicate the remainder of the hidden fruit by selecting
the correct Arabic numeral from among alternatives 0 to 5. An adult female
chimpanzee with extensive prior training on a range of concepts, including a
symbolic language system, will begin training with numbers, following the same
procedures that were used with the young animals. At the same time, a computer-
assisted testing apparatus will be developed to facilitate training and data-
collection with adult chimpanzees.