* 8820856
* A Fluorescent Probe to Study Dopamine Receptors and Their   Regulation
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* V. Bakthavachalam, Research Biochemicals Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1991
* USD 225,002.00

Dysfunction of dopamine systems in the brain have been implicated in endocrine,
neurological, and psychiatric disorders and dopaminergic drugs are widely
prescribed for these disorders. Brain dopamine receptors are clearly implicated
as the targets of these drugs. These receptors are in a mobile, dynamic state
and can be modulated by drugs, lesions, diseases, hormones, and other
challenges. For example, post-mortem brains of schizophrenia and Parkinson
patients have altered levels of dopamine receptors, a consequence of dopamine
drug therapies and/or the disease states. Although the end status of dopamine
receptor modulation by drug treatment has been described, little is known about
the mechanisms of drug-induced receptor adaptive processes. The continuation to
develop fluorescent probes as a novel approach to study cellular and subcellular
distribution of dopamine receptors and their regulation will occur during the
Phase II of this research. Based on the information from the Phase I study,
fluorescent derivatives of D1 and D2 selective agonist ligands with higher
affinity and improved fluorescence characteristics will be prepared. The
research will determine the affinity and selectivity of these compounds for
dopamine receptors and test the retention of agonist properties. The most
promising of these novel ligands will be evaluated on tissue sections by
fluorescence microscopy, biotin-avidin coupling, and autoradiography.
Experiments will be conducted on receptor mobility in response to agonist
challenge on attainment of receptor-specific fluorescence.