* 8820796
* Diffusion and Multiple Equilibria
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Boyan Jovanovic, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 11/30/1992
* USD 129,687.00

The proposed research agenda consists of three broad parts. The first part
involves a largely empirical investigation of the diffusion of technological
innovations, and how this diffusion affects the aggregate behavior of output.
More specifically, it is concerned with explaining the time-series behavior of
GNP in terms of the time path of innovations and the speed with which they are
diffused. This is expressed as a stochastic reduced- form equation relating
current innovations in GNP to past innovations with various lags. Cross-section
country data on GNP growth rates and innovation activity, for example, as
measured by patent applications, are then used to estimate the parameters of the
equation. The second part of the study consists of a theoretical development of
three models regarding the adoption of technological innovations by firms, and
of the process of diffusion of technical knowledge. The first of these models
seeks to explain why bigger firms are usually the first to adopt a new
innovation. The other two models deal with frictions in the spread of
information, with an emphasis on personal contact. The final part of the
research involves an econometric investigation of issues arising from the
presence of multiple equilibria. In this setting, the parameters of preferences
and technology generate a set of equilibria and then an outcome is chosen from
this set. The question at issue is how to estimate the Markov process for
selection given that part of the movement in equilibrium will be due to the
presence of exogenous shocks. This fundamental research bears in a very
important way on the general topic of how shocks to technology impact on both
long- term growth and on cyclical fluctuations. The technological shocks, on
which the research is focussed, are those that result in permanent additions to
our stock of knowledge. Since the stock is much too large for anyone to be
familiar with, its diffusion will determine its effect on output, productivity,
investment, and other aggregates. It is the thesis of the investigator that such
innovations occur largely at the firm level, and then spread throughout the
economy in ways that despite their centrality are still imperfectly understood.
Work already completed and the further work projected by this proposal,
constitutes frontier research on the topic, which is of critical importance in
the modern theory of "endogenous growth", and in modern business cycle theory.