* 8820779
* The Influence of Structure on the Itinerant Band            Structure of Thin Metal Overlayers
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Peter Dowben, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1993
* USD 178,800.00

The electronic band structure of thin film overlayers can be altered by changing
the crystal structure and lattice parameters. The correlation between crystal
and band structures will be investigated by combining the powerful surface
science techniques of angle-resolved photoemission and low energy electron
diffraction (LEED). Overlayers will be forced into unusual crystal geometries
and lattice spacings by epitaxially growing the overlayer on carefully chosen
crystal substrates. The investigation will concentrate on selected overlayer
materials chosen from the IIa and IIb elements and the noble gases. The band
structure of the overlayers can be investigated by using photoemission to
determine the binding energies of the valence bands as a function of the
position in the Brillouin zone. This traditional technique of determining band
structure will be complemented by a new method that consists in analyzing the
relative photo-ionization partial cross-section of valence orbitals as a
function of photon energy. LEED will be used to investigate the overlayer
crystal lattice structure by comparing LEED intensity versus electron
accelerating voltages with dynamical LEED calculations. By combining the two
techniques of photoemission and atom beam scattering in the investigation of
thin (0-10) monolayer films, insight into the importance of atomic orbital
overlap and many electron effects upon electronic band structure will be
provided.