* 8820680
* Mathematical Sciences: Conjectures of Ramanujan in the      Unorganized Portions of his Notebooks
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Bruce Berndt, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/31/1991
* USD 41,339.00

In the years following the death of the greatest Indian mathematician,
Srinivasa Ramanujan, three notebooks containing unfinished and unpublished work
of his were discovered. The contents of the notebooks reflected much of the
mathematical style of the man. There are unsupported conjectures, claims and
formulas written in an unorganized manner, covering vast areas of mathematics.
No other recorded genius is known to have practiced mathematics like Ramanujan.
He worked in isolation with only a few old books at his disposal. He was not
aware - or apparently concerned - with structured mathematics as it had
developed in the western world during the early part of the twentieth century.
Indeed, even today, none of those who have studied his remarkable contributions
and legacy, can comprehend how he came to have such remarkable insight with so
little formal training. It is the search for this insight which motivates much
of the work to be supported by this award. The means by which this effort will
be carried out is simple to state. One goes through the notebooks statement by
statement (there are roughly 3000 results stated without proof), verifying or
negating each one, using all the powerful mathematical tools now available. This
task has been going on for many years. The first notebook is essentially
understood and the second is also nearly complete. As a result of this, over 40
papers and two definitive books have appeared. Work is now progressing on the
third which will involve higher order transformations of hypergeometric series
and inversion formulas stated by Ramanujan. Some of the deepest work and
potentially most difficult challenges will be in the area of asymptotic
expansions of infinite series, products and integrals. At some later time
attention will have to be given to brief allusions to generalizations in the
theory of elliptic functions made by Ramanujan in a 1914 paper. Any progress
here is expected to be of considerable interest to physicists.