* 8820594
* Acquisition of a Phase-Lifetime Spectrofluorometer
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Richard Clarke, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 11/30/1991
* USD 74,670.00

Trytophan and tyrosine are natural fluorophores and components of proteins.
These biological chromophores are fluorescent, i.e., when photo excited they
emit light which is characteristic of their chemical and physical environment.
Fluorescence is an important analytical technique because of its extreme
sensitivity and specificity. The time scale of the fluorescence phenomenon can
make the technique a very effective probe of the surroundings of the
fluorophore. The requested spectrofluorometer is a state-of-the-art instrument
which provides spectral differentiation of fluorophores in a mixture on the
basis of difference in fluorescence lifetimes. In the case of a protein
molecule, the true emission profile of the tyrosine and tryptophan residues
which contribute to the total fluorescence of the protein can be identified and
monitored. The spectrofluorometer can also offer information on the molecular
size, conformation, and interactions of fluorophores in a protein molecule. With
these measurements, the dynamic chemical and physical nature of the fluorophores
can be deduced. The biological research projects which require the use of the
spectrofluorometer include: 1. The conformation of a metabolic enzyme, ornithine
transcarbamoylase, under the influence of a variety of ligands will be analyzed.
The goal is to probe the possible metabolic regulation of this enzyme. One of
the most challenging problems in biochemistry today is the study of metabolic
regulation. 2.The characterization of chromophore-based biopolymers using
fluorescence techniques will be conducted to provide insight into how groups are
assembled and communicate electronically along a polymer backbone. This study
will aid the elucidation of the structure of biological polymer composite and
the design of new materials for optical and electronic processing. 4. The
molecular mechanism of the retinal based proteins, rhododpsin and
bacteriorhodopsin, will be investigated for the understanding of
phototransduction in membranes. 5. The development of skeletal muscle tissue in
the vertebrate embryo is a complex multistep process which is not yet well
understood. The sensitivity of the spectrofluorometer will be exploited to
dissect out the signal transduction cascade within the myoblast membrane for the
understanding of cell differentiation of muscle.