* 8820672
* Acquisition of a Peptide Synthesizer
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Timothy Cross, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 02/28/1991
* USD 47,700.00

The acquisition of a sophisticated peptide synthesizer for the Bioanalytical
Facility at Florida State University will have a major impact on the research
efforts of both chemists and biologists. For the work of Dr. Cross this
capability makes possible a far more detailed structural study of membrane bound
peptides by solid state NMR than has been possible before. These biophysical
studies requiring large samples of isotopically labeled peptides will allow for
the development of an atomic resolution picture of both the three dimensional
structure and molecular dynamics. For one this capability will allow for studies
of the mechanism of action of the collagenase enzymes which have a remarkable
specificity not only for the amino acid sequence but also for supramolecular
structural features. To deconvolute these specificity requirements, a wide range
of peptides will be synthesized to more clearly define the primary sequence
specificity. Futhermore it is possible to synthesize specific sequences which
have certain supramolecular properties. Another requires synthetic peptides for
studying the binding of antitumor agents (taxol and taxol analogs) to tublin
models. While the binding studies are just being initiated this research project
is getting a lot of attention and these studies are a very important step in the
understanding of the taxol antitumor activity. The biologists, will also be
studying synthetic segments of large proteins. One is interested in
characterizing the Luteinizing Hormone Release Inhibiting Factor (LHRIF) as well
as preparing analogs of super active agonists and antagonists. Another will be
assaying for antibody binding to synthetic polypeptides, as well as an ability
of the polypeptides to inhibit reactivity between antibody and idiotope or
allotype- bearing Ig molecule.