* 8820971
* Maintenance of the Bacillus Genetic Stock Center
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1989,05/31/1994
* Donald Dean, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 05/31/1994
* USD 646,219.00

Bacteria of the genus Bacillus are intensively studied in both basic and
applied research efforts. The powerful array of genetic techniques available for
these organisms allows the scientist engaged in basic research to probe the
inner workings of the cell's genetic machinery. Their ability to form
specialized cells (spores) -- analogous to the formation of specialized tissues
and organs in higher organisms -- allows insights into the mysteries of cell
differentiation and development. The applied researcher focuses on the ability
of the bacilli to synthesize a variety of products: medically useful
antibiotics; enzymes which degrade proteins (in laundry detergents and contact-
lens cleaners, for example) or turn starch to sugar; and natural pesticides that
provide an environmentally responsible alternative to chemicals. The Bacillus
Genetic Stock Center (BGSC) greatly assists these research efforts by
maintaining the world's largest public culture collection for the genus Bacillus
and distributing cultures without prejudice to all scientists who request them.
Each year some 1500 strains are distributed to scientists throughout the world.
The BGSC staff are available at all times for expert consultation and
periodically prepare and distribute a 100-page catalog of strains and reference
work. This project provides partial support for the BGSC's activities for the
next five years.