* 8820100
* Lanthanide Optical Spectroscopy
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* William Blumen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 11/30/1991
* USD 30,463.00

This proposal on "A Study of Atmospheric Fronts Over Mountainous Terrain"
between Dr. William Blumen of the University of Colorado and Professors ZHAO
Ming and WU Rongsheng of Nanjing University is jointly sponsored by NSF and the
Chinese State Educational Commission (SEDC). The investigators propose to study
physical processes that affect atmospheric frontal motions over the earth's
orography, specifically the mountainous regions of China. They will emphasize
the role of the planetary boundary layer in this process. The investigations
will consist of 1) observational and analysis study to document and examine
various cases of frontal distortion by orography; 2) a numerical modelling
effort to simulate frontal motion over terrain features such as the Tien Shan
complex in western China; and 3) a theoretical study to examine the relation
between frontal motion and planetary boundary processes. The investigators will
carry out the first two phases at Nanjing University, where the data, analysis
procedures and numerical model resources are. The Chinese investigators will
plan and execute these aspects of the research in consultation with the American
investigator. The theoretical phases, including analysis of the numerical
experiments, will be carried out jointly through visits. Scientists do not
completely understand the physical processes that affect frontal passage over
mountainous terrain, complicating numerical weather prediction. The grid
resolution and model physics may be insufficient to depict fronts adequately
and, therefore, meteorological predictions in the vicinity of large mountain
complexes are generally less reliable than elsewhere. The proposed research is
of mutual interest to both the Chinese and American investigators. The
particular emphasis placed on orographic effects in China will expose Western
scientists to meteorological observations that have not been readily accessible,
and the sharing of resources contributes to the research program.