* 8820774
* Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Andrew Mason, California State University-Long Beach
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 09/30/1991
* USD 93,572.00

Matching funds have been requested by California State University Long Beach for
a transmission electron microscope (TEM). The instrument will be used by a
number of investigators within the School of Natural Sciences for a diverse
range of projects requiring high resolution bright and dark field imaging and
selected area diffraction. These projects include studying the cytological
dedifferentiation of primary invertebrate cells cultured on support beads,
studying the formation and secretion of haemocyanin and inorganic polyphosphate
inclusions in cultured molluscan cells, examining the ability of various
purified intermediate filament proteins to be reconstituted into filaments in
vivo and examining the size and geometry of purified, soluble neuroprotein
oligomers. Other projects requiring conventional TEM include a study to
quantitatively determine plasmodesmatal and desmotubule communication to
estimate the relative degree of involvement of symplastic and apoplastic
transport of photosynthates to sieve tubes. The instrument will also be used to
study the developmental changes in the cysts and trophozoite forms of
Pneumocystis carinii and establish the mode of attachment of the organism to
host lung epithelial cells. A number of investigators require the instrument for
immunocytological studies. These studies aim to determine the induction and
cytological distribution of metallothionein and heat shock 70 proteins in marine
invertebrates upon exposure to environmental stress. Other studies include the
immunolocalization of phosphoprotein phosphatase-1 activating kinase and the
various phosphatases and their regulatory subunits in the enzyme cascade
involved in glycogen metabolism. TEM in combination with O2 plasma
microincineration and energy dispersive X-ray microanalysis will also be used to
determine the ultrastructural features and cellular ligands involved in metal
accumulation in commercially and ecologically important marine invertebrates.