* 8820632
* Concentrations of Methane and Nitrous Oxide During Glacial  and Inter-Glacial Periods:  Analyses of the Vostok Core
* O/D,OPP
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1992
* Reinhold Rasmussen, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing grant
* Mary Campbell
* 10/31/1992
* USD 236,259.00

It has been established that the concentration of methane has more than doubled
over the past 100-200 years and that nitrous oxide levels have increased by some
20%. These changes are probably caused by increasing emissions from human
activities and possibly from reduction in the capacity of the atmosphere to
remove methane. Increased concentrations of both gases can add to the global
warming expected from the increasing concentrations of CO2. Changes, during ice
ages and other colder periods, probably reflect the response of the biogenic
sources in the world's ecosystems. As the earth warms up in the future, these
ecosystems may emit more and more CH4 and N2O into the atmosphere, causing a
positive feedback on the cycles of these gases and hence on the world's climate.
This program has 3 components: 1. recovery of ice core samples from Vostok
Station; 2. laboratory analyses of ice samples to measure CH4 and N2O over the
150,000 years spanned by the core and supplemented by analyses of other
available cores. The expected results are primary data on the changes of N2O
during heating and cooling of the earth and more complete data on the response
of CH4 to climatic changes; 3. delineate the patterns in the data and assess the
causes of the changes of concentrations that occur during ice ages. These
analyses will provide information on how the sources and sinks of these gases
respond to climatic changes and may provide a basis for understanding what may
occur in the future.