* 8820219
* Louisiana Stimulus for Excellence in Research (LaSER): The  Louisiana EPSCoR Program
* EHR,ESR
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1993
* Barry Benedict, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Continuing Grant
* Richard J Anderson
* 06/30/1993
* USD 1,950,000.00

The State of Louisiana has made excellent progress in implementing the EPSCoR
program over the last two years using its own resources. The EPSCoR committee
remained intact and implemented the EPSCoR component projects which were rated
VERY GOOD - to EXCELLENT by the NSF EPSCoR merit review process, conducted in
1986. While the projects were scaled back, due to NSF's declination of the
initial proposal, the Louisiana Board of Regents provided $3.4 million and the
universities provided $6.5 million to initiate EPSCoR. All of these projects
have made progress. The State of Louisiana has committed $34.0 million in
interest income annually from off-shore oil windfall monies to establish the
Louisiana Educational Quality Support Fund (LEQSF) for education/research
development. Louisiana is committed to the expenditure of at least $17.0 million
of these funds in support of higher education. A portion of these funds will
support the Louisiana Stimulus for Excellence in Research (LASER). As Louisiana
re-submitted only those original components which were recommended as VERY GOOD
- and above, no new merit reviews were requested on these components. However, a
site visit to determine State commitment was conducted in August 1988. Site
visitors were Dr. John Margrave of Rice University and former member of EPSCoR
final panel in 1986; Dr. Dennis Willows of Friday Harbor Lab in Washington and
former site visitor to Louisiana in 1986 and; Dr. Judith Sunley, Division
Director for Mathematics at NSF , also a site visitor in 1986. After
consideration of the initial Stage 1 technical reviews and a review of progress
to date and an assessment of State commitment, all three of these reviewers gave
the Louisiana Proposal high marks. At a meeting with Governor Buddy Roemer, the
Governor assurred the site visit team and NSF of his personal commitment and
that of his administration and the State's Legislature. The Louisiana EPSCoR
Plan is a broad-based cooperative effort by the Louisiana Board of Regents and
the various University units. The Committee's initial assessment of R&D barriers
was impressive and has subsequently been enriched by the development of a "White
Paper", prepared by the LASER committee, entitled "Prosperity Through Academic
Excellence". This document was adopted by the Louisiana Educational Quality
Support Fund and the Louisiana Board of Regents as policy for the State of
Louisiana. The Louisiana EPSCoR proposal embraces 13 component research projects
and 73 targeted researchers from 12 Louisiana Institutions. LSU and Tulane
University participate in the greatest number of the projects; however,
Louisiana Tech, Louisiana Marine Consortium, Southeastern Louisiana University,
and Southern University all participate. The leadership of the Louisiana EPSCoR
Program is excellent. The EPSCoR Chairperson and Project Director are highly
qualified. Based on the above analysis and review, an award is recommended.