* 8820673
* Dissociations between Language and Cognition: Evidence from a Neurodevelopmental Disorder
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1990
* Ursula Bellugi, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1990
* USD 140,000.00

ABSTRACT The general objectives of the research are to understand the
interrelationship and separability of language and cognition. Williams Syndrome
(WS), a rare (est. 1:50,000) metabolic disorder provides a unique and powerful
vehicle for investigating separa- bility of higher cortical functions.
Preliminary studies with six WS adolescents suggest a specific behavioral
profile which is discontinuous from normal; subjects are mentally retarded with
grammatical capacity remarkably spared. The broad program of studies outlined
below will provide a new and important perspec- tive on the neural basis for
language and cognition. I. Decoupling of language from cognition The precise
relationship between language structure (grammar) and other aspects of cognitive
functions is a hotly debated theoretical issue. The study of normal development
sheds little light on this issue in that linguistic and nonlinguistic cognitive
faculties are so intertwined that it is extremely difficult to separate these
functions. In contrast, subjects with WS may provide a unique opportunity to
address hypotheses bearing on the dissociability of linguistic and nonlinguistic
cognitive domains and their underlying neural basis. II. The selective autonomy
of syntax The investigators will mount a broad program of probes of syntax and
semantics, using both on-line and off-line tasks which may show fractionation of
higher cortical functioning. They will examine the degree to which linguistic
components are vulnerable to marked cognitive deficits. The preliminary
hypothesis is that language in WS subjects may be characterized by the relative
preservation of the most autonomous aspects of the linguistic system (syntax),
and that to the extent that other cognitive systems interact with a component of
the linguistic system, e.g. in the semantic domain, increasing deviance in
language organiza- tion may be found. The selective preservation of grammar in
this population would provide an important testing ground for determi- nants of
cerebral specialization for language. III. Differential impairment in components
of spatial cognition Spatial cognition has traditionally resisted fractionation
into components; however, WS may provide a strong case for dis- sociations
within this domain. The investigators will explore the hypothesis that WS
results in severely impaired visuospatial abilities, but preserved
visuoperceptual capacities. In addition, preliminary studies suggest that
spatial cognition in WS is characterized by a selective attnetion to details of
a configuration at the expense of the whole.