* 8820111
* Experimental Evaluation of Dynamic Stiffness of Footings
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1989,04/01/1992
* Anestis Veletsos, University of Sarajevo
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/01/1992
* USD 0.00

The principal objective of this three-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research
project in earthquake engineering and hazards reduction between Branislav
Verbic, Faculty of Civil Engineering at the University of Sarajevo, and Anestis
Veletsos, Rice University, is to evaluate the response of building foundations
supported in sandy soil and on clays when subjected to seismic motion. The
investigators will test current theoretical solutions to determine foundation
stiffness and rigidity under simulated seismic conditions; and compare their
data with past tests. If significant disagreement is found, new improved
theoretical solutions will be proposed. This proposal combines the theoretical
and experimental expertise of the U.S. and Yugoslav scientists. Soil/structure
interaction studies performed under seismic duress have significant implications
for building and site construction in earthquake sensitive areas in the U.S. and
Yugoslavia. This project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on
Cooperation in Science and Technology and is funded through a joint fund of
matching contributions from the U.S. and Yugoslav governments. The U.S.
contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds are
involved. Grants are made to the principal Yugoslav institution. Dollar funds
are included for U.S. scientist travel to Yugoslavia and for Yugoslav
scientists' living expenses in the U.S.