* 8820552
* Experimental Tests of Finite Horizon Job Search Models
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Ronald Oaxaca, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 141,422.00

This research involves laboratory experiments to test job search models and
econometric analysis of field experimental data to test parallelism of
laboratory and field search behavior. In addition, experimental data will be
used to evaluate econometric techniques that have been developed to cope with
the limited information problems associated with naturally occurring-job
markets. The tests include direct tests of the reservation wage property using a
new experimental design with precommitment and econometric techniques that use
either limited or full information on reservation wages. Experiments will also
be conducted taking into account more complicated search environments which will
include tests of models with variable search intensity, perfect and imperfect
job recall, and search with unknown wage offer distributions. Evaluation of the
limited information econometric techniques involves application of these methods
to the subset of the laboratory data that corresponds to variables that are
observable in uncontrolled markets. Econometric tests of parallelism will use
results from field experiments conducted in the naturally-occurring labor market
to provide empirical evidence about the qualitative similarity of laboratory
search behavior and actual market search behavior. $$$ This project is concerned
with testing theories about the job search behavior of unemployed workers using
experimental methods. A key element in testing these theories is the minimum
wage a worker is willing to accept in taking an available job. These theories
will be tested in terms of this reservation wage property by exploiting
information on the responses of subjects to actual financial offers received.
The research will examine behavior in environments corresponding to labor
markets in which individuals have imperfect notions about their job offer
prospects, or in which they are able to vary the intensity in which they search
for jobs. Econometric techniques have been developed to analyze labor market
data in environments where key variables in the worker's decision problem are
unobservable. The validity of these methods will be evaluated by determining
whether the inferences generated from applying these techniques are contradicted
by inferences made on the basis of the more complete information provided by
laboratory experiments. This project is important because the results from the
laboratory experiments may shed new light on the factors contributing to
unemployment.