* 8820938
* Persistent Flow Anomalies, Blocking and Variations in       Synoptic-Scale Eddy Activity.  Theoretical and Diagnostic   Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Paola Rizzoli, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/1992
* USD 315,623.00

The primary goal of this research is to obtain an improved understanding of the
mechanisms that determine the evolution of large-scale flow anomalies such as
blocking. A second major goal is to determine how the large-scale flow anomalies
may influence (and be influenced by) synoptic-scale eddies. In order to achieve
these goals, a combination of approaches will be employed to study the
variations in synoptic-scale eddy activity and the roles of various dynamical
and physical processes during different stages in the evolution of the large-
scale flow anomalies. Specific objectives of the proposed studies include:
applying synoptic and diagnostic approaches to analyze and compare numerical
simulations of low-frequency variability in the NCAR Community Climate Model
with corresponding observational results, with particular emphasis given to
assessing the adequacy of model simulation of the structures and life cycles of
persistent anomalies and blocking. Diagnostic analyses will also be employed to
examine the relationships (in both the model and observations) between the
large-scale flow anomalies and changes in synoptic-scale eddy activity at
various stages in the evolution of the large-scale flow patterns (i.e., during
the development, mature and breakdown stages). In addition, extensions to
current analytical and theoretical models of blocking will be developed,
concentrating particularly on the coherent structure models of Malguzzi and
Malanotte-Rizzoli (1984) and Haines and Marshall (1987). These models will be
employed to further examine the roles played by various dynamical and physical
processes in the initiation, persistence and breakdown of the anomalous large-
scale flow patterns. This work will enhance our capability to make seasonal
forecasts.