* 8820017
* Structure Defects and Chemical Reaction in the Solid State: High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscopy and Micro- analysis
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1989,06/30/1992
* LeRoy Eyring, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1992
* USD 530,440.00

The purpose of this research is to investigate the mechanisms of solid state
chemical reactions at the atomic level. Such descriptions are rare yet they are
important to the scientific understanding of nature and vital to the efficient
design of materials. The means for accomplishing such a study have now become
available under the general label of high-resolution electron microscopy (HREM),
analytical electron microscopy (AEM) and associated techniques which now have
the requisite lateral resolution. Furthermore, with the union of low-light TV
techniques and high-speed image processing, high temporal resolution is
available as well. These studies will also be aided by the availability of
unique new ultra-high vacuum microscopes that can effectively eliminate unwanted
chemical interference in thin film research. In situ chemical reactions of
various generic kinds will be studied using these HREM techniques and the
mechanisms of reactions proposed. Configurations of specimens that will be used
include diffusion and reaction of two vacuum deposited substances (Au-Si, Au-Al,
etc.) in thin films, gas-solid reactions that can occur in the residual gases of
the microscope (the oxidation of a reactive metal), thermal or radiation-induced
decomposition of compounds and the study of dynamic changes in the surface
structures of materials. Microscopic characterization of specimens reacted
outside the microscope will also be studied. In addition, the class of binary
and ternary materials with a structure related to that of CaF2 are to be further
studied (e.g. the binary rare earth oxides and calcia-stabilized zirconia). In
particular preparation and structure including defects will be emphasized. These
anion-deficient materials are of great interest scientifically because of
several types of solid state behavior requiring clarification and technically
important as reactor fuels, high-temperature and high-strength ceramics, fast-
ion solid electrolytes, and specific ion electrode sensors.