* 8820043
* Kin-Recognition Mechanisms of Larval Anurans
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* Bruce Waldman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 01/31/1992
* USD 53,264.00

Animals frequently make sacrifices that may benefit other members of their
species. Evolutionary considerations suggest that such altruistic behaviors are
especially likely to be evident in the interactions of close genetic kin.
Because kin descend from the same ancestors, they possess many genes in common.
By aiding their close relatives, individuals thus can propagate copies of their
own genes. A prediction of this theory is that organisms should discriminate,
where possible, between their close kin and other members of their species, and
they should direct beneficial acts primarily toward their close relatives. An
understanding of the mechanisms by which animals recognize their kin is
important for evaluating theories of the origin and evolution of social
behavior. Dr. Waldman is investigating how kin-recognition abilities develop in
vertebrates. Because their developmental patterns are well understood, amphibian
larvae are excellent animals for exploring factors influencing development. Dr.
Waldman will study the responses of tadpoles that are exposed as embryos to
various artificial odorants to determine whether or not early experience of
environmental factors has long-lasting behavioral effects. Of course, embryos
are normally in contact with maternal factors during early development, and cues
important for developing kin-recognition abilities may be acquired from the
mother. By transplanting ovaries between genetically unrelated females, and
later testing the behavioral responses of the foster-siblings thus created, Dr.
Waldman will examine the extent to which the mother influences the development
of kin-recognition abilities in her offspring. To see if individuals may learn
the odors of their siblings at later stages in development, tadpoles will be
reared individually in special containers. They will be exposed to water
conditioned by either their siblings or non- siblings, and their subsequent
behavioral responses will be recorded to determine whether or not individuals
can be induced to recognize non-kin rather than kin if they are previously
exposed to their odors. This study should demonstrate how the development of
kin- recognition abilities results from the interaction of genetic and non-
genetic factors. The results may provide insight into how higher vertebrates
acquire the ability to recognize their relatives. Moreover, the results should
strengthen our under- standing of how nepotistic behaviors evolve in vertebrate
populations.