* 8820858
* RUI:  Vertebrate Forebrain Organization: Ray-Finned Fishes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Mark Braford, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1991
* USD 172,429.00

The forebrain is the part of the brain of vertebrates that has evolved into the
elaborate cerebral hemispheres. Roughly half of all vertebrate species are bony
fishes, yet we know very little about the forebrain structure of this important
group. This project will clarify the identity of the neuronal fields in the two
major anterior parts of the brain, the telencephalon and diencephalon, in bony
fishes. Anatomical studies will follow four lines of approach. 1) Distribution
of certain chemical markers will be studied by antibody binding, to identify
regions that are comparable to similarly studied regions in the forebrain of
other vertebrates. 2) Patterns of connections between forebrain and other brain
regions will be determined by local uptake and neuronal transport of certain
tracer substances. 3) The unusual development of the forebrain in these fish
will be analyzed to better understand the origins and correspondences of certain
structures with those found in other vertebrates. 4) Comparisons will be made
among fish species that are closely related evolutionarily, but have diverse
lifestyles and differentially developed sensory systems, to gain insight into
the functional significance of specific regions of the forebrain. This work will
provide a morphological foundation for physiological and behavioral studies,
lead to better understanding of the organization and evolution of the vertebrate
brain, and reveal new aspects of form and functional relations in the forebrain.
It will be important to neuroscience in general, beyond just sensory, motor, or
neuroscience, and perhaps important to brain modelers.