* 8820069
* Sex-Ratio Behavior and Ecology of Nasonia
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Samuel Skinner, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 07/31/1991
* USD 90,000.00

Given genetically determined variations in behavior (among individuals of a
species), natural selection will favor those variants with the most appropriate
behavior for their environment. Thus, in order to fully understand the evolution
of behavior, one needs to know at least two things: the degree to which the
behavior of interest is under genetic control, and the ecological milieu in
which the behavior occurs. In bees and wasps, females have behavioral control
over the sex of their offspring and, given this, they produce different ratios
of sons and daughters in different environments. A deep theoretical
understanding of the ecological forces selecting for particular sex ratios has
developed over the past two decades. This theory is able to account for many of
the patterns of sex- ratio production observed in bees and wasps (as well as
many other organisms). However, two broad gaps remain in our knowledge. While
the patterns of sex-ratio production are well documented, little is known
regarding the environmental cues leading females to vary the sex ratio, nor do
we understand the behavioral processes by which different sex ratios are
produced. Yet it is at these levels--variation in the responsiveness to
environmental cues and variation in the processes of sex-ratio production--that
genetics becomes a significant component of behavior. Secondly, because many
wasps and bees are difficult to study in nature, our knowledge of their ecology,
as it relates to sex-ratio theory, is often scanty. In order to truly test the
theories, detailed accounts of the relevant ecology are needed for a variety of
species. Dr. Skinner's research is aimed at filling these gaps by utilizing a
wasp that is uniquely amenable to both genetic and ecological research. The
goals of this project are (1) to experimentally dissect the behaviors of
different wasp genotypes to (a) determine what, mechanistically, leads them to
produce different sex ratios, (b) determine the environmental cues that elicit
different sex-ratio behaviors, and (c) determine the degree to which "different"
sex-ratio behaviors are fundamentally integrated by common underlying
mechanisms, (2) to videotape egg- laying in seminatural settings in order to
assess the relative contributions of different behaviors to the overall sex
ratios produced by individual females, and (3) to observe mating and egg-laying
behaviors in nature to provide a detailed ecological framework for laboratory
studies of sex-ratio behavior.