* 8820508
* Biological Control of Land Surface Atmosphere Exchange: An  Ecosystem Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* David Schimel, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Blackshear
* 08/31/1991
* USD 300,000.00

Biological control of water, carbon dioxide and energy exchange at the land
surface is an important factor modifying climate, and climate change; its study
requires consideration of biophysical processes over time and space scales of
ecosystem change. Simple biophysical models have been employed to address land
surface/climate interactions, but controls over mass and energy fluxes by
ecosystem processes such as nutrient availability or herbivory have not been
considered. It is hypothesized that biotic controls such as nutrients and
herbivory significantly affect vegetation-mediated mass and energy fluxes, and
that these biological effects are largest when fluxes are largest. Preliminary
landscape-scale process studies suggest that leaf nitrogen and nitrogen use
efficiency are key parameters regulating exchange, and have high spatial
amplitude at both proposed sites (short- and tall- grasslands). It is proposed
to analyze ecosystem controls over mass and energy fluxes and develop a model
designed for use at landscape to regional scales. The model explicitly considers
variation in characteristic time rates of change of biophysical and ecosystem
processes and may be driven using remotely-sensed inputs. Process studies will
develop relationships among plant and ecosystem variables and spectral features.
This project will evaluate GIS and remote sensing-based techniques for spatial
extrapolation using the model, including applications of new high spectral
resolution sensors. Several approaches for choosing spatial resolution for
spatial simulation will be compared and evaluated relative to measured regional
carbon dioxide and water fluxes at the Konza and Central Plains LTER sites. The
immediate phase of this project will address (1) the ability of coupled models
to simulate seasonal fluxes at selected sites and (2) the ability of field
spectrometers to detect plant canopy characteristics necessary to the
simulations. The project team is excellent. Institutional accommodations and
facilities are quite good. The research should produce results important to
resolution of questions on grazing land production and the effects of possible
climate change. The Ecosystem Studies Program recommends that an award be made.