* 8820832
* Electrochemistry of Strongly Adsorbed Heme Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Edmond Bowden, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 01/31/1993
* USD 246,800.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfields of bioelectrochemistry, electron transfer and modified electrodes.
A fundamental investigation of the interfacial electron transfer reactions of
immobilized proteins that undergo oxidation-reduction reactions on electrodes
will be undertaken. The results will help to elucidate the electronic coupling
between enzymes and electronically conducting materials. They will also provide
insight into biological electron transfer processes as "protein/electrode
complexes" can be considered analogues of physiological protein/protein
complexes. A variety of electrochemical and spectroscopic methods will be
employed. Adsorption isotherms, protein orientation, adsorbate nativeness and
electron transfer activation parameters will be determined. The heme proteins
cytochrome c, cytochrome c552, and cytochrome c peroxidase, adsorbed on tin
oxide electrodes, will be investigated to enable evaluation of the roles of
electron transfer distance and electrostatic surface interactions as rate-
controlling factors. Systematic study of the electrochemical characteristics of
adsorbed proteins that undergo oxidation-reduction reactions will aid in
elucidating the role of electron transfer in biological systems. The results
will also aid in the design of efficient biological probes and sensors.