* 8820002
* Seismic Resistance and Retrofit of Post-Tensioned Flat-PlateFloors
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Manpreet K. Singh
* 12/31/1991
* USD 188,031.00

The flat-plate floor system is generally recognized as an unsuitable structural
system for resisting high-intensity lateral loads. Nevertheless, in regions of
high seismicity in the U.S. this structural system is still one of the most
widely used systems in multistory buildings braced by stiffer ductile frames of
structural walls. Recent research has shown that even in these braced structures
the conventionally-reinforced flat plate is susceptible to failures if gravity
shear stresses on the floo and lateral drifts are not controlled to acceptable
values. Performance of the unbonded post-tensioned flat-plate floor in a similar
situation is not well known. This research studies the behavior of this
structural system. The research involves design, construction, experimental
testing, retrofitting, and analysis of unbonded post-tensioned flat-plate
construction subjected to gravity and reversed cyclic lateral loads simulating
earthquake effects. Both isolated connections and a three by three bay model
floor are studied. Effects of gravity load intensity, lateral load intensity,
and retrofitting techniques are the primary variables in the study. The
experiments determine the suitability of this structural system to support
gravity floor loads when subjected to cyclic lateral drifts typical of those
occurring in buildings during intense ground shaking. One of the primary
objectives is to establish guidelines for design of this structural system.