* 8820151
* Project Crumansonata-Studies of Mafic Dike Swarms and       Interplate Lineament Evolution, India, Award in U.S. and    Indian Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Somdev Bhattacharji, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1992
* USD 117,314.00

Description: This project supports research by Dr. Bhattacharji and scientists
from Louisiana State University, Florida State University, University of Rhode
Island, Kansas State University and Queens College in New York in collaboration
with geologists from the Geological Survey of India (GSI), under the direction
of D.P. Dhondial the Director General of GSI. The research will include field
work in central India along a lineament belt, and will include geochemical and
geochronological studies in laboratories at U.S. universities. The objectives
are: determination of the tectonic evolution of the inta-plate lineament belt
and the relationship to associated flood basalts; delineation of the
evolutionary paths of the mafic and ultramafic dikes and dike swarms;
determination of the chemical and isotopic nature of the parental magmas, study
of the hot spot hypothesis for intra-plate magmatism; and development of a
thermo-mechanical model for the evolution of the lineament belt. Scope: The
topic of this research was developed through a joint field workshop held in
India which identified the specific lineament as suitable for providing the
needed data. The work was started in the field and some laboratory
investigations were carried out. A program report was produced which showed
interesting results and pointed to the importance of geochronologic and
petrogenic studies of the areas visited. The research project has the full
backing of the Government of India, and enables a large number of U.S.
scientists to work with their Indian colleagues on field investigations in
India. It allows the Indian scientists to visit the U.S. for participation in
the laboratory testing of samples. The collaboration is particularly useful to
the two sides.