* 8820360
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research: Chlorofluoromethane Measurements in the Antarctic
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Douglas Wallace, Brookhaven National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1989
* USD 20,766.00

This award will support the participation of Dr. Douglas Wallace, Brookhaven
National Laboratory, in the Swedish Antarctic Expedition scheduled for December
1988 and January 1989 in the Weddell Sea, one of the world's greatest deep water
formations. During the expedition Dr. Wallace will make time series measurements
of chlorofluoromethanes (CFMs). The collected data will then be interpreted in
conjunction with physical and geochemical parameters measured by Swedish co-
investigators from the Department of Marine and Analytical Chemistry, University
of Goteborg, which is one of the world's major centers of expertise on marine
chemistry. Chlorofluoromethanes can be used as transient tracers of ocean
circulation and mixing over decadal timescales. The proposed CFMs study can make
a significant contribution to the understanding of oceanographic and geochemical
processes in the Weddell Sea. The study of dissolved CFMs as time-dependent
tracers in the ocean is especially valuable in this region, where globally
important deep and bottom water types are formed. Both the U.S. and Sweden will
clearly benefit from the proposed work. The CFM data base previously collected
by U.S. scientists will be expanded and the Swedish expedition will be greatly
strengthened by the addition of CFM measurements to the shipboard program.