* 8820311
* RUI:  Acquisition of a Preparative Ultracentriguge:  A        Multi-User Request
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Michael Gretz, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 10/31/1991
* USD 30,000.00

A preparative ultracentrifuge and two rotors will be placed in the Biology
Department of George Mason University. The high speed capability of the
ultracentrifuge and the large volume capacity of the rotors are needed 1) for
the continuation of research of at least five professors in the Biology
Department of this University, and 2) in the laboratory instruction
undergraduate students in this Department. By facilitating methodologies of cell
fractionation, the ultracentrifuge will impact the following research projects:
the study of iron transport into the bacterium Pseudomonas aeruginosa, the
localization of the electron transport components of an iron- reducing
bacterium, the isolation of membranes involved in extracellular polysaccharide
synthesis and modification in red algae, the role of thymic growth factors on
human breast cancer cells growing in culture, and the role of stress proteins in
the acquisition of stress tolerance. As well, the instrument will be used to
train students in the research laboratory of each professor. It will also be
used to teach students in the classroom laboratory the basic techniques of cell
fractionation and virus isolation. Students enrolled in Biological
Ultrastructure, Experiments in Microbiology, Techniques in Virology, and
Advanced Techniques in Molecular Biology will use the ultracentrifuge in
laboratory experiments.//