* 8820621
* A Novel Improvement in Biochemical Fluorescence Methods: TheUse of a Photodiode Array Fluorometer Together with Global  Least Square Analysis of Quenching Data
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Maurice Eftink, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/1991
* USD 124,544.00

Fluorescence spectroscopy is one of the most valuable tools available for the
study of the solution structure and dynamics of biomolecules and the
thermodynamics and kinetics of interacting biochemical systems. The emission of
most biochemical systems is heterogeneous, however, and this complicates the
interpretation of fluorescence data. As a means to resolve these heterogeneously
emitting systems we propose to implement the following strategy to enhance our
ability to acquire and interpret steady state (intensity and anisotropy)
fluorescence quenching (or enhancement) studies. Specifically, we propose to
implement the following strategy to enhance our ability to acquire and interpret
steady state (intensity and anisotropy) fluorescence quenching (or enhancement)
studies. Specifically, we propose a) to develop computer software to perform
nonlinear least squares analysis of fluorescence data in a global manner (i.e.,
multiple wavelengths fitted simultaneously), b) to interfere a photodiode array
fluorometer with a personal computer in order to conveniently acquire and store
data for such a global analysis, c) to employ a computer-controlled dispenser
for the precise and rapid addition of quencher or other reagent, and d) to apply
this approach to several fluorescence quenching studies, primarily with proteins
that contain two fluorescing tryptophan residues. This approach will be useful
not only for solute quenching studies, but also for ligand binding systems, and
for any system in which the fluorescence of a probe is changed in response to
the addition of a chemical agent, or to a change in temperature, pH, etc..