* 8820112
* The Role of Biogenic Factors in Precipitation of Calcium    Carbonate in Freshwater
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1989,03/01/1991
* Stjepko Golubic, Rudjer Boskovic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/01/1991
* USD 0.00

In this two-year U.S.-Yugoslav cooperative research project in ecology between
Dusan Srdoc, Rudjer Boskovic Institute in Zagreb and Stejepko Golubic at Boston
University, the investigators will carry out a complete case study of a typical
freshwater system. The study will focus on the Plitvice Lakes and waterfalls in
the karstic region of Yugoslavia. The goal is to identify the principal
biological activities that influence calcium carbonate formation of these
waterfalls and travertine deposits. A multidisciplinary apporach will be used.
The Yugoslav research team has expertise in aquatic chemistry and chemistry in
general. The biological research will be carried out by the U.S. investigator.
The U.S. scientist will determine the species composition and ecological role of
organisms in forming cascades, and identify biological mineral formations. This
project was approved by the U.S.-Yugoslav Joint Board on Cooperation in Science
and Technology and is supported through a joint fund consisting of matching
contributions from the governments of the United States and Yugoslavia. The U.S.
contribution is provided annually by the Department of State. No NSF funds are
involved. Grants are made to the principal scientific institution in Yugoslavia,
but include dollar funds for U.S. scientist travel to Yugoslavia and for
Yugoslav scientists' living expenses in the U.S.