* 8820919
* MSA in the Vostok Ice Core:  A 160,000 Year Record of       Biogenic Sulfur Emissions from the Southern Ocean
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1994
* Eric Saltzman, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 02/28/1994
* USD 334,881.00

The goal of this project is to obtain a long-term (160K yrs.) record of the
atmospheric deposition of marine derived sulfur to the East Antarctic ice sheet.
Measurements of methanesulfonic acid (MSA) and non-seasalt sulfate will be made
on samples on Vostok and several other Antarctic ice cores. The data will allow
an assessment of the levels and variability of the organosulfur signal under a
variety of climatic conditions ranging from the relatively stable interglacial
or glacial maximum to the glacial/interglacial transitional periods. The MSA
data will provide a basis for differentiating between sulfate of biogenic
origin, which was originally present in the atmosphere as fine particle size
marine aerosols, and sulfate aerosols derived from abiotic sources. This
information has a direct bearing on our interpretation of the ice-core record in
terms of the abundance of cloud condensation nuclei in the paleoatmosphere. The
flux of dimethylsulfide, and hence MSA, through the marine atmosphere is also
directly related to the primary productivity of the oceans, a critical factor in
the long-term control of atmospheric PC02. Thus, the global distribution of MSA
in ice cores can potentially contribute to the testing of various scenarios of
climate change driven by changes in oceanic productivity. Because the MSA
concentration is a regional tracer, data from a number of sites are needed.
Vostok core represents an important element in a larger data set needed to
reconstruct the paleoatmospheric signal of marine sulfur emissions.