* 8820837
* Teaching Engineering Ethics: A Case Study Approach
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Michael Pritchard, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/1993
* USD 124,977.00

Undergraduate engineering curricula in the U.S. require issues of engineering
ethics to be addressed. Engineers and the engineering profession recognize that
students need to learn how to use and assess available information in making
ethical decisions, and how to test and develop their own perspectives on
professional ethics. They need to develop the thought processes necessary to
integrate information with acceptable professional "norms" of behavior, to make
ethical decisions. Yet, surveys demonstrate little in the way of formal or
systematic approaches to the development and testing of new curricula or
teaching methods. This project will develop and test annotated case studies,
with accompanying commentaries and bibliographies, in print and software form,
for classroom use. Special effort will be made to develop multiphased cases,
sensitive to organizational contexts and to the importance of thinking through
the likely outcomes of initial decisions for later decisions that also call for
ethical reflection. Workshops for engineering faculty at WMU will help them
develop effective ways of meeting the ethics requirement of the Accreditation
Board for Engineering and Technology. Project results will be available for
national dissemination. This project addresses an important issue in a unique
way. The research team and collaborators are interdisciplinary and well
qualified to collaborate. Further effort is likely to continue beyond the
duration of this award. The project is designed well; appropriate testing and
dissemination are planned. University support is good. An award in the amount of
$124,977 is therefore recommended.