* 8820518
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on NMR Phenomena in Solid H2and D2
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1993
* Horst Meyer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1993
* USD 14,374.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Horst Meyer, Department of Physics,
Duke University, to pursue with Dr. Insuk Yu, Department of Physics, Seoul
National University, for 24 months, an experimental and theoretical nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) study of solid hydrogen and deuterium (H , HD, and D ).
The research 2 2 will focus on (1) a better understanding of the NMR "solid
echo" pattern in D single crystals, (2) a systematic study of 2 "stimulated
echoes" in solid H and D that can give valuable 2 2 information on the molecular
fluctuation rates, and (3) understanding the anisotropy of the NMR shift in the
proton spectrum between H and HD. Solid H and D are each made up 2 2 2 of two
molecular species forming a homogeneous mixture. These two species have
rotational angular momentum (J=1) and (J=0). Mixtures of these species can be
prepared in any proportion. The J=1 molecules have an electric quadrupole
moment, while those with J=0 are spherically symmetric. Anisotropic forces
between the J=1 particles produce orientational ordering at temperatures below
about 3 degrees Kelvin. This ordering process in these molecular solids,
analogous to dilute magnetic systems, is a function of the J=0 concentration.
Above a critical concentration of J=1 equal to about 53 mole percent, there is a
well defined transition to an ordered state. The research will attempt to
provide a more quantitative understanding of the orientation ordering process in
H , HD, and D and to explain anomalous behavior observed in 2 2 previous NMR
studies of solid hydrogen. The U.S. and Korean collaborators are highly
respected scientists who have records of successful research in the field of
this project. Their collaboration in the past has led to several joint
publications. Because Seoul National University does not yet have low
temperature facilities, the work in Korea will be mostly theoretical, while that
at Duke University will be both experimental and theoretical. The present
project will allow the collaborators to combine their talents and interests for
mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit. Korean participation in the project, including
Dr. Yu's visits to Duke University, is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).