* 8820395
* Quaternary Geochronology:  Eastern Sahara and American West
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1992
* C. Vance Haynes, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1992
* USD 184,183.00

Previous NSF-sponsored research in the hyperarid eastern Sahara has established
a discontinuous geochronological sequence spanning the Quaternary. Early to
Middle Pleistocene alluvium and eolian sediments with Early Paleolithic
archaeology in buried "radar" valleys are inset by lacustrine deposits
associated with Middle Paleolithic archaeology. These are overlain by Holocene
sand sheets, playa deposits, and laminated lake beds with associated Neolithic
archaeology. Paleoclimatic and paleo- environmental interpretations based upon
geology, archaeology, fauna, and palynology indicate major north-south
fluctuations of the Sahelio-Saharan transitions zone during late Quaternary
time. The Meidob Hills, a basaltic volcanic pile, periodically active for
perhaps the past 30 millions years, lies on the present southern fringe of the
Sahara and has, therefore, experienced the passage of the transition zone back
and forth several times. With the collaboration of an interdisciplinary team I
propose to study alluvial and eolian sediments interbeded with datable volcanics
to establish a time-calibrated strati- graphic sequence that will be
correlatable to strata of the hyperarid core of the Sahara as well as southward
to African rift valley sequences. The results will be of value in understanding
past man-land relationships in the sensitive Saharan fringe in order to better
assess future land uses and also in comparing hyperarid geomorphic processes
with semiarid American West. Investigative techniques include stratigraphy,
sedimentology, palynology, AMS radiocarbon dating, space imagery remote sensing,
isotope geochemistry, and archaeological observations. The possibility for early
hominid remains will not be overlooked.