* 8820342
* Insulin-Like Growth Factor-I and Chromaffin Cell Function
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Robert Perlman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/31/1992
* USD 190,313.00

Chromaffin cells in the adrenal medulla secrete the catecholamine hormones
epinephrine and norepinephrine. These cells are derived during ebryonic
development from the neural crest and are very similar to norepinephrine-
secreting neurons in the sympathetic nervous system and the brain. Insulin-like
growth factor-I (IGF- I) is a peptide hormone that is structurally similar to
insulin but that probably acts to regulate cellular replication and
differentiation. IGF-I enhances catecholamine secretion from bovine chromaffin
cells in culture. The goal of this research is to understand the mechanism by
which IGF-I regulates catecholamine secretion and other chromaffin cell
functions. Because calcium is known to be an important regulator of
catecholamine secretion, the proposed research will focus on the effects of
IGF-I on calcium metabolism in chromaffin cells. The effects of IGF-I on the
number and activity of calcium channels and on the concentration of
intracellular calcium in chromaffin cells will be studied. If IGF-I affects the
function of calcium channels in these cells, the channels that are regulated by
IGF-I will be identified and characterized. The effects of IGF-I on other
chromaffin cell functions, including catecholamine synthesis, cyclic AMP
production, and phospholipid metabolism will be evaluated. This research should
provide important new information about the regulation of catecholamine
secretion and about the actions of IGF-I in the nervous system.