* 8820897
* Collaborative Research on Public Goods:  An Experimental    Study of Endogenous Organization and Large Group            Characteristics
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Arlington Williams, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 08/31/1993
* USD 77,830.00

One of the most interesting and fundamental areas of economic analysis concerns
the provision of public goods. As a generic term, a "public good" is one which
is provided and financed by many people, but can be used by individuals. Obvious
examples are goods and services provided by governments to citizens in general.
On a smaller scale the term can be applied to any situation in which a group, by
acting in a collective fashion, can provide goods and services that the
individual members of the group could not finance themselves. The pricing of
public goods, that is to say the charges levied on the individual members of the
group, is very important. A difficult problem is to invoke a pricing policy in
which each user of the good pays a fair share of the cost of providing that
good. Often, because of asymmetric information about usage, some members of the
group pay more than their share while other members "ride free". The project
explores two new research areas and expands our knowledge of public goods
provision within the context of a voluntary contribution mechanism. The first
topic examines a "nested" public goods problem in which groups may communicate
only if they pay the organization costs associated with communication. The
second area involves an experimental inquiry into the properties of public goods
provision in large groups. Past work has shown that group size, particularly
when endogenously determined, can significantly affect the outcome of public
goods experiments. The project is done in collaboration with Mark Isaac of the
University of Arizona. %%% One of the most interesting and fundamental areas of
economic analysis concerns the provision of public goods. As a generic term, a
"public good" is one which is provided and financed by many people, but can be
used by individuals. Obvious examples are goods and services provided by
governments to citizens in general. On a smaller scale the term can be applied
to any situation in which a group, by acting in a collective fashion, can
provide goods and services that the individual members of the group could not
finance themselves. The pricing of public goods, that is to say the charges
levied on the individual members of the group, is very important. A difficult
problem is to invoke a pricing policy in which each user of the good pays a fair
share of the cost of providing that good. Often, because of asymmetric
information about usage, some members of the group pay more than their share
while other members "ride free". This project applies the framework of
experimental economics in two main areas of public good provision to assess the
impact of information sharing among group members. In the first part
communication costs are borne fully by the members. The second part of the work
studies the affect of group size on the outcome of public good pricing.