* 8820849
* Scanning Calorimetry Studies of the Micelle-Vesicle         Transition In Phospholipids
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Charles Spink, SUNY College at Cortland
* Continuing Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 08/31/1992
* USD 87,615.00

Mixtures of phospholipid and detergents are known to undergo transformation
between micelle and vesicle forms under proper conditions. The transformation
process occurs within a narrow range of compositions of detergent and
phospholipid and seems to involve intermediate structures which are quite
different from either the vesicles or micelles which exist at the two extreme
boundaries of the transition region. Little is known about the characteristics
of the transitions in the transition region and the properties of the
transitions forms. This project involves the study of several detergent-
phospholipid systems by differential scanning calorimetry at compositions
particularly close to the transition region between micelles and vesicles.
Lipids in aqueous mixtures of phospholipids and detergent are thought to exist
in several different structural forms dependent upon the composition and
conditions in solution. At low mole ratios of detergent to lipid unilamellar
vesicles form, while at high ratios micellar structures prevail. The transition
between these limiting structures is a fundamental problem that has implications
for several important areas relating to the physical and chemical behavior of
phospholipids. The results of this project could be significant for a better
understanding of membrane reconstitution methods, vesicular drug delivery
methods and the mechanisms of lipid transport in biliary mixtures of bile salts
and phospholipids.