* 8820001
* Effect of Calcium and Inositol Polyphosphates on Nerve Cell Function
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Simon Levy, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 03/31/1993
* USD 197,072.00

Variations in the intracellular concentration of calcium ions (Ca) play an
important role in a wide range of cellular reactions and processes. In most
cells, brief increases in Ca can result either from calcium entering the cell or
calcium being released from a specialized compartment inside the cell. Calcium
can be released from an intracellular compartment when an agonist (hormone or
neurotransmitter) binds to a distinct receptor on the cell membrane. According
to this model, binding of the agonist (first messenger) to the membrane receptor
leads to the intracellular release of an agent (second messenger). The second
messenger, in turn, releases calcium from the intracellular compartment. The
proposed study will focus on characterizing the action of a novel second
messenger, called inositol trisphophate (IP3), on nerve cells. The experiments
will be carried out in giant molluscan neurons. Molluscan neurons constitute a
particularly favorable prepartion in which to study calcium function and
regulation. Some nerve cells display a prominent calcium component in the ionic
basis of their excitability. Their cell bodies are quite large (0.1-0.5mm in
diameter, about 10 times larger that mammalian neurons), and are easily
identifiable for isolation. For these reasons, experimental manipulations can be
made in these cells which would be impossible in the mammalian nervous system.
Preliminary studies suggest that intracellular injections of inositol
trisphosphate cause an increase in intracellular calcium stores. The proposed
experiments will: 1. Look for an agonist that causes Ca to increase by puffing
pharmacological agents on the cell membrane and measuring the level of Ca with
calcium-selective probes made in the laboratory. 2. Compare the Ca increases
induced by the agonist or IP3 by either puffing the agonist or injecting IP3 and
measuring Ca. 3. Determine the localization of the intracellular Ca store by
injecting IP3 at different depths fro the inner membrane of a nerve cell and
measuring the free Ca change at each depth. 4. Determine the effects of IP3
injections on the electrical characteristics of the cells and correlate them
with the intracellular free calcium level. The studies will suggest whether the
action of some neurotransmitters on nerve cells is mediated by an increase in
calcium released by inositol trisphosphate. The combination of these
electrophysiological, pharmacological and biochemical techniques should prove
useful to gather new and important information about nerve cell function and
perhaps about disorders of the human central nervous system.