* 8820070
* Segregation of Developmentally Restricted Subpopulations in the Neural Crest Lineage
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* James Weston, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 10/31/1992
* USD 238,400.00

Dr. Weston will exploit the avian neural crest, which provides an experimentally
accessible population of pluripotent embryonic cells that undergoes a
characteristic sequence of restrictions of developmental potential.
Phenotypically distinct crest-derived subpopulations can be detected at early
stages of development using sensitive cell type-specific markers. Some of these
subpopulations appear to arise from developmentally restricted, but functionally
undifferentiated embryonic cells. Although the existence of developmentally
restricted precursors has been inferred, they cannot now be identified directly.
Therefore to characterize the initial appearance and ultimate fate of these
cells, we propose: 1) to identify subpopulations of crest-derived cells that
have distinct, limited developmental potentials using specifically identified
monoclonal antibody markers; and 2) to characterize the normal developmental
appearance of immunochemically identified cells, and the subsequent expression
by these cells of other phenotypic traits characteristic of crest derivatives.
To examine early restriction of developmental potential, we propose; 3) to
analyze the response of identified precursors to environmental factors,
including an assessment of a) the responses of a crest-derived neurogenic
precursor subpopulation to specific growth and survival factors, and b) the
normal responses of nascent neurons to environmental cues. %%% The developmental
potential of embryonic cells becomes progressively more restricted during
embryogenesis. The mechanisms by which this occurs remain to be elucidated. In
this study Dr. Weston will address the important issue of how this diversity is
generated, stabilized and propagated within cellular lineages during embryonic
development.