* 8820485
* Developmental Patterns in Human and Rhesus Monkey Brains:   Acceleration, Neoteny or Embryonic Resemblance
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Este Armstrong, American Registry of Pathology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan S. Friedlaender
* 08/31/1991
* USD 92,791.00

Traditionally the comparative study of brains of apes and humans has been of
interest to anthropologists, but not to neuroanatomist who are more concerned
with the human brain per se. But, very few anthropologists have the background
and expertise to deal in detail with problems of the comparative morphology of
human and non-human primate brains. Dr. Armstrong is one of these few. This
research involves detailed measurements of the gyration and degree of maturation
in diencephalic nuclei of the brain of humans, apes, and monkeys. Despite this
neuroanatomical detail, the study does have broad relevance for Anthropology.
Anthropologists and the general public alike have wondered for a long time
whether differences between human, monkey and ape brains are related to
differences in intelligence. An understanding of developmental differences
between human and nonhuman brains has a direct bearing on this question. This
research attempts to answer the specific question, Can merely a shift in the
rate of neural development account for differences in size of (parts of) adult
human and monkey brains? It makes use of the extensive collection of well-
preserved brains in the Yakovlev Collection of Armed Forces Institute of
Pathology.