* 8820805
* Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope and         Accessory Equipment for Image Processing and Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Lawrence Ruben, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 09/30/1991
* USD 55,250.00

The present proposal seeks support to obtain a rebuilt Philips EM300
transmission electron microscope. Several major proposed projects require
electron microscopy, but are not adequately supported by existing equipment.
These research projects utilize combinations of morphological, morphometric and
immunolocalization analyses in conjunction with biochemical or molecular
techniques. (1) To study the influence of calcium ions on differentiation in
Physarum polycephalum. Exogenous calcium can induce differentiation and
differentiation is accompanied by mobilization of internal calcium stores.
Morphometric analyses are proposed to quantitate changes in the mitochondrial
content of stored calcium granules. (2) To study the genetic mechanisms
regulating eggshell formation during oogenesis in Drosophila by visualizing the
effects of well defined mutations on eggshell development and to localizing with
high resolution the responsible gene products. (3) To study molecular mechanisms
involved in regulation of the mitotic process to localizing with high resolution
monoclonal antibodies MPM-1 and MPM-2 which recognize a subset of phosphorylated
proteins abundant in mitotic cells. (4) To study calcium regulatory pathways in
Trypanosoma brucei by immunolocalization. (5) To use morphometric analyses to
provide ultrastructural evidence of free radical damage during aging in tissues
of the housefly, Musca domestica. (6) To evaluate the basis of immunosuppression
in mice infected with Trichonella pseudospiralis by analysis of adrenal
mitochondria and lipid storage droplets in the zona fasciculate layer to provide
further evidence of a parasite induced hyperadrenal state. (7) To evaluate,
morphologically, the effect of mutations on ATPase organization. (8) To identify
changes in seminal vesicle composition and structure which accompany the aging
process. Emphasis is place upon the distribution and quantity of type IV
collagen, laminin, proteoglycans and testosterone.