* 8820241
* The Animal Rights Movement: Value Conflicts Over Scientific Research
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Dorothy Nelkin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 03/31/1992
* USD 80,705.00

The Studies in Science, Technology and Society program supports research that
examines the structures and processes that influence the direction and use of
science and technology in their social, political, and economic contexts. Ethics
and Values Studies supports research that examines the social, professional and
individual values and mutual obligations and responsibilities that arise in
interactions of science, technology and society. Research projects often examine
social controversies surrounding impacts of or on sciences or technologies. This
research addresses a very important EVS issue .. controversies surrounding the
use of animals in research. Prior EVS.supported research on this issue has
examined ethical foundations for views about animal experimentation, legal
developments, and the views of Animal Care and Use Committees. The current
research takes an empirical approach that will provide data and insight on (1)
contrasting perceptions of the ethical dilemmas raised by animal experimentation
and (2) the dynamics and impacts of these controversies on science, technology
and society. Assisted by an advisory group including scientists and social
theorists with different views of the merits of arguments for and against animal
research, the two investigators will review scholarly as well as popular media
accounts of animal rights and animal welfare concerns and activities; and they
will interview and observe activists and scientists concerned with several
crucial cases and new legislation and regulations concerning animal care and
use. The research and analysis will focus on recruitment of members and
supporters to different factions in the controversy, evolution of the
organizations and tactical choices, and effects on scientific research. Results
will include a series of articles for researchers, STS scholars and policy
makers, and a book directed at the wider public that is interested in these
issues. This project will contribute to professional and public discussion of
issues surrounding uses of animals in research. The investigators are very
well.qualified; results from prior support of the co.principal investigator have
been timely, informative and well.received. Institutional support is adequate
and costs are reasonable. Total support in the amount of $80,705 is recommended.