* 8820807
* Studies of the Concentration and Isotopic Composition of    O2, N2 and Ar in Trapped Gases from the Vostok Ice Core
* O/D,OPP
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1993
* Michael Bender, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 09/30/1993
* USD 416,390.00

Interactions between climate and the biosphere have a profound influence on the
nature of our environment. The biosphere directly affects climate through
regulating the concentration of CO2 and trace greenhouse gases, and by exerting
a major influence on the hydrologic cycle. Climate has a great effect on the
distribution of terrestrial ecosystems, and the related process of ocean
circulation, is a major determinant of oceanic production and the
characteristics of marine ecosystems. Describing the nature of climate-biosphere
interactions is fundamental to understanding climatic evolution and its effects
on the planetary ecosystem. The glacial-interglacial time scale is of special
relevance to the interactions between climate and the biosphere here. Over this
relatively short time interval (102 kyr), climate is not influenced by changing
continental positions, long-term tectonic events such as mountain building, or
the evolution of the fauna and flora. Rather, climate change is forced by
variations in the distribution of solar insolation on the Earth's surface,
variations in the atmospheric concentrations of the radiatively active gases,
and perhaps by incompletely understood tectonic, stochastic climatological, and
biotic processes as well. The detailed study of Pleistocene biogeochemistry and
paleochemistry is an excellent way to learn about climate-biosphere interactions
and is also crucial to the understanding of how Earth's climate will be
influenced by man's alteration of the planetary environment. This research
addresses a wide range of issues concerning interactions between the climate and
the biosphere. The experimental work will determine the concentration and
isotopic composition of O2, N2, and Ar in trapped air in the Vostok ice core,
which preserves a record of the ambient environment back to 160 Kyr B.P.