* 8820397
* Interdisciplinary Satellite Symposium (COMPUSAT)
* CSE,EIA
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1989
* Paul Hazan, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/1989
* USD 36,000.00

The symposium will be a five-hour nationwide video telecast with active
audience participation. The emphasis will be on multidisciplinary aspects of
computing technology and applications covering the following areas: VLSI, design
automation, software engineering, personal computing, office automation, machine
intelligence, robotics, and test technology. The goal of the interdisciplinary
satellite symposium is to: a. Present the state-of-the-art and future trends in
rapidly evolving computer-based technologies; b. Suggest directions for fruitful
interactions between computing technologies and resulting innovative
applications; c. Provide a forum for dialogue and interaction between
individuals (professionals, faculty, and students) in different segments of
computer science, computer technology, and user communities. The National
Science Foundation will sponsor the participation of approximately 10 minority
colleges so that they may benefit from this highly leveraged technical
initiative. As a companion submission to the IEEE request the Black College
Satellite Network will evaluate the IEEE-sponsored satellite teleconference. In
addition to providing downlink services to viewers, BCNS will develop and
coordinate the implementation of a uniform evaluation instrument at the minority
university receive sites. Evaluation coordinators will be identified by the
deans or department chairs at each participating institution. Variables to be
considered are teleconference logistics, format, thematic content and
effectiveness in providing orientational information, outreach and enhanced
curriculum offerings. Results will address the issues of faculty and student
enrichment, student pipeline quality and quantity and institutional
infrastructure impact.