* 8820793
* Case Studies on Transfer of Biotechnology to Third World    Countries
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1990,06/30/1992
* Allan Haberman, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 06/30/1992
* USD 100,267.00

A central focus for studies in science, technology and society is the
development and management of complex technologies. These efforts raise
correspondingly complex ethical and value concerns which must be confronted and
reconciled in the process. This project addresses key value issues in the
transfer of biotechnology to developing countries. The research team -- composed
of U.S. researchers and cooperating scientists from the developing countries --
will conduct a detailed analysis of two cases involving research, development
and production of vaccines in these countries. Researchers will use interviews,
study of documents, and observation, to examine whether these projects provide
examples of viable ways to foster the development of independent biotechnology
industries in developing countries and what value considerations enter into the
decisions to undertake and manage them. An Advisory Committee will provide
project oversight and review. Products are expected to include monographs and
articles, two masters' theses, sessions at meetings of relevant professional
societies and at international conferences, and teaching modules and design
exercises for use here and overseas. This project addresses an important issue
in a unique interdisciplinary manner. The research team, consultants, and
advisors represent an appropriate mix of disciplines and are uniquely qualified
to collaborate. Further effort is likely to continue beyond the duration of this
award. The project is designed well; university support is good. An award in the
amount of $100,267 is therefore recommended.