* 8820366
* Vegetation Change Accompanying Urbanization
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Elizabeth Hobbs, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/1991
* USD 76,108.00

Geographers, ecologists, and other scholars are beginning to understand how the
process of urbanization affects plant aggregations and how vegetation changes
through time in an urban environment. Within the rapidly developing field of
spatial analysis in ecology, little research has been conducted on urban
vegetation change, or, more particularly, on change in urban forests. Trees
affect microclimates and water balances in urban regions, provide aesthetic
elements of the urban landscape, and furnish habitats for fauna. A mix of issues
in biogeography and urban geography are examined in this project, which
investigates changes in the distribution of vegetation, especially trees, in St.
Paul, Minnesota for the period from 1850 to 1980. Combining archival and
historical analyses with contemporary field work, the study will use a
geographic information system (GIS) to store data on vegetation cover and to
explain observed changes as a product of initial cover, land use, population
density, and trends in the changes of the urban landscape. The development of
general concepts and theories of urban forest dynamics depends on this kind of
study, which will analyze the effects of changing land use on the structure of
urban forests over a longer time period than has been examined previously. By
studying the biophysical aspects of the urban environment, this research will
contribute to the scientific basis of knowledge essential to planning for
healthful and attractive urban environments and to our understanding of human-
environmental relationships.