* 8820406
* Role of NMDA Receptors in the Development of Mammalian      Visual Cortex
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1993
* Michael Stryker, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 01/31/1993
* USD 249,545.00

Neural plasticity refers to the ability of central nervous system connections
to be modified or rearranged, particularly during a critical period early in
development. The overall goal of Dr. Stryker's research over the past several
years has been to understand the role of neural activity in mammalian visual
system plasticity and development. Much recent evidence from studies of long-
term potentiation (LTP) in the hippocampus suggests that the N-methyl-D-
aspartate (NMDA) subtype of glutamate receptor plays a crucial role in this
neural activity-dependent synaptic plasticity. LTP plasticity is found in both
young and adult nervous systems. In this project, Dr. Stryker and his colleagues
will conduct several studies to elucidate the role of NMDA receptors in
mediating the effects of activity on the plasticity of the cat visual cortex.
Plasticity in the visual cortex is only found during an early stage of
development. The investigators will infuse NMDA-antagonists into the visual
cortex; measure electrophysiologically the specificity of the receptor blockade
so produced; record the effects of NMDA- receptor blockade on patterns of neural
activity; and study physiologically and anatomically effects on plasticity in
development. Dr. Stryker has a long history of making significant contributions
to our knowledge of nervous system development. This new work promises to reveal
whether the cellular and molecular details of plasticity in the adult central
nervous system (LTP), now receiving enormous research attention, apply also to
the rearrangement of neuronal connections in brain development.