* 8820408
* Export-Oriented Small- and Medium-Size Enterprises and      Economic Development in Peripheral Regions
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Niles Hansen, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1991
* USD 37,854.00

Considerable attention has been devoted in the United States and elsewhere to
the analysis of the factors that result in different rates of economic
development in peripheral rural areas versus more densely settled urban
enclaves. Of particular interest have been the roles of federal government-
sponsored development programs and local initiatives as stimulants of economic
growth. This project will analyze the ways in which central and local
development strategies have influenced the rapid expansion of export-oriented,
small- and medium-sized economic establishments over the last decade in western
Jutland, the most peripheral part of Denmark. A qualitative evaluation of at
least a dozen hypotheses will be based on data on economic activity, surveys of
establishment executives, and interviews with many of those executives as well
as business leaders in related fields, labor leaders, government officials,
educators, and other analysts. Through analysis of these sources, new insights
should be formed on the role of public policies as well as the impact of other
factors on the success of a rapidly growing set of economic activities. This
project will provide much new information about the conditions and processes
that have influenced economic growth in Jutland in the last decade, but it also
will provide a solid basis for generalization to other locales in order to
determine the degree to which elements of the Danish experience can be
generalized. The methodology will be replicable, permitting extension of this
work to other locales where the same or different strategies have been or might
be employed. Among the areas about which this research is likely to provide new
information and perspectives are more peripheral parts of the U.S., including
the Mississippi Delta region, the Mexican border region, and the Pacific
Northwest.