* 8820107
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Project:           Micromixing in Viscous Polymer Melt
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Costel Denson, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1993
* USD 225,717.00

The mixing of highly viscous liquids and polymer melts is frequently encountered
in polymer processing operations and requires special equipment such as
motionless mixers and extruders of various designs,that subject the fluid to
extensional and shear flows as well as surface renewal. Mixing may be an end in
itself, as in polymer blending or compounding. Often mixing is an essential
requirement for other operations such as polymerization, devolatilization,
polymer grafting, or the dissolving of additives or solvents. The development of
new processes dependent on mixing of viscous polymer melts requires the
selection of a type or class of equipment to carry out the desired operation.
This in turn depends on an understanding of the fluid mechanics of the system.
This research addresses the development and application of a method for
measuring the effectiveness of viscous mixing in practical mixing equipment
commonly used in polymer processing operations. The method involves estimating
the degree of mixing by monitoring the product of a mass transfer limited set of
competitive second order chemical reactions. The specific experimental system
will measure the product distribution obtained from the reaction of p-phenylene
diamine and phthalic anhydride when each of the reactants is dissolved (in low
concentrations) in separate streams of molten polyethylene. In this system, the
product distribution depends on the manner in which the two streams are
contacted and mixed. The results should influence the selection, design, and
operation of industrial equipment used for the mixing of viscous fluids. It is
anticipated that the results will, in additional, suggest directions and provide
the means for developing new types of mixing devices or mixing elements based on
a fundamental understanding of mixing mechanisms. This work will be done in a
cooperative mode with industry under the Industry/University Cooperative
Research Program. Du Pont will supply the funds to support a graduate student
for two years, quantities of polymers for the test program at the University of
Delaware, analytical and test services at Du Pont, and the services of a very
competent co-PI to help supervise the graduate students doing this research. The
project will thus benefit from two excellent researchers and the combined
facilities of both the University of Delaware and Du Pont.