* 8820010
* Visual Orientation in Honey Bees
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Fred Dyer, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 12/31/1992
* USD 107,000.00

Many animals, from insects to human beings, can learn the locations of several
important sites in the environment, such as feeding places, watering holes,
nests, shelters, or mating grounds. For example, foraging honey bees, like many
other insects, may range widely from their nest, traveling to any of several
familiar flower patches as far away as 10 kilometers. Over such a distance, the
flowers and the landmarks around them cannot be seen by a bee setting out, yet
the bee can find its way using familiar landmarks it sees at the starting point
and along the way. Little is known about how bees learn landmarks on this scale.
Equally remarkable, on returning home the bee can communicate the location of
the food using the famous "dance language," a series of precise body movements
observed by nestmates. The dance language itself relies on the bee's ability to
learn about the landscape. A dancer indicates the angle of its flight path
relative to the sun's compass direction; on cloudy days the bee can determine
the direction of the unseen sun by referring to a memory, stored previously in
sunny weather, of its position relative to familiar landmarks. It is still a
riddle how bees form this memory in the first place, and how they update it as
they encounter new landmarks or as the sun changes its pattern of movement
seasonally. To study how bees use visual information stored in memory to perform
these feats of orientation, Dr. Dyer will observe the responses of experienced
bees when visual cues are altered in specific ways. Such experiments can reveal
which of many features of the environment (e.g., the size, shape, distance, and
color of landmarks, or the sun's position and rate of movement) provide spatial
information to bees, how the relationships among features are remembered, how
memories develop over time, and what happens to previously stored information
when a bee encounters new information. Thus, the goal is to uncover general
processing strategies underlying the use of visual spatial information for
orientation. The visual orientation of a bee in a familiar environment is
controlled by a brain little larger than the head of a pin. The larger brains of
vertebrates, and especially of human beings, are obviously capable of processing
that is considerably more complex. However, a difference in complexity does not
necessarily imply that there is a dramatic difference in the basic neural
processes. A recurrent theme in biology, in fact, is that general principles can
sometimes be more easily elucidated by studying simple organisms. Hence, in
addition to throwing light on how bees learn about their environment, these
studies may help cognitive scientists refine their hypotheses regarding the
mechanisms of spatial orientation in more complex organisms, including man.