* 8820908
* Ultra High Speed Integrated Circuits and Systems (ICAS)
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Walter Ku, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 01/31/1990
* USD 9,000.00

The area of Algorithm-Specific Integrated Circuits (ASIC) for ultra-high speed
communications and signal processing systems is currently the fastest growing
segment of the semiconductor industry in the world. The U.S. lead is eroding and
may have already been surpassed by foreign competition. Of the top five
manufactures of ASIC in the world, three are Japanese. This award is funding an
Industry/University Planning Meeting to study the feasibility and viability of
an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Ultra-High Speed
Integrated Circuits and Systems (ICAS) to be operated by the University of
California, San Diego together with San Diego State University. The universities
have drafted a prospectus for the Center's research and operations that will
provide a basis of study at the September 1988 meeting to be held in San Diego.
The co-principal investigators and their colleagues are recognized experts in
their fields and have the necessary industrial interaction to run this meeting.
The Program Manager recommends that the University of California, San Diego
(along with San Diego State University) be awarded a $9,000 grant for one year
for an Industry Planning Meeting for an I/UCR Center on Ultra-High Speed
Integrated Circuits and Systems. Future funding will be based on a new proposal.