* 8820705
* Experiments on the Internal Structure of Latexes Using SmallAngle Neutron Scattering
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Andrew Klein, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1992
* USD 274,139.00

The purpose of this research is to obtain basic information about the kinetics
of formation and how these kinetics affect the final structure of latex
particles. These materials are used as coatings and paints, also as impact
modifiers. The value of this work to modern industry is that with an improved
understanding of the structure and behavior of latex particles, better materials
can be produced. Questions relating to film formation kinetics, strength of
materials, and special purpose applications including medicine and biotechnology
depend on a detailed knowledge of the structure and behavior of the latexes.
Structured latexes are submicron sized particles, with some unique internal
morphology, suspended in a fluid medium, most often water. When the dimensions
of the chains are about half those of the latex diameter, some type of
segregation is present, with the first polymerized material appearing near the
center of the particle. Technologically, the most significant structured latex
is the core-shell type with a rubbery core and a glassy shell. This type
generically represents high-impact polymers, and more specifically ABS
(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) plastics and acrylic impact modifiers. The PIs
plan to look at both homopolymer and copolymer latexes using small-angle neutron
scattering (SAS) to follow the course of the polymerization. To elucidate
homopolymer structure, polystyrene will be used. They plan to test the
hypothesis that polystyrene of molecular dimension about half of the latex
particle size segregates into what appears to be a core and a shell, with the
first polymerized chains tending to be near the center of the particle. The
question of how much segregation exists before the second portion of the monomer
is polymerized, and how the extent of segregation changes during polymerization,
will be the subject of planned experiments. The model assumes that the internal
viscosity of the system is high, and/or vitrification is occurring, the final
system being below its glass transition temperature, and the polymer soluble in
the monomer. To look at copolymer systems, small-angle neutron scattering
measurements will be made before polymerization of the second component is
initiated, and several times during the polymerization. The results should
elucidate if segregation occurs or, if not the rate of desegregation decrease as
the internal viscosity of the system increases and/or if the glass transition of
monomer-plasticized particles is approached.