* 8820464
* US-France Cooperative Research:  Laboratory and Numerical   Modeling of Topographic Effects on Oceanic Currents Along   Sloping Surfaces
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Don Boyer, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1992
* USD 14,800.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Donald Boyer, Arizona
State University, and Dr. Gabriel Chabert d'Hieres, Institut de Mecanique de
Grenoble, France. This research seeks to investigate the nature of the flow of
homogeneous and two-layer rotating flows along model coastlines (or sloping
floors in the deep ocean), including the interaction of such flows with
topography. The modeling parameters for this system include the Rossby, Ekman
and Burger numbers, the slope of the shelf along the coastline and geometric
parameters characterizing the topography. Primary consideration will be given to
such cases in which the Burger number is small, so that the effects of
stratification can be neglected. The research will include laboratory
experiments and analytical and numerical quasigeostrophic models. The laboratory
investigations are to be conducted in the 13 meter diameter rotating tow tank of
the Institut de Mecanique, Grenoble, France. This facility permits experiments
with shelf slopes approximately one order of magnitude smaller than those on
more conventional turntables (i.e. one to two meters in diameter) and thus
allows one to more closely simulate this parameter for possible oceanic
applications. The initial laboratory experiments will concentrate on
understanding the background flow for the case of along-shore currents in which
no obstacle is present and for which the shoreline is either on the left or on
the right. The interaction of these background flows with topography will then
be addressed. Particular attention will be focused on the conditions for which
such phenomena as blocking, eddy shedding and trapped Rossby waves occur. The
results of this research will contribute to the understanding of basic features
of topographic effects on oceanic currents along sloping surfaces. The Grenoble
facility is unique and the experience gained in this project will be valuable
for the further development of a similiar facility in the U.S.