* 8820867
* Renovation of Vertebrate Fossil Collections of the          University of Nebraska State Museum
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1989,10/31/1992
* Robert Hunt, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James L. Edwards
* 10/31/1992
* USD 384,845.00

The vertebrate fossil collection of the University of Nebraska constitutes one
of the most important records of vertebrate evolution, especially of Cenozoic
mammals, in the Great Plains of North America. It is large (more than one
million specimens), historically important (143 holotypes), and is heavily used
by an active curatorial staff and numerous visiting scientists. Two serious
problems, however, prevent the research potential of this unique resource from
being fully realized. First, at least one-third of the collection is stored in
insecure, unlit, unheated temporary shelters 40 miles from the Museum's research
facility on the University campus. University officials, cognizant of the
problem, have made space available in a more modern building on campus and have
agreed to renovate 8500 sq. ft. of this facility for the reception of the
endangered collection, much of which is unprepared, research-quality Neogene
mammal material collected through federally-funded field programs in the 1930s.
This project provides funds for transporting this material to the new facility
and for its initial preparation and stabilization. The second need addressed by
the project is for upgrading the active research collection already housed in an
excellent modern facility on the University campus. Only about 1/3 of this
collection is currently stored in functional metal cabinets; the remainder is
arrayed, in various degrees of inaccessibility, in deteriorating wooden cabinets
or stacked in cardboard boxes. This project provides funds to reorganize and
markedly enhance the usefulness of this collection.