* 8820743
* Marriage Opportunities and Women's Roles in the U.S.
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Scott South, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 05/31/1992
* USD 58,607.00

This research focuses on some principal consequences of the "marriage squeeze",
the extent to which imbalances between the numbers of marriageable males and
females affect marriage and divorce rates, fertility, and female labor force
participation. The study addresses theoretically important questions as to the
relationships between demographic characteristics of the population and
opportunities of the individuals within it. Determining how women's marriage
opportunities lead to variations in marriage, marital and nonmarital fertility,
labor force participation and divorce is central to our understanding of these
social processes. The study also will address the question of how black-white
differences in marriage and other outcomes relate to marriage opportunities. The
project has three major objectives. The first is to determine how the marriage
squeeze for women varies by age, race, educational attainment and geographic
area. The second is to examine the effect of marriage opportunities on rates of
marriage, fertility, labor force participation and divorce. The third objective
is to investigate how racial differences in marriage opportunities contribute to
racial differences in marriage, fertility, illegitimacy, labor force
participation and divorce. Both 1980 Census data and data from the National
Center for Health Statistics will be drawn upon to address these question. The
findings of this research will help clarify major questions in the study of
women's lives. While social and economic theorists have argued that a causal
link exists between women's marital opportunities and the roles they occupy,
their theories have not been adequately tested. The deficit of marriageable men
has been hypothesized to produce low rates of marriage and fertility and higher
rates of illegitimacy, divorce and female labor force participation. Dr. Scott
analyzes these outcomes to test the assertion that the marriage squeeze is a
powerful force shaping the lives of American women. This analysis of marriage
opportunities may be especially important in gaining a broader understanding of
the links between demographic changes in the population and other societal
changes.