* 8820674
* Curing of Low Shrinkage Unsaturated Polyester resins in     Reactive Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,02/29/1992
* Ly James Lee, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/1992
* USD 155,123.00

Unsaturated polyester resins are widely used thermosets in polymeric composites
because they offer a good balance of properties, are relatively inexpensive, and
are amenable to most fabrication processes. With the aid of fillers,
reinforcements and additives, they are usually available in the form of
compounds for: (1) compression molding (sheet molding compound, SMC), (2)
injection molding (bulk molding compound, BMC), (3) resin transfer molding
(RTM), and (4) pultrusion. Their uses are in the automotive, housing, marine,
and electric/electronics industries (for example, SMC is widely used for auto
body exteriors). Unsaturated polyester resins are a mixture of saturated and
unsaturated dicarboxylic acids with glycols. Due to high polymerization
shrinkage during cure, structural and surface flaws results because as the
polyester crosslinks with styrene it shrinks away from the mold walls. Many
physical changes occur during polymerization including: (1) microgel formation
at a very early stage of polymerization due to the high extent of intramolecular
reaction; (2) macro-scale gelation where materials change from a viscous fluid
to a network gel with chemical crosslinking; and (3) glass transition (i.e.,
vitrification) where the reacting mixture changes from a rubbery material to a
glassy polymer at a later stage of polymerization. These changes occur during
the course of reaction and may affect the ongoing chemical reaction. Additional
problems with the process are due to the fact that the reaction has to approach
complete conversion because the residual reactants can not be removed and may be
defects in the molded product, and, in order to compete with thermoplastic
manufacturing, reaction rate has to be very high to reduce the cycle time (on
the order of seconds or minutes). The goal of this research are to increase
understanding of the reaction mechanisms and molecular structure of unsaturated
polyester resins, specifically (i) to understand the mechanism of microgel
formation and macro-crosslinking in the chain growth crosslinking
copolymerization of unsaturated polyester resins, (ii) to understand the effect
of processing conditions, molecular structure of resins, type and concentration
of initiator, and low profile additives on the reactions kinetics and
morphological changes of low shrinkage unsaturated polyester resins, (iii) to
propose a mechanistic curing model based on the true reaction mechanism of
unsaturated polyester resins (i.e., an inhomogeneous chain growth crosslinking
copolymerization), which can be used for the design of new materials and the
optimization of processing methods, and (iv) to establish the interrelationship
between the above mentioned results, cure time and surface finish of molded
parts. Information resulting from this research will be used for solving the
problems of poor surface quality of molded parts and too long a cycle time. This
is an Industry/University Cooperative Research (IUCR) effort. Scientists from
three companies will participate in the research program. The companies will
also contribute materials and the use of some of their facilities.