* 8820831
* Acquisition of a Mass Spectrometer for Analyzing Stable Isotopes in Ecosystem Nutrient Cycling Studies
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Robert Warner, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1991
* USD 75,000.00

The proposed purchase of a mass spectrometer for isotope ratio analyses is to
benefit and enhance a number of collaborative projects, especially those of the
rhizosphere research group of which the principal investigator are major
participants. The objectives of this research group are: (1) to understand the
fundamental relationships among plant roots, soil, and microorganisms
(rhizosphere systems), (2) to characterize and quantify nutrients cycling in
rhizosphere systems of natural and disturbed ecosystems (ecosystem rhizosphere),
and (3) to provide, through a multidisciplinary approach, information derived
from rhizosphere studies for use in improving the nutrient use efficiency of
plants and managing environmentally sensitive ecosystems in response to their
reactions to human influence. A considerable amount of research has already been
conducted or been initiated by our research group, and several more projects are
being considered. A significant portion of the methodology being developed is
centered around the use of a stable isotope of nitrogen (15N), a major nutrient
common to all rhizosphere systems. The 15N isotope can be traced throughout the
plant-soil system using the isotope-ratio mass spectrometer for analysis. The
ability to trace this element through the various transformation processes
affords us the opportunity to quantify the processes of rhizosphere systems with
emphasis on microorganisms-root interactions and nutrient transport and
transformations. Our cooperative projects address basic questions on the
functions of rhizosphere systems of which is a dire lack of knowledge. These
areas include the effect of introduced organisms in the rhizosphere on plant-
soil nutrient dynamics, nitrogen cycling in deforested areas, nitrogen use
efficiency in semi-arid areas, rhizosphere processes, and the fate of
genetically engineered organisms in the environment. These projects will
contribute significantly to our basic knowledge of rhizosphere functioning. The
acquisition of a modern isotope-ratio mass spectrometer will greatly enhance our
ability to carry out the planned research as well as to stimulate other research
interests.