* 8820993
* An Economic Framework of Total Functional Value for         Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Robertson Ward, Architectural Research Centers Consortium Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ashland O. Brown
* 06/30/1992
* USD 57,656.00

Potential improvements in facility performance, a multi-level performance
"cascade" from the functional and environmental performance, to the performance
of operating and physical systems, must be evaluated within a framework of
relative economic value and resource allocation reflecting long-term
cost/benefits. Some building systems directly affect functional performance and
Functional Use Costs. Functional Use Costs are primarily human costs and
constitute the largest component of total organizational cost. This proposed
research will develop a conceptual and representational tool, an economic
framework expressing the relative affect of performance improvements on the
Total Functional Value, focussing on the work environment. Two performance
classes for elements of building systems will be identified and developed in
relation to their potential affect on functional use costs; their relative
economic sensitivities to affect ultimate value will be quantified. A functional
use data base will be generated by two levels of surveys. Quantitative and
qualitative descriptors will be developed in graphic and computer
representations. An existing life cycle costing computer program will be
expanded to include functional use costs on ASTM standards. This research will
provide building professionals and other decision makers with a theoretical and
working model, demanding interdisciplinary consideration of comprehensive value
and identifying immediate applications, targets for effective development, and
priorities for future research.