* 8820916
* Dynamical Evolution of Globular Clusters and Galactic Nuclei
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Haldan Cohn, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 08/31/1992
* USD 163,900.00

Understanding the dynamical evolution of dense stellar systems, such as globular
clusters and galactic nuclei, is one of the most fundamental problems of
gravitational astrophysics. Substantial progress towards this goal has been made
in recent years as a result of both theoretical and observational advances.
Frequent star-star gravitational interactions cause a profound evolution of the
overall structure of these systems on astrophysically interesting time scales.
Powerful computer simulation methods have firmly established the inevitable
evolution of globular clusters of stars toward the collapse of the core of the
cluster. The advent of new observing instrumentation and the ability to achieve
high angular resolution from ground based observatories have both led to
significant advances in the observational study of globular clusters and
galactic nuclei. Drs. Cohn, Lugger, and Durisen, at the University of Indiana,
have undertaken a major research effort to extend our understanding of stellar
cluster evolution. Supercomputers have become an essential tool in this
investigation. Globular clusters provide an excellent laboratory for
observational tests of the stellar dynamical theory that underlies this group's
models of normal and active galactic nuclei. The wealth of observational data on
the structure of globular clusters and galactic nuclei that is being acquired by
this group and others provides a firm basis for the theoretical modeling.