* 8820423
* U.S.-Indonesia Cooperative Research:  Employment Decisions, Mobility, and Enterprise Development in Indonesian          Transmigration.
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1991
* Thomas Leinbach, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1991
* USD 74,227.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. Thomas R. Leinbach and John F.
Watkins, Department of Geography, University of Kentucky, to pursue with Dr.
Fachrurrozie Sjarkowi and Mr. M. Bakir Ali, Faculty of Agriculture, University
of Sriwijaya (UNSRI), Palembang, Indonesia, for a period of 24 months, a program
of cooperative research on employment decisions, mobility, and enterprise
development in Indonesian transmigration. The transmigration program, an
important element of Indonesian development planning, seeks to improve the
living standards and employment opportunities for previously landless
agriculturists by moving them from densely populated Java and Bali to relatively
underpopulated Sumatra. The central objective of this research will be to derive
empirically a series of models which generalize types of transmigration
household employment behavior with respect to off farm activities. These models
will be contrasted with and tested against a series of hypotheses which form a
theoretical model. Primary data for the research will be gathered from household
interviews and several case studies in a sample of ten transmigration villages
of South Sumatra province. Both sponsored and voluntary settlement households
will be studied. The Indonesian transmigration program is an attempt to
redistribute the population from densely populated areas to relatively
underpopulated ones. This program benefits the nation by relieving population
pressures, improving the economic well-being of the settlers, and providing
development planning of the underdeveloped out islands. The testing of the
generalized descriptive and predictive models will contribute to the
understanding of employment behavior in rural settings and the role of short
term mobility in these strategies. The collaborators are highly respected
scientists in the field of this research. The present project will allow them to
combine their talents and interests for mutual benefit. This project is relevant
to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers and
their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual benefit.