* 8820690
* Receptor Proteins in Vertebrate Olfaction
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Stephen Goldberg, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1992
* USD 108,000.00

The long term objective of Dr. Price's research is to understand the mechanism
(or mechanisms) by which chemicals in the air stimulate olfactory receptor cells
in the nose, thus leading to odor perception. One mechanism suggested is that
the odorous chemicals (odorants) bind to specific receptor proteins on the
surface of the cells, which causes the cells to generate nerve impulses. This
research project will test the hypothesis that certain proteins isolated from
the tissue containing olfactory receptor cells are, in fact, receptor proteins
and a determination of the protein characteristics will be made. Isolating the
proteins by affinity chromatography takes advantage of the fact that they bind
certain odorants. Odorant analogues are linked to solid supports and made into
columns through which tissue extracts are passed. Proteins that bind odorants
often bind the analogues as well. The analogues are linked to the solid support,
thus these proteins are separated from the thousands of other chemicals in the
extracts. The proteins are recovered by washing the solid support-analogue-
protein complex with concentrated solutions of the analogue. Binding an odorant
does not prove that a protein is a receptor. This problem is approached by
preparing antibodies that interact with different parts of the protein (so-
called monoclonal antibodies). The antibodies are applied to olfactory receptor
tissue and responses to odorants are measured. If the protein is a receptor,
some of the antibodies should prevent it from binding the odorant and,
therefore, inhibit responses. Two proteins have been isolated from olfactory
tissue and subjected to this test. The results suggest that they are receptors.
Receptor proteins are hypothesized to comprise a family of similar proteins.
Some antibodies against each of the two proteins mentioned inhibit responses to
several unrelated odorants. This finding is consistent with the stated
hypothesis; the antibodies probably interact with part of the protein that is
common to all receptor proteins. The two proteins are indistinguishable by
electrophoresis, which estimates protein size on the basis of the rate at which
it moves in an electric field. This, too, is consistent with the hypothesis that
receptor proteins comprise a structural class. These studies are intended to
elaborate upon the investigations described above by seeking and comparing
additional proteins. Samples will be provided to other investigators for use in
their experiments on olfactory mechanisms.