* 8820473
* Workshop on Geometric Modeling for Computer-Aided Product   Realization; Rensselaerville, New York;                     September 18-22, 1988
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1988,11/30/1989
* Joshua Turner, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 11/30/1989
* USD 38,474.00

This proposal requests funding for a workshop to identify, record and
disseminate promising research directions in geometric modeling as applied in
the broad area of computer- aided design (CAD) for the design and manufacture of
products. Geometric modeling is central to engineering design and manufacturing.
In recent years, geometric modeling needs have changed dramatically. The
geometric aspects of CAD systems have evolved from line geometry to solid models
which allow automated three dimensional color shaded graphics and automated
analysis. This progress has improved the detailed design portion of the design-
manufacturing process, but has done little for preliminary and conceptual design
process. For example, the present state of solid modeling research has not
resolved the question of geometric representations about which the designer can
reason. Geometric (form) features and design features in general show promise in
making inroads into this "reasoning" question. Much work needs to be done to
formulate the issues and focus on the most promising geometric representations
for computer representation. Successful resolution of these research questions
will contribute to the framework for technological progress in the promising new
areas of conceptual design, design for life cycle requirements, and concurrent
product and process design. Research progress in this area will contribute to
changing the way design will be done in the future. The role of this workshop is
to focus attention on the essential research directions in geometric design
which will enable the realization of such new design processes.