* 8820600
* Molecular Characterization and Function of Motilin Gene and Peptides in Guinea Pig Gut
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Gajanan Nilaver, Oregon Health & Science University
* Standard Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1992
* USD 84,723.00

Motilin is a gastrointestinal hormone which may regulate intestinal motility.
The precise molecular nature and tissue distribution of motilin, and mechanisms
of motilin induced gut contractions are controversial due to use of antisera
against porcine motilin and synthetic porcine motilin for studies in non-
porcine species. Paucity of anatomical and physiological information on enteric
nerves in the species studied is also a compounding problem. This study focuses
on the synthesis, localization and function of the prepromotilin derived
peptides, motilin and motilin associated peptide (MAP). Motilin cDNA from guinea
pig gut will be used to detect prepromotilin mRNA by Northern analysis and in
situ hybridization. Nucleotide sequence determination will permit synthesis of
guinea pig motilin and MAP for use in studies on single enteric neurons in vitro
and intestinal motility studies in vivo, as well for antisera generation to
study motilin/MAP processing by RIA, HPLC and immunohistochemistry. Conducting
these studies in guinea pigs, a species with a well characterized enteric
nervous system, will make it possible to assign motilin/MAP actions to specific
neuronal sub-populations with defined interactions and effector targets.
Studying the biology of motilin/MAP from the level of gene expression to
physiological action(s) in the intact animal should define their role in
gastrointestinal function.