* 8821203
* Scientific Explanation and Theories of Discovery
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Clark Glymour, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1990
* USD 49,295.00

Professor Glymour is examining the issue of scientific explanation. In his
approach, the notion of explanation has structural properties that are invariant
across contexts. He argues that this approach is preferable first because one of
the traditional aims of explanation has been to provide part of a strategy of
discovery; that is, we should conjecture those hypotheses or theories that
provide the best explanation of whatever the relevant phenomena may be.
Characterizations that provide structural criteria for comparing the goodness of
explanations offer the prospect of a canon that can be applied to aid in
discovery (or to afford justification for discoveries already claimed) in areas
of inquiry that differ in their substance. If such procedures can be had they
are much to be desired. Second, he argues that philosophical progress is better
made by advancing structural philosophical theories and investigating their
limitations than by excluding them from consideration. Third, he has under
previous NSF grants implemented structural criteria for goodness of explanation
in computer programs that aid in the search for causal explanations in a variety
of different substantive domains. Where it has been possible to test these
programs they have turned out to be astonishingly reliable. He thus assumes that
it is a reasonable conjecture that certain sorts of structural criteria,
properly employed, are reliable guides to discovery, not in every context
certainly, but in contexts that share certain general properties. What is not
known is why that should be. Why should inference to the best explanation, or at
least certain forms of it used in certain places, be a reliable guide to truth?
In this grant, Professor Glymour will try to make more explicit a particular
explanation of scientific explanation and to investigate why, if at all, it
should form part of a reliable procedure for scientific inquiry. The enterprise
is partly one of trying to make precise the intuitions that seem to be revealed
by a number of examples, in part the enterprise is normative, and concerned with
why preference for better explanations is a rational policy if one seeks the
truth. An entirely clear, general account of the conception of explanation has
yet to be given and the methodological literature contains little or no
discussion of why inferences made with it should be reliable. It is this "clear,
general account" which is the aim of this project.