* 8821038
* Geomorphic Evidence for Crustal Uplift Adjacent to a        Subducting Aseismic Ridge, Pacific Coast of Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Thomas Gardner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 01/31/1991
* USD 10,440.00

This award will provide partial support to Prof. Thomas Gardner of The
Pennsylvania State University for a sabbatical stay in Costa Rica to calculate
uplift rates determined from fluvial terrace sequences along the northwestern
portion of Costa Rica and to relate that data to the plate tectonic model for
subduction of the adjacent aseismic Cocos Ridge. The research should provide
critical data on crustal uplift rates resulting from "normal" subduction in
northwestern Costa Rica during the time of subduction of the Cocos Ridge in
southeastern Costa Rica. The proposed site provides the ideal location for
determining the needed tectonic data because the Quatenary plate tectonic
history of the region is well known. The subduction of buoyant, ocean
lithosphere in the form of oceanic plateaus, aseismic ridges, or very young
lithosphere may be responsible for anomalous tectonic activity along convergent
plate boundaries. While the latter activity may be broadly understood, its
specific causes and quantifications remain largely unaddressed. The Pacific
coast of Costa Rica represents an unsurpassed site for a study of one specific
case among these phenomena: the vertical motions of the crust in proximity to a
subducting oceanic lithosphere that contains an aseismic ridge. This study,
which is part of a larger study supported by the NSF, will involve scientists
from the Instituto Geografico Nacional, the Universidad de Costa Rica, and the
Instituto Costarricense de Electricidad. In particular, Prof. Ana Chinchilla of
the Universidad de Costa Rica will formally participate in the field work. By
closely involving scientists from Costa Rica in the research, this award serves
to advance the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program.