* 8821793
* Systematic Procedure for the Synthesis and Retrofitting of Processes Containing Solids Operations
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* James Douglas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 10/31/1992
* USD 248,895.00

Solids processing operations are commonly encountered in flowsheets for
petrochemical, polymer, inorganic and biochemical processes. Specialty polymers
and biochemical processes are high growth areas where new plants design are
being developed and efficient methodology to screen the numerous design
alternatives is needed. Petrochemical and inorganic processes are more mature
but could be more competitive if retrofitted to reduce raw materials and energy
cost. The purpose of this work is to develop systematic procedures that can be
used for the conceptual design of plants that include solids processing.
Processing is commonly done in stages, where more detail and more accuracy are
added to the design at each level in a hierarchial manner. The goal of the first
step is to determine if any flowsheet is profitable, an if so, to find the best
three of four flowsheets. Conceptual design is the rapid screening of process
alternatives (using shot cut design models) to identify the best process to
develop. The PIs plan to divide the work into three components: 1. The
development of a 'system' approach to the synthesis of solids processes, i.e.,
equipment selection guidelines,an understanding of alternative flowsheet
structures, the identification of the dominant design variables, and the
sensitivity of the total processing costs to model parameters and the functional
form of models. 2. The development of new models for solid processing units so
that there is a consistent description of the process behavior, for example, the
existing models for crystallizes contain descriptions of the particle size
distribution, but the models for centrifuges, filters and dryers do not. 3. The
development of a new testing stragtegy for solids processes, so that the minimum
information about the characteristics of the solid (obtained by a chemist) can
be used to develop a first design. The procedure will help the user to select
the process equipment, to select the interconnections between the units, to
identify the dominant design variables, to estimate the optimum design
conditions for the process alternatives selected, to list other alternatives
that should be considered, and to identify the best alternative. An interactive
computer code based on this procedure will be the final product of the project.