* 8821575
* Race and Political Belief
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Paul Sniderman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 10/31/1991
* USD 249,961.00

All the lines of contemporary research on American attitudes toward the issue
of race converge in raising fundamental questions about the commitment of white
Americans to the value of racial equality. In particular, skepticism about white
racial attitudes raises two questions. First, how pliable is the commitment of
Americans to the value of racial equality? Do Americans who support the value of
racial equality at the level of principle stand behind it in practice? The
second, concerns the issue of discrimination. To what extent do Americans remain
likely not only to hold negative attitudes toward blacks, but also to treat them
differently and worse than whites? These two questions were out of reach until
just recently, since there was no way to study either directly in a conventional
public opinion survey. A principle contribution of this research investigation
is to develop and apply specific new methods for the direct assessment of racial
discrimination and policy commitment. To assess discrimination the researchers
ask all respondents about whether people are entitled to various forms of
government assistance, with one half the time the person in need of assistance
being black, the other half not black. The objective is to determine if there is
more support for helping people who are not black than for helping people who
are. It may be considered proof of discrimination if there is, since the
question versions are identical except for one identifying the person in need of
assistance as black and the other identifying him or her as not black, and since
respondents, by virtue of being randomly assigned to question versions, are
themsleves identical in all relevant respects, chance variations aside. To
assess commitment to the value of racial equality, respondents are first asked
their opinion about a racial policy proposal and once they have taken a
position, they are presented with a counter argument. The test of commitment is
the willingness to maintain a position even after hearing an argument for the
other side. In addition to measuring discrimination and policy commitment, the
investigators also measure an array of attitudinal and demographic variables,
using standard measures to enhance the comparability of the data set. The aim is
to be able to determine not only if there is racial discrimination, but what
social conditions and social ideas are most effective in preventing it.