* 8821712
* Harappan Exploitation Practices:  A Comparative Regional    Study
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Richard Meadow, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1993
* USD 124,652.00

The Harappan civilization, which dates from approximately 2500 to 2000 B.C., is
centered on the riverine region of the Indus Valley and thus, encompasses
portions of northwestern India and adjacent Pakistan. Harappan sites include
large urban centers and this culture marks the appearance of true civilization
in India. While the emergence of civilization has been widely studied in the
Middle East and Egypt, relatively little is known about this Eastern
counterpart. In this research, Dr. Richard Meadow will analyze faunal materials
collected from the excavation of eight Harappan sites. These remains of both
hunted and domesticated animals will be identified to the species level. Through
dental analysis Dr. Meadow will also determine ages of death. Examination of
bone breakage and fragment distribution will allow him to determine culling,
butchering, and distribution patterns. With these data he will address a number
of major questions. What was the nature of faunal exploitation practices at
sites in the Greater Indus Valley leading up to and during the period of the
Harappan phenomenon? Was animal exploitation in the immediate pre-Harappan
period different from that in the Harappan and did it change in the course of
the Harappan period? Were new domestic animals introduced into the region? Did
animal exploitation practices differ significantly between contemporary sites?
If they did, are the differences correlated with site size, structure, and
function? Are there patterned differences in the nature of faunal remains
recovered from different sectors of sites? If so, can they be interpreted as
relating to differential access to animal resources by different segments of the
population? This research is important because a study of the faunal procurement
and distribution system provides a direct and important insight into how this
early civilization functioned. Through this research Dr. Meadow will learn about
the forces which gave rise to this early urban phenomena, which sustained it and
then led to its decline. The results should be generalizable to other such
societies in many parts of the world.