* 8821368
* Seminar: "Application of Biotechnology in the Study of      Animal Parasites and Their Vectors," Jakarta, Indonesia,    June 26 to July 5, 1989
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1990
* John Bruce, University of Massachusetts Lowell Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 04/30/1990
* USD 35,096.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. John I. Bruce, Center for Tropical
Diseases, University of Lowell, to conduct with Dr. Bintare Rukmono, Department
of Parasitology, University of Indonesia, a U.S.-Indonesia seminar on the
application of biotechnology in the study of animal parasites and their vectors.
The joint seminar, involving eight U.S. participants, will be held for ten days,
June 26 to July 5, 1989, in Jakarta, Yogyakarta, and Denpasar, Indonesia. The
purpose of this seminar is to bring together for mutual benefit U.S. and
Indonesian parasitologists to exchange ideas on the study of animal parasites
and their vectors and to apply new and developing technologies to obtain a
better understanding of the parasites, their vectors, their biology, and life
cycles. In addition to reviewing and updating animal parasitosis in Indonesia
and other countries in the immediate geographical region, projections will be
made on the application of new tools in biotechnology to the study of these
parasites. The containment of animal parasites is important to development in
many tropical countries. The seminar will provide to U.S. scientists information
on Indonesian research on zoonotic parasites that are not well known to
Americans. There will be reviews on biotechnology and the use of biotechnology
in the study of nematodes, cestodes, trematodes, protozoa, arthropods, and
mollusks. For example, there will be a review of nematodes followed by papers on
the development of monoclonal antibodies to detect nematode antigens, the
biochemistry of nematodes, the use of isoenzymes and probes to detect nematode
antigens, genetic differences, etc. It is intended that the seminar will be
instrumental in fostering future collaborative research and training efforts
that will be beneficial to U.S. and Indonesian parasitologists. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing Countries Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. scientists and engineers
and their counterparts in developing countries through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual benefit.