* 8821685
* Credibility in Stabilization Programs
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Rudiger Dornbusch, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1992
* USD 82,020.00

This project focuses on the credibility of stabilization programs. Its main
objective is to develop and test a positive theory of stabilization. Governments
face uncertainty about the effectiveness of the measures they initiate in a
stabilization program and about variables whose realization, subsequent to
stabilization, will affect the viability of their program. They choose a program
that selects the preferred tradeoff between the costs of program failure and the
costs of adjustment that make a collapse less likely. A model along these lines
establishes an ex ante optimal probability of program success as a function of
structural characteristics of the stabilizing country. Specifically, a program
is more likely to succeed the higher the reserve levels and the responsiveness
of the economy to adjustment measures. A program is less likely to succeed the
higher the marginal (political) cost of adjustment, the more prevalent the
capital flight, and the higher the variance of foreign exchange flows. The plan
is to test a model along these lines by studying a wide range of stabilization
programs. In addition, three related questions will be addressed: (1) the
liquidity premium required to induce a return of capital flightin the aftermath
of a stabilization will be modelled (2) a model of the phenomenon of high
realized real interest rates in the post- stabilization phase will be developed
(3) a model will be built and tested of the large decline of long-term interest
rates in high- debt European economies, specifically, Ireland. The principal
substantive point to be made about credibility is that governments cannot create
facts (policies) that are set once and forever, immutably. Any program can be
undone (with more or less difficulty) by the next government. Moreover, even a
well- designed program may not be sturdy enough to withstand shocks such as a
major, unexpected terms of trade deterioration. Thus credibility is a relative
term and there is a need for a theory to capture how the public forms a judgment
about it and how that judgment possibly interacts with the credibility. In turn,
the development of a successful model of credibility, will depend on an
understanding of the underlying reasons for the failure of stabilization
programs.