* 8821834
* RAMHSS:  Facilities Support for the Mammal Collection,      Field Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Julian Kerbis, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1992
* USD 280,991.00

Field Museum of Natural History in Chicago maintains one of the world's premier
mammal collections. Since 1893, the Museum has assembled mammal specimens from
nearly every country on earth, representing virtually all of the extant families
and most genera. In terms of size and coverage, the mammal collection of Field
Museum ranks third nationally and fourth in the world. This immense resource is
used in a wide variety of scientific contexts. Preserved materials are used
mainly in studies of mammalian evolution, but are also intensively used in
studies of anatomy, archeology, paleontology, physical anthropology, veterinary
medicine, ecology, biogeography, and wildlife management. The huge geographic
and taxonomic range of the collections attracts use by scientists the world
over. In order to aid the collection in providing services to the community of
scientists, this project awards funds to (1) verify and expand an existing
computerized catalogue database. Once verified, the database will permit faster,
more accurate, and more comprehensive information retrieval for the collection's
many users; (2) tan large skins and house already-cleaned skeletal material of
African mammals collected in 1928-29. Collected for exhibits by the Milwaukee
Public Museum and containing numerous endangered species that are poorly
represented in collections, the materials remained uncleaned and untanned for 55
years, until they were adopted by Field Museum. The NSF support will make this
collection fully available to the scientific community.