* 8821204
* Privately Provided Public Goods:  A Theoretical, Econometricand Experimental Study of Cooperation
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* James Andreoni, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 86,251.00

The purpose of this research is to study giving for the support of privately
provided public goods, like the support of charities. The project will entail
the development of appropriate theoretical models, econometric analysis, and
laboratory experiments. This research is motivated by recent studies showing
that the classical free rider hypothesis is insufficient for describing observed
behavior. The theoretical work examines a general model that includes both
private and public goods motives for giving. It stresses that a general
equilibrium approach to policy is necessary. The econometric research follows
from the theoretical work by proposing a spatial autoregressive study of
charitable giving. This technique will account for the interdependence of
preferences, and will permit tests of the theoretical hypotheses. The laboratory
experiments are designed to test alternative hypotheses about when and why free
riding occurs. %%% Over the past ten years there has been a growing body of
theoretical, econometric, and experimental work on privately provided public
goods. The standard view of public goods is that if left to individuals to
supply, a less than desirable amount will be privately provided, and thus
government must supply these goods to attain a social optimum. However,
researchers have been surprised that there is a considerable amount of
cooperation among individuals in supplying certain types of public goods, as in
the case of charitable giving. This project involves a three pronged approach
involving the development of better theory, statistical analysis of giving
behavior, and laboratory experiments studying cooperative behavior. The
underlying theme of these three different approaches is that the traditional
theory of public goods does not adequately explain observed behavior of private
giving. This research is important because it will help explain known facts
about charitable giving and, hence, provide a better framework for policy
analysis. The project will also develop new methods for measuring the effects of
taxes and subsidies on giving behavior.