* 8821008
* Experimental Elementary Particle Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Giancarlo Moneti, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* David Berley
* 08/31/1992
* USD 1,251,600.00

The Syracuse University, SU, group has played a major role in all aspects of
the study of e+e- collisions at the Cornell Electron Storage Ring, CESR. This
collaborative work began more than a decade ago and is expected to continue in
the future. The new CESR/CLEO II detector, combined with the ultra high
luminosity of CESR, and excellent scientific collaboration constitutes the best
research center in the world for studying the heaviest quark presently known,
the b quark. Understanding the physics of the b quark is one of the most
important research objectives in particle physics today. The research advantage
at CESR/CLEO II is expected to exist for several more years. In the next few
years, the CESR luminosity is expected to become a factor of 20 higher than the
DORIS machine at DESY in West Germany. (DORIS is the only other facility in the
world presently capable of doing b physics.) The field of research is that of
experimental elementary particle physics. This research studies the basic
building blocks of matter (e.g., electrons, positrons, quarks and weak bosons)
at very high energies. The experiments use accelerators (colliders) which
provide the highest energy particles made in the laboratory. The data is
collected and analyzed using highly complex and sophisticated apparatus and
techniques.