* 8821355
* New and Net Production and Total Dissolved Inorganic        Carbon Changes in Surface Ocean Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Christopher Langdon, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1991
* USD 265,622.00

An implicit assumption in recent marine production research is that new
production can be quantitatively converted to net community production.
Applications of the new-regenerated model and net-gross model are applied to
critical questions such as how and to what extent ocean biology affects material
flux from surface waters. This research is currently limited by a non-
quantitative understanding of how the models relate to material flux or even how
the models relate to each other. This research is a field investigation of the
relationship between net and gross production (using both oxygen and Total
Dissolved Inorganic Carbon changes) and new and regenerated production (using
15N). Both mass balance and tracer rate measurements will be made on the same
time scale, using newly developed in situ samplers/incubators for simultaneous
measurements. The study focuses on testing the implicit assumptions of balanced
growth and balanced remineralization that relate surface nutrient cycles. The
assumptions will be tested by comparing the results of our unique incubations
with the theoretical relationships relating these cycles. This direct analysis
for short time scale nutrient dynamics associated with plankton community
metabolism will lead to improved field methods for measuring material throughput
in planktonic systems.