* 8821583
* An Empirical Analysis of Stock Price Dynamics with          Applications to the Stability and Efficiency of Asset       Markets
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Andrew Lo, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1992
* USD 185,922.00

The purpose of this research is to analyze the behavior of stock market prices
in three phases: (1) An extensive and exhaustive documentation of the
statistical properties of stock returns for all the commonly used data sets,
with particular attention to how the forecastability of returns differs across
sample periods, sampling frequencies, and data bases: (2) An analysis of the
statistical side-effects caused by the institutional features of the stock
market, such as transaction costs and the existence of bid and offer prices
instead of a single price; (3) An examination of the economic implications from
the finding of the first two phases. Novel aspects of this research include the
construction and analysis of a new database consisting of time-stamped
transaction prices for all securities traded on the Toronto Stock Exchange from
1979 to 1987 which included continuous bid-ask quotes; the specification and
estimation of statistical models that are capable of fitting stock returns data
over many periods; the derivation and empirical implementation of dynamic
portfolio strategies that optimally exploit the predictability in returns, so as
to gauge the economic importance of forecastable components in stock price
changes. This project is important because it will shed light on the possible
effects of transaction taxes or other types or forms of governmental regulation
on the behavior of the stock market.