* 8821263
* PRF/J:  Regulation of Phytophagus Insect Populations:       Density Perturbation Experiments on Microrhopala vittata,   an Herbivore of Solidago
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Naomi Cappuccino, Individual Award
* Fellowship Award
* Althea Ball
* 09/30/1991
* USD 58,800.00

It has long been debated whether populations of phytophagous insects are
regulated by density-dependent processes acting to return their densities to
equilibrium levels, or whether they are characterized instead by non-equilibrium
processes such as local extinction and recolonization. This question will be
addressed by performing density-perturbation experiments on Microrhopala
vittata, a leaf-mining beetle that feeds on goldenrod (Solidago spp.). Work will
commence with assessments of density, mortality and fecundity of this beetle in
several small (&lt;1000 stems) stands of goldenrod. Populations will then have
their density experimentally supplemented (to levels 10-20% below the minimum
observed), and the effect of these manipulations on predation, parasitism,
fecundity and dispersal will be quantified. All samples for mortality and
fecundity will be done non-destructively (no Microrhopala or enemies will be
killed) so that quantification of these processes will not affect population
density. A return of Microrhopala density to more moderate levels following
perturbations will support the equilibrium viewpoint. Alternatively,
supplemented populations may irrupt and reduced populations may become locally
extinct; this would constitute evidence for the non-equilibrium viewpoint.
Funding is being awarded for two years of postdoctoral fellowship research at
The University of Quebec in Montreal, Canada.