* 8821520
* Union Power, Partisan Control and Economic Performance      of OCED Countries, 1960-1985
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Adam Przeworski, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1991
* USD 50,302.00

A number of recent studies of economic performance among the OECD countries
report that those countries which have strong unions and social-democratic
governments and those countries which have weak unions and right-wing
governments both do better in terms of growth, investment and unemployment than
countries in which the political patterns are more mixed. What is not clear from
this research is why this would be the case: is it because governments with
different ideological orientations choose different policies in the presence of
strong and weak unions or is it because the same policies have different
consequences when unions are strong than when they are weak? This investigation
focuses on fiscal policies, in particular, on different kinds of tax policies.
Economic theory leads to the belief that investment can be financed by
maintaining a high level of after- tax profits or by using taxes on income from
capital that are neutral in their effect on investment. Given this alternative,
one would expect that governments with different ideological orientations would
use different tax policies. In particular, that social-democratic governments
would impose investment-neutral taxes on incomes from capital and develop
extensive welfare services. The effect of taxes, however, depends on the power
of unions. When unions are strong, they can adjust wage rates in response to
taxes and transfers, increasing their demands when incomes from employmnet are
taxed and decreasing their preferred private wage in response to transfers and
welfare services. Weak unions can rarely do the same. A database comprised of
political and economic data on OECD countries from 1960 to the present will be
gathered for this research. The investigator then analyzes these data to assess
which of the aspects of unions do in fact matter in influencing investment,
union wages, union vs. non-union wage differentials, as well as private and
public employment. The investigator will examine whether governments with
different orientations, facing unions with different strength, do in fact choose
different fiscal policies. The effects of these policies on investment, economic
growth, wages, transfers and welfare services, and income inequality will also
be evaluated. The contribution of this research will be twofold. First, the
project should illuminate the causes and consequences of government policies.
Studies of economic performance have thus tended to jump from political
conditions to economic outcomes, leaving the entire policy process in a black
box. The purpose of the research is to determine why governments choose
different policies and if the same policies have different consequences given
the power of unions. Secondly, the research should identify what it is about
unions that matters: from what do they derive the strength to act strategically
vis-a-vis employers and governments. More generally, this investigation should
contribute to a more realistic understanding of the economy as a system of
strategic interaction among governments, firms and unions, acting within an
institutional framework.