* 8821219
* Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1989,02/29/1996
* Bruce Wheeler, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Raymon Glantz
* 02/29/1996
* USD 601,290.00

In order to optimize interdisciplinary approaches that capitalize upon new
technical and theoretical developments, a Center for the Neurobiology of
Learning and Memory is being established at the Beckman Institute (currently
under construction) of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign . This
center will serve as 1) a Resource Center, providing advanced facilities for the
study of the learning and memory process, including optical imaging (for
histological studies), multi-electrode array recording (to allow functional
patterns of interactions among neurons to be examined), and rapid tissue
freezing (for assessment of sub-cellular dynamics); 2) a Research Center that
fosters communication and collaboration among scientists pursuing common and
related problems of memory and neural plasticity; 3) a Training Center which
prepares graduate and postdoctoral investigators for research careers in
learning and memory, and 4) a Recruiting Center that to attract outstanding
young people to scientific careers. This program of scientific development and
interaction is taking advantage of the unusual resources of the Beckman
Institute and the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign campus in
neurobiology, interdisciplinary collaboration and cooperation, and strengths of
the component disciplines of neural and behavioral sciences. Technical foci of
the Center include large array neurophysiological recording facilities, with
which the interactions among brain regions during learning are studied; rapid
freezing facilities for examining brain slices in vitro, (with which the nature
of plasticity at the level of the synapse is studied), and neuroanatomical
imaging and analysis facilities (where memory processes are studied at levels
ranging from the molecular to the morphological). Several types of learning are
being studied, including discriminative conditioning, acquisition of motor
skill, acquisition of acoustic discriminative ability, and the traditional
psychological animal learning tasks such as mazes. In addition, current "models"
of memory (such as long-term potentiation and kindling) are being examined. The
function of the Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory is to advance
our knowledge of brain substrates of learning and memory from the cellular and
molecular to the integrative brain system levels.