* 8821152
* Social Stimulation of Vocal Learning
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1990,11/30/1995
* Andrew King, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 11/30/1995
* USD 283,737.00

Major discoveries about how birds learn to sing have brought to light
remarkable parallels with how human beings learn to speak. Just as human beings
learn to speak the language that is spoken around them, many species of birds
learn to sing the song that is sung by their neighbors. Just as human speech
develops from infant babbling, bird song develops from simpler vocalizations of
young birds. Drs. West and King have discovered that this development of song by
male cowbirds is guided by visual signals from female cowbirds, just as signals
from other people guide the development of speech by the human child. This
important discovery of social shaping of vocal repertoires is the basis for the
current research project, which will explore linkages between female perception
and male vocal production in the development of avian communicative capacities.
The species chosen for study, the brown-headed cowbird, is especially
appropriate because it can be bred in captivity, affording the opportunity to
study the development of individuals with known communicative histories. This
research should lead to the delineation of new forms of non- imitative vocal
learning, the elucidation of how reward mechanisms function in a naturally-
occurring form of cultural transmission, and the investigation of how the visual
system operates at behavioral and neural levels to affect vocal development.