* 8821154
* Research in Econometric Theory
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Peter Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1992
* USD 115,832.00

This research addresses three important topics in applied econometrics, namely
analysis of panel data, stability of time series data, and derivation of
instrumental variables. Panel data, that is a set of data including both time
series and cross sectional observations have become widely used in studies of
consumer behavior, entrance into and exit from the labor market, and decision-
making within the family. Time series data play a very important role in many
analyses of the long term performance of an economy and the influence of
government policy. Instrumental variables often come into econometric research
when the variables required in a model are either not observable, or have
statistical properties which interfere with the model's applicability. The work
on estimation of models with panel data extends the existing literature on
linear models to nonlinear models. In particular the logit and probit models are
extended to include time varying and random parameters. Dynamic models with
lagged dependent variables are also derived and analyzed. The research on time
series analysis involves the derivation of tests for unit roots. The tests
include allowance for autocorrelation in the variables. The power and robustness
of the tests under varying assumptions concerning trend and stationarity are
assessed. The work on instrumental variable estimators provides a simple and
easily applicable method of improving the efficiency of estimators, and brings
under one general principle the treatments of diverse estimators such as 3-Stage
Least Squares and Full Information Maximum Likelihood. %%% This project bridges
an important gap between theoretical and applied econometrics. It focuses on
three important topics widely used in econometric research, namely analysis of
panel data, stability of time series, and the derivation of instrumental
variables. The term "panel data" refers to any data set of observations on a
given group of individuals, firms, or organizations taken over time. In this
respect a panel data set is comprised of both cross sectional data (on the
different individuals) and time series data (observations on the same group of
individuals taken at different times). Such data are widely used in economic
analysis of the labor market, consumer behavior, and economic growth. Time
series data are very prevalent in studies of the aggregate economy. This project
provides tests for the stability of a given set of time series data, and
examines the robustness and power of those tests under various assumptions about
the correlation among the observations and the tendency of the entire series to
change through time. Instrumental variables are often used in economic models in
place of more relevant variables in order to bring desired statistical
properties to the model. For instance, in many models the relevant variables are
not observed, but instruments derived from them can be observed. This project
provides efficient methods for deriving instrumental variables and applies them
to several estimation techniques.