* 8821396
* Mathematical Sciences: Toeplitz Operators, Quantum Mechanicsand Mean Oscillation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Lewis Coburn, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* William Y. Velez
* 05/31/1992
* USD 77,600.00

Professor Coburn will continue his study of the symbol calculus associated with
the Berezin - Toeplitz quantization. One specific setting is complex n-space
with Gaussian measure, and with moderate growth and oscillation conditions on
the singularities of the symbols. Coburn will seek to characterize bounded
Hankel operators in this setting in terms of mean oscillation of symbols. The
corresponding boundedness problem for the Hardy spaces of the ball and polydisc
will also be attacked. Coburn expects the techniques developed in working on
these problems to be useful in the study of derivations on various naturally
occurring algebras. The impetus for this general area of mathematical research
comes from quantum mechanics. In the classical, pre-quantum overview of the
world, the observables of a physical system are numbers, or, if one wants to
keep track of the dependency of these numbers on some other quantities,
functions. This is common sense, but at the microscopic level it doesn't quite
work. One needs to replace functions by operators, linear transformations of a
space that is usually infinite-dimensional. This replacement is what
mathematical physicists call quantization. The general idea is that the
operators behave almost like the functions from which they arise, except for
correction terms which turn out to contain important information. In this line
of endeavor, physical insight informs mathematics as often as the reverse.