* 8821998
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Studies of Thermoluminescence  and Catholuminescence
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Stephen W.S. McKeever, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 02/28/1991
* USD 12,200.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. S. W. McKeever,
Oklahoma State University and Dr. P. D. Townsend, University of Sussex, England.
Dr. McKeever will spend six months in Dr. Townsend's laboratory, working on
three distinct projects: 1) conductivity and cathodoluminescence of II-VI
semiconductors, 2) absorption and luminescence of doped lithium fluoride and 3)
the thermoluminescence (TL) of quartz. During this period, Dr. McKeever will
make extensive use of apparatus for the recording of 3D TL glow-curves and of
cathodoluminescence. The 3D TL facilities in particular are unique and not
available at Dr. McKeever's home institution. The materials which will be
studied are cadmium telluride, lithium fluoride and silicon dioxide. Each of
these materials has significant technological importance. In the CdTe work, the
investigators will examine edge emission during low temperature
cathodoluminescence in order to study bound exciton relaxation luminescence. The
purpose is to characterize the excitonic states in different samples and to use
this information in the study of the non-linear optical properties of the
material. The '3D' TL apparatus will be used for the lithium fluoride studies.
The lithium fluoride samples are variously doped with copper, magnesium, and
phosphorus impurities. The investigators will look for evidence of perturbations
in the emission due to impurity clustering effects within the lattice. These
properties are to be used in assessing the optimal impurity concentrations and
method of production of lithium fluoride: copper, magnesium, and titanium for
dosimetry applications. The silicon dioxide work will involve
cathodoluminescence and 3D TL measurements to examine the effects on the
luminescence properties of various thermal, radiation and electrolitic sweeping
treatments in order to more clearly understand the TL behavior of this material.
Dr. McKeever is internationally well known in the field of thermoluminescence
and its application in dosimetry and in dating of natural sediments.