* 8821925
* Dynamic Pricing Policies:  Duopoly Equilibrium and          Information Acquisition
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Kenneth Arrow, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1992
* USD 71,307.00

This project studies the microeconomic umderpinnings of the inflationary
process. It is widely accepted among economic theorists that inflation, that is
changes in the aggregate price level, is characterized by discrete jumps in
individual prices. This work analyzes the theoretical feasibility of aggregating
those discrete price changes into a smooth time path for an aggregate price
level. Fundamental to such a study is the interaction of the firms in setting
pricing policies. If firms follow identical real price cycles in setting prices,
then consistent aggregation is feasible. However, there are important reasons
why such uniformity in pricing policies among independent firms might not
converge to an economic equilibrium. Specifically the project employs a duopoly
model where demand depends on current real prices. Each firm faces a choice of a
price path or price strategy which maximizes the present value of profits over a
time horizon. The salient feature of the model is the discontinuous pattern of
nominal price adjustments. The project characterizes those conditions under
which the assumptions of a smoothly changing aggregate price level is consistent
with economic equilibruim. %%% Among the most difficult and important areas of
economic research is the characterization of price movements, production, and
pricing strategies of firms in oligopolistic markets. Such markets by definition
have only a few firms which account for all the industry's output, and are very
prevalent in both the U.S. and international economy. Automobile manufacturing
is an example of an oligopolistic market. In such markets prices are set based
on the interaction among the firms, the relative size of each firm's market
share, and the incentives faced by each firm to act independently of the others.
This type of interaction results in the prices set by individual firms being
changed in discrete intervals rather than moving smoothly through time. However,
many studies of the aggregate economy, particularly those examining inflation,
assume a continuous time path for prices. This project studies the conditions
under which the assumption of a smooth time path for aggregate prices is
consistent with the independent setting of prices by individual firms, and with
economic equilibrium. In doing so, the work adds a fundamental theoretical basis
to studies of both the aggregate economy and the behavior of individual firms.