* 8821104
* Encyclopedia of Bioethics Revision Project
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1989,09/30/1993
* Warren Reich, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 09/30/1993
* USD 67,089.00

Studies in Science, Technology and Society supports research and educational
projects that examine the social, political, intellectual and economic contexts
that influence the direction and use of science and technology. Ethics and
Values Studies supports projects that examine the social, professional and
individual values and mutual obligations and responsibilities that arise in
interactions of science, technology and society. This project provides partial
support for the scholarship needed to prepare a thorough and expanded revision
of the entire first edition of the Encyclopedia of Bioethics. Users of the
Encyclopedia include students and teachers in professional, graduate,
undergraduate and high schools; professionals; researchers; public policy makers
and the general public. This basic award-winning reference work was published by
Macmillan in 1978. Since that time, there have been enormous changes and
advances in the life sciences, including biotechnology and bioengineering,
requiring major revisions to the entries in the current work. In addition, the
revised edition will be more thoroughly and explicitly concerned with all
branches of science that deal with living organisms and life processes. It will
be more attentive to ethical issues in life sciences such as agriculture,
genetics (including bioengineering), behavioral and social sciences, ecological
sciences and biomedical technologies, as well as their implications for science
and engineering education. Foundational problems related to the cultural impact
of the life sciences and technology and the philosophy of science and
engineering that influence the ethical responses will be examined. This
expansion requires the development and integration of new sub-areas and topics
into the work. Most of the support for this project is provided by the
publisher; funds from this award will enable the additional scholarly effort
that is needed to proceed expeditiously. This project will contribute to the
development of a basic resource in bioethics, for use by scholars, students, and
publics. The principal investigator and his advisors are very well qualified;
prior results have been very meritorious and well received. Institutional and
other support is good and costs are reasonable. The project has high priority
for support.