* 8821957
* Enterprise Employment and Wage Outcomes:  Theory and        Comparative Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Jan Svejnar, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 88,356.00

The purpose of this project is to test the fundamental hypotheses underlying
much of labor economics. Virtually all government policies which are intended to
affect employment are based on the maintained hypothesis that the marginal value
product of labor is equilivalent to the wage rate. This is true of policies in
developed as well as developing countries. However, observation has shown that
many enterprises do not seem to operate according to this traditional model. In
many countries institutional entities affect the labor market in fundamental
ways. For instance, both wage-setting and hiring policies might be affected by
union contracts. If such is the case, then policies affecting hiring, union
negotiating, wage setting, and non-wage compensation could be misdirected, if
they are based on the traditional model. The analytical methodology is based on
a bargaining model in which a firm's objective function allows for the
participation of several parties in co-determining the wage/employment outcome.
It incorporates incentives and institutional constraints of both the labor
market (union contracts and other labor/management agreements) and the
government. The model can also be constrained to the traditional model, so the
hypothesis of equality between wages and marginal revenue product can be tested.
This model will be applied to extensive labor market data sets from the United
States, China, Yugoslavia, Tunisia, and Senegal. %%% The movement of the labor
market (that is to say employment, unemployment, wages, and non-wage
compensation), in response to economic conditions, government policy,
institutional structure, and managerial incentives is one of the most
fundamental components of economic analysis. In virtually all analysis of the
labor market a hypothesis is maintained that, in the absence of any outside
intervention, firms hire workers such that the market value of the product
produced by the workers is exactly equal to the compensation paid to them. In
many realistic applications, however, that central assumption will not be
correct. In particular, for industries or economies where a great deal of
institutional structure, such as powerful unions, or government intervention as
in the centrally planned economies, hiring and wage-setting procedures are
determined outside the market itself. The labor market equilibrating mechanism
plays a smaller role. Analyses assuming a freely equilibrating labor market, can
yield incorrect results when applied to highly structured markets. This project
examines the effects on economic analysis of maintaining the marginal value/wage
equality when studying highly structured economies. A new model is developed to
incorporate institutional considerations, governmental intervention, and
managerial structure. This model is tested using labor market data from both
developed and developing countries including the United States, The People's
Republic of China, Tunisia, Yugoslavia, and Senegal. The dynamics of the labor
markets in these countries cover a wide spectrum, varying from a relatively free
market in the United States to a highly centralized, planned economy in the
People's Republic of China.