* 8821690
* New State Roles:  Environment, Resources and the Economy
* SBE,SBE
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1990
* Jurgen Schmandt, Houston Advanced Research Center
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1990
* USD 20,000.00

A major objective of the Directorate for Scientific, Technological, and
International Affairs is to encourage the pace and direction of technological
innovation and economic productivity through activities and initiatives that
stimulate interactions between Federal, State, and local government, academia
and industry. This conference provides a broad forum for the exchange of
experience and information within this alliance. The conference interactions
will be useful to all participating sectors and of special utility to Federal
decision makers responsible for science and technology policy. The Houston Area
Research Center is presenting the 1988 Woodlands Conference, New State Roles:
Environment, Resources and the Economy, on November 13-16, 1988. STIA will
support two of the working groups for the conference. The working group on
regional economic development will assess state programs and policies designed
to stimulate regional economic growth. The group will discuss existing and
developing state economic development programs, assess the impact of those
programs, and identify program components or development strategies that appear
to be most effective. These strategies include relationships between state and
federal governments, between state governments and universities, and between
state governments, universities and the private sector (business and industry).
The working group on strategies will examine ways to improve policy decisions at
the state level. This working group will take a general look at new state roles
and examine crosscutting issues of the efficiency, effectiveness and equity of
state initiatives.//