* 8821055
* Dissertation Research:  Upper Paleolithic Subsistence       Organization
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Lewis Binford, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 05/31/1991
* USD 6,060.00

For his doctoral dissertation research, Mr. James Enloe will analyze faunal
materials recovered from the archaeological sites of Pincevent and Verberie,
both located in the Paris basin of northern France. Both sites are attributable
to the Upper Paleolithic Magdalenian culture and date to approximately 12,000
years ago. Through meticulous excavation living floors have been exposed at each
to reveal well preserved hearths and associated lithic and faunal remains.
Reindeer, Rangifer tarandus, make up more than 95 percent of the bones
identified at each site. Mr. Enloe will inspect the bones for a wide range of
attributes, including age and sex indications, breakage, cutmarks and a number
of osteological measurements. These latter will serve as a first step in the
refitting of individual carcasses. With these data, it will then be possible to
determine whether the individual hearths were used contemporaneously (presumably
by different families) and to reconstruct meat sharing patterns between them. It
will also be possible to reconstruct hunting and butchering patterns. The study
of recent and extant hunting and gathering societies has demonstrated that
traditional groups employ a number of strategies to buffer against short term
spatial and temporal variation in resource availability. These include sharing
between social units and development of storage facilities. Although
archaeologists have argued about the antiquity of these strategies and how they
developed over time, no consensus exists. Mr. Enloe's analysis of the data from
Pincevent and Verberie should contribute to a resolution. In a preliminary study
Mr. Enloe has developed a refitting technique which allows bones from the same
animal to be thus identified. It will be further refined in this current
project. Because this technique can potentially be employed in a wide range of
situations it will be used by a number of archaeologists. Thus the significance
of Mr. Enloe's research extends beyond a single case study.