* 8821977
* Integrated Seawater Sampler and Data Acquisition System for the Ocean Sciences (Phase II)
* GEO,OCE
* 09/30/1988,05/31/1993
* Henri Berteaux, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Contract
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 05/31/1993
* USD 2,154,739.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution in conjunction with Battelle Ocean
Sciences will design, construct, test, and evaluate a new integrated, in-situ,
sea water sampler and data collecting system. Design criteria calls for the
ability to collect at least 36 discrete water samples, of up to 10 liters each,
from ocean depths down to 6,000 meters in significantly less time than now
required. Water sample integrity will be maintained without chemical
contamination from component parts during all phases of operation from
collection through transfer to storage containers or to shipboard analytical
instruments. Provision will also be made for the integration of certain
commercially available instruments. Sample containers will positively seal to
prevent contamination from outside or loss of gases from the sample prior to
transfer. A deck unit will control the sample collection mechanism of the
underwater unit. A handling system will be supplied that will allow the
deployment and recovery of the underwater unit, including attachments. Secure
stowage of the underwater unit on deck between deployments will be integral to
the handling system. The handling and stowage system shall be designed as an
integral part of the sampling system and shall be transportable for use on a
variety of oceanographic vessels. The extensive hydrographic survey plans and
scientific goals of upcoming projects necessitate development of a new sampler
with improved capabilities. Improvements over present samplers will be realized
in terms of the efficiency and reliability of sample and data collection.