* 8821820
* Enzymes Involved in the Regulation of Nitrogen Metabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1994
* Paul Ludden, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Uffen
* 06/30/1994
* USD 434,385.00

This project supports research on the regulation of nitrogen metabolism by ADP-
ribosylation of nitrogenase and other proteins in the photosynthetic bacterium
Rhodospirillum rubrum. The system is unique in that the first two enzymes of the
nitrogen assimilatory pathway are regulated by separate covalent modification
cycles: dinitrogenase reductase is reversibly ADP-ribosylated and glutamine
synthetase is reversibly adenylylated. Recently, it was discovered that R.
rubrum glutamine synthetase can also be ADP-ribosylated in vitro and this
suggests a mechanism by which the two cascades can be coordinated in vivo. In
addition to the dinitrogenase reductase component of the nitrogenase complex,
the R. rubrum ADP-ribosyl transferase will ADP-ribosylate dinitrogenase
reductases from other organisms. Biochemical studies have shown that these
alternate targets have distinctly different requirements for modification. The
genes for these alternate targets will be transfered to R. rubrum so that a
biochemical analysis of their properties as targets in vivo can be made. Results
from these studies will delimit the requirements for ADP- ribosylation of
dinitrogenase reductase in vivo.%%% Organisms must adapt their metabolism to
respond to their environment. Microorganisms, in particular, are subject to
rapid and divergent changes in their environment. Rhodospirillum rubrum is
remarkable in its ability grow under drastically different conditions
photosynthetically, fermentatively and by respiration. It is capable of using
both very simple carbon sources, such as carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide, and
a variety of complex carbon sources. It is capable of assimilating nitrogen in
the form of ammonia nitrogen and also possesses the ability to control
metabolism by reversible covalent modification of certain enzymes. Dinitrogenase
reductase of the nitrogenase enzyme system is reversibly modified by adenosine
diphosphoribose, glutamine synthetase is regulated by adenylylation and perhaps
by ADP- ribosylation, and it is likely that other metabolic pathways are
regulated by these mechanisms. Thus, the study of nitrogen assimilation in R.
rubrum offers the opportunity to study the interaction of separate regulatory
cascades which must respond to some of the same stimuli. This research will
provide for an understanding of the relationship of these cascades to each other
and their integration into metabolism in the cell.***//