* 8821598
* The Impact of Reform Litigation on Social Change
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Michael McCann, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1991
* USD 69,842.00

Social scientists in recent decades have devoted considerable attention to
analyzing the role of law, lawyers, and litigation in movements for social
reform. Some work has provided a generally optimistic view about the
accessibility of courts to minority interests and disadvantaged groups within
society. Other scholarship has presented a more pessimistic perspective
regarding the utility of litigation for advancing progressive social change.
Those with this view note the many instances of unsuccessful reform litigation.
They maintain that optimistic assessments of judicial action on behalf of long
disadvantaged groups often reflect a naive faith in what is called the "myth of
rights"..that is, the myth that all victims are assured their day in court and
that judicially affirmed rights are self implementing instruments of social
change removed from the constraints of politics and power. This study seeks to
move beyond this debate about the role of law in social change by systematically
examining the role of law, lawyers, and litigation in recent political struggles
over the implementation of comparable worth wage policies. The core of the
project consists of six case studies of pay equity campaigns over the last
decade. The primary data will be derived from semi.structured interviews and
questionnaires that focus on perceptions of events, political motivations, and
strategic understandings among lawyers, union activists, feminist leaders, and
officials in government and industry in comparable worth political struggles.
Two general hypotheses guide the research: (1) that litigation and legal rights
discourse about entitlements to equal treatment are a catalyst for mobilization
of an active political constituency, and (2) that litigation, whether successful
or not, has been a pivotal resource in leveraging policy change. The study
addresses central questions in sociolegal theory. The research goes beyond
previous studies in legal mobilization by examining the tactics of using law,
the role of precedents and legal decisions in shaping tactics, and the indirect
effects of law separate and apart from winning court cases. Mobilization and the
law are seen as interactive elements ultimately embracing citizens and activists
who are not involved in law suits and eventually changing the discourse of
lawyers and judges who are. By identifying variations in comparable worth
experiences and different ways in which social movements might use or be limited
by the concept of rights, this research offers the unique prospect of providing
empirical data that is essential for assessing the critique of rights and the
policy of rights advocacy more generally. The study should also illuminate the
complex influence of law in political arenas outside of courtrooms from which
more adequate theories about the role of law in society can be constructed.