* 8821357
* Noncompetitive Inhibition of the Acetylcholine Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* David Johnson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Stacy Springer
* 07/31/1993
* USD 193,700.00

The control of skeletal muscles by the brain requires the transmission of
electrical signals down nerve fibers to the muscles. When the electrical signals
reach the end of the nerve fibers, a chemical, acetylcholine, is released and
diffuses across the space between the nerves and muscles. The acetylcholine that
reaches the muscles binds to a molecule in the muscle membrane, the
acetylcholine receptor, and opens an ion channel in the receptor molecule which
starts a series of events leading to the contraction of the muscle. In addition
to acetylcholine, many drugs bind to the acetylcholine receptor. Some of these
drugs, i.e. noncompetitive inhibitors, bind at sites different from where
acetylcholine binds. These noncompetitive inhibitors block the effects of
acetylcholine. The purpose of this research is to understand at a molecular
level how these noncompetitive inhibitors block the effects of acetylcholine.
Because the acetylcholine receptor from Torpedo electric organ is very similar
to human acetylcholine receptor and is the richest source of receptors, the
Torpedo will be used as a model. Fluorescence techniques will be utilized to
determine whether different types of noncompetitive inhibitors perturb 1) the
distance between drug binding sites, 2) the orientation of bound drugs, 3) the
distance from drug binding sites to the membrane surface, 4) the rotational
constraints of lipids proximal and distal to the receptor. The ability of a
variety of noncompetitive inhibitors to perturb the above parameters will be
correlated with their capacity to inhibit receptor functional activity. Because
the acetylcholine receptor is structurally similar to other ligand-regulated ion
channel molecules, the research should advance the basic understanding of how
drugs, especially general anesthetics, modulate the functional activity of
ligand-regulated ion channel molecules.