* 8821766
* Validation of Block Theory and Discontinuous Deformation    Analysis with Data from Field Case Histories and Model      Experiments
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Richard Goodman, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* MEHMET T. TUMAY
* 04/30/1992
* USD 168,000.00

This project will obtain data from actual case histories of underground
construction in jointed rock masses to validate and guide novel, potentially
useful analytical methods developed at Berkeley in the last six years. These
methods, lumped under the title "discontinumm mechanics" include a geometric
analysis (block theory) and a numerical analysis (discontinuous deformation
analysis). The case histories selected are in different types of rocks that
contain so many joints that continuum mechanics may not be applicable and where,
in contrast, application of discontinuum mechanics is appropriate. The cases
include an underground powerhouse to be constructed in Mexico, a vehicular
tunnel to be enlarged from a pilot tunnel in Kentucky, and a shaft to be
excavated in Nevada. Careful geotechnical mapping is in progress or has been
completed in each case so the data will be available with which to perform
verification studies. Forward modelling predictions will be matched against
actual behavior. Actual block movements will be back calculated. The potential
of block theory and discontinuous deformation analysis as tools for designers of
underground works will then be enhanced as these approaches are tested and
adjusted for the "real work".