* 8821561
* US-China Coop Research: Occurrence and Distribution of ToxicCyanobacteria(blue-green algae) in China;Isolation & Charac-terization of Toxins and Their Role in Waterbased Diseas
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Wayne Carmichael, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Tonya Butler
* 10/31/1991
* USD 27,845.00

This proposal on "Occurrence and Distribution of Toxic Cyanobacteria (blue-
green algae) in China; Isolation and Characterization of Toxins and Their Role
in Water-Based Diseases" between Dr. Wayne W. Carmichael of Wright State
University and Professors Yu Min-Juan and Li Shang-Hao of the Institute of
Hydrobiology Exploration is jointly sponsored by NSF and the Chinese Academy of
Sciences. This joint research project will perform a more rigorous investigation
of the ecology of toxic cyanobacteria and their role as agents of water-based
disease in the increasingly eutrophic lakes of China. The research will build on
preliminary studies by the Chinese investigators in 1985, and both the Chinese
and American investigators in 1986, which established the presence of toxic
cyanobacteria in several eutrophic lakes and ponds near Wuhan. The investigators
propose to study the occurrence and distribution of waterbloom forming toxic
cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) in selected lakes, ponds and other water bodies
of central and southern China. They will isolate toxins and characterize them
chemically; culture clonal isolates of toxic species to study toxin production,
including environmental factors which select for the presence of toxic strains;
and compare toxic strains and their toxins with other cyanobacteria which the
American principal investigator collected from North America, Europe, South
Africa, Australia and New Zealand.