* 8821995
* Trapped Gases in the Greenland Ice Sheet: CO2 Isotope       Ratios &amp; Concentration in the Past Atmosphere
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1995
* Austin Long, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 02/28/1995
* USD 532,109.00

As part of the Greenland Ice Sheet Project, this project will extend the
atmospheric CO2 concentration and isotope composition record back through
Holocene times. This would be done by measuring the concentration and C13/C12
ratio of carbon dioxide in atmospheric gases trapped in relatively small (250 g)
samples of ice from Greenland ice cores. The technique would be to place the
sample in a specially designed vacuum system and to sublime the ice onto the
surface of a -80 c cold trap. The gas will be released by this procedure. The
amount of CO2 sample so obtained would be accurately measured and its C13/C12
ratio determined. The air in the sample would be recovered on molecular sieve.
The amount of air, per unit of ice, would record the altitude of the ice sheet
at the time of seal-off. The ratio of CO2 to air would be accurately measured
(to better than 0.5%) which would record the CO2 concentration of the sample of
trapped atmosphere to better than 1ppm. The C13/C12 ratio of atmospheric carbon
dioxide during glacial times will also be measured. The change of this ratio
during the glacial/post-glacial transition will be an important test of the
proposed mechanisms for the large (80 ppm) CO2 concentration change that
occurred at that time. Other climate-related questions include a detailed study
of the end of the last glacial and the glacial/post-glacial transition, the
Younger Dryas event, and the Dansgaard-Oeschger events. These concentration and
stable isotope data, combined with radiocarbon dates for CO2, will enable
testing of carbon cycle models relating to past and future climate change.