* 8821160
* Optimal Learning in Uncertain Environments
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Nicholas Kiefer, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 101,665.00

This project examines the dynamics of decision-making under uncertainty, when
reducing the degree of uncertainty by accumulation of information about the
economic environment entails paying a cost. The general framework is one in
which economic agents face a tradeoff between immediate expected gain and
investing in information which might lead to increased future gains. The project
brings the tools of Bayesian econometrics to bear in studying the accumulation
of information by an optimizing agent in a stochastic economy with unknown
aspects which can be learned, but where learning entails a cost. The tradeoff
between current reward and accumulation of information of uncertain value is
examined. Two important economic examples are studied: 1) a profit-maximizing
monopolist facing uncertain demand, and 2) a controlled regression problem. This
setting is also extended to include random environments in which information
collection is an ongoing activity. Analytical and numerical methods for studying
these types of problems are developed, and application to more general
estimation of dynamic programming models is advanced. %%% Among the most
important and difficult economic problems to model are those which deal with the
making of decisions in the presence of uncertainty. These questions face most
people in the economic marketplace, and include investing for the future,
setting prices and output, making major purchases like automobiles and houses,
and the purchase of insurance. In each of these circumstances uncertainty about
the economic environment in which one is moving plays a key role, and that
uncertainty can be reduced by acquiring more information. However, information
is not costless, and the economic agent must make an implicit tradeoff between a
current level of satisfaction or profit, or investing in the acquisition of more
information, the value of which is uncertain. The project builds an analytical
econometric framework which is based on Bayesian statistical methodology, and
which incorporates learning and the cost of knowledge accumulation. The Bayesian
approach differs from the usual statistical paradigm in being able to allow for
the beliefs of the economic agents about the system in which they work. As
knowledge and information are gained, those beliefs change, and in turn the
dynamics of the decision-making process is altered. This research models the
changing expectations and their effects on economic decisions, develops
numerical techniques for estimation, and indicates how such models can be
applied to empirical analysis.