* 8821347
* Carbene Migratory Insertions in Complexes of Cyclic         Allenes, Cyclopropylidenes and Tropynes
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,03/31/1994
* William Jones, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 03/31/1994
* USD 277,854.00

This project by William Jones within the Organic Dynamics Program will
investigate the chemistry and structure of small ring, organic compounds
complexed to metals. The equilibrium between allene (two double bonds across
three carbons) and zwitterionic forms (doubly charged) will be studied. This
work will provide information about sigma and pi bond strengths. Small, strained
rings complexed to transition metals show quite unusual chemical behavior. For
instance, depending on substitution, a cyclopropane bonded to an electron
deficient metal can either open to a pi-allyl complex, or undergo alpha-carbon
elimination to give a carbene complex. Both of these reactions will be studied
with an eye to determining the detailed mechanism of the former, the generality
of the latter, and the factors that cause one to dominate over the other. Both
cationic and neutral cyclopropylidene complexes will be prepared to determine
the conditions under which they open to complexes of allenes. It is anticipated
that neutral complexes may open slowly, and cyclopropylidenes complexed to
neutral electron deficient metals may be quite stable due to cyclopropane's
potential to behave as a four electron donor. Fe(II) complexes of properly
substituted cyclobutanes undergo alpha-elimination of carbon to give cyclic
carbene complexes. The generality of this reaction will be explored, and some of
the chemistry of these unusual compounds will be studied with the intention of
preparing iron containing naphthalenes and highly strained cationic carbyne
complexes.