* 8821421
* Felix Klein and the Gottingen Mathematical Tradition
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/1989,02/28/1991
* David Rowe, Pace University New York Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1991
* USD 18,000.00

Felix Klein is universally regarded as one of the most important mathematicians
of modern times, and the lack of a major biographical study devoted to his
career is certainly one of the more glaring gaps in the literature in the
history of mathematics. Familiar to all serious students of mathematics, Klein
has also figured prominently in reform movements in technology, science, and
mathematics education. He is also widely known for his classic "Vorlesungen uber
die Entwicklung der Mathematik im 19. Jahrhundert," which remains unique as an
overview of the personalities, institutions and ideas that shaped the world of
mathematics in the modern era. All of these achievements were overshadowed by
Klein's success and influence as a scientific organizer and the leading
architect of the modern Gottingen mathematical tradition. By attracting
colleagues like David Hilbert, Hermann Minkowski, Carl Runge, Ludwig Prantl,
Edmund Landau, Hermann Weyl, Richard Courant, et al., Klein not only dethroned
the once omnipotent Berlin establishment, he ensured Gottingen's dominance as
the leading center for mathematics in Germany and the world up until the time of
the Nazi takeover eight years after his death. Dr. Rowe is continuing his
project whose ultimate aim is to produce a large-scale scientific biography of
Felix Klein (1849- 1925). Under this grant, he will analyze Klein's early
geometrical works and those of his collaborator, Sophus Lie. Dr. Rowe will also
prepare an annotated edition of Klein's unpublished lectures on elliptic
function theory. Finally, he will collaborate with Renate Tobies and Walter
Purkert on a shorter biography of Klein to be included in the Birkhauser series
"Vita Mathematica."