* 8821960
* Atmospheric Radionuclides in South Central Greenland
* O/D,OPP
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Jack Dibb, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/1990
* USD 37,299.00

This project is a study of the processes that are active in determining the
characteristics of aerosols that are removed from the arctic atmosphere and
deposited in the Greenland ice sheet. These processes involve the dynamics of
tropospheric and stratospheric mass exchange, the efficiency with which aerosols
and associated chemical species are removed from the lower atmosphere, the
relative importance of wet and dry deposition, and the early post-depositional
chemical and concentration changes in the snow. Knowledge of these processes is
crucial to the reconstruction of paleoatmospheres from the record that is
preserved in the ice sheet. Air sample filters and snow and ice samples
collected in a year-long effort at Dye-3 in southern Greenland will be analyzed
for radionuclides, including Beryllium-7, Beryllium-10, Chlorine-36, and
Lead-210. Beryllium-7 is a cosmogenic radionuclide that is useful as a tracer of
intrusions of stratospheric air, while Lead-210 results from the decay of radon
emitted from the Earth's surface and is a tracer for continental air masses.
While Chlorine-36 is an important modulator in ozone chemistry, its ratio to
Beryllium-10 may possibly become a method for dating ice cores older than 50,000
years. Results to date have been mixed because the ratio can fluctuate greatly
over small depth intervals. This project however will obtain data on time scales
short enough to determine whether short term differences in the transport
mechanism or seasonal variations in the efficiency of the removal process cause
the observed fluctuations.