* 8821904
* Mathematical Sciences: Partial Differential Equations and   Geometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* William Ziemer, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 05/31/1992
* USD 61,939.00

Much of the research sponsored by this award will focus on variational problems
in mathematical analysis and the partial differential equations which derive
when extrema are reached. The variational problems are normally reflections of
some physical principle such as the minimization of action or energy. The
proposal focuses on four areas, most of which represent continuations of
research currently in progress. Elliptic variational problems represents one
area. The form of the associated differential equation is one of inhomogeneous
divergence type. It is formulated to reflect a variational problem involving an
obstacle. The equation has a forcing term which is a measure, or distribution,
rather than a function. A goal of this work is to determine the regularity
properties of the solution and the geometry of the contact set of the obstacle
(which may not be known) in terms of assumed smoothness of the boundary of the
obstacle. Parabolic variational problems will also be treated. The obstacle
problem will again be considered. This class of problems is more difficult to
analyze than the elliptic because there is a lack of symmetry between the space
and time components of the differential operator. Still, some results from the
elliptic case are expected to be applicable here. Another variational question
to be addressed is that of minimizing (integrals of) gradients of functions on
domains in which the function's boundary values are specified. A question of
concern here is that of smoothness - there are examples of minimizing functions
which need not be smooth across the interior of the domain. Work will be done to
characterize when one can expect smooth extremal functions in this context. The
fourth area to be treated is that of non-linear potential theory. This concerns
a number of questions about a differential operator, the p-Laplacian, which has
been the subject of considerable interest recently. Solutions of the
corresponding differential equations enjoy many of the properties of harmonic
functions. Emphasis will be placed on understanding the critical set where the
gradient of solutions equals zero.