* 8821400
* Theoretical Study of the Economics of Law
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Steven Shavell, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 45,407.00

During the past decade, one of the most significant developments in the
scientific study of law is work at the intersection of law and economics. Among
those who have contributed to this area, Dr. Shavell is among the most respected
for his innovative work and productivity. Under this project, Dr. Shavell plans
to continue and extend his theoretical research on the economic analysis of law
to a set of problems where economic principles can generate new knowledge about
the effects of legal rules and the nature of law-related relations. Three
problems will be addressed. The major topic concerns an alternative to property
rights regimes (patent, copyright, trademark protection) in intellectual works.
The alternative is for the government to give rewards for creation of
intellectual works and then have the works enter the public domain. The main
problem with patents is that they create a monopoly, and hence inefficient
pricing above marginal cost; on the other side, not having patents (or another
system of reward) may reduce the private returns to innovation. A theoretical
analysis will be made of how the registry and reward system compares to a system
of protection of property rights. Given that productivity, competitiveness, and
technological change are important economic issues, the possibility of
assignment of property rights for intellectual works can play an important role
in improving productivity of American industry and increasing U.S. technical
progress. The second problem is an extension of the investigator's previous work
on optimal sanctions and enforcement costs. A distinction will be made between
two types of enforcement costs--fixed costs that the government must bear
regardless of the number of individuals sanctioned and variable or marginal
costs which increase with the number of individuals sanctioned or engaging in
harmful acts. The essential idea to be explored is whether the offender should
also pay for the cost of being caught. The third problem, also an extension of
the investigator's previous work, considers optimal incentive contracts when
there are non-monetary outcomes. The economic model of the principal and agent
relationship generally assumes that the risky outcome that results from the
agent's action is monetary. This analysis will pertain to the case in which the
outcome affects the principal's utility in a way other than by affecting his
wealth, such as a lawyer seeking custody for a client's children or a physician
seeking to cure a patient. This study should increase our understanding about
the qualitative aspects of optimal contracts.