* 8821604
* The Debate Over Evolutionary Theory in Germany
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1992
* Robert Richards, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 12/31/1992
* USD 39,000.00

Over the past several years, we have witnessed the conflict of science,
religion, philosophy and politics in a number of areas, but in no area more
dramatically than in evolutionary theory. Indeed, teaching of both evolution and
the counter "theory" of creationism has been endorsed by two state legislatures,
seemingly supported by a president of the United States, but rejected by the
federal court system including the Supreme Court of the United States. That this
debate is not new in the United States is well known -- the "Scopes Monkey
Trial" in Tennessee in the 1920's is just one example of this conflict. The
debate in England on the theory of evolution between Bishop "Soapy Sam"
Wilberforce and Thomas Huxley is another infamous example of the conflicts
between science and religion over this theory. Yet these conflicts were not
confined to the English speaking world. It is both instructive and important for
our understanding of the relationships between these two belief systems, science
and religion, to examine these conflicts. Professor Richards is looking at such
a debate in Germany. Just after the turn of the century, Europe's leading
Darwinist, Ernst Haeckel, and the Jesuit entomologist Erich Wasmann held a
series of dramatic debates whose various themes recapitulated previous
controversies and whose echoes reverberated through the German intellectual
community during the next decade. Professor Richards will use the debates as an
organizing device to investigate the cultural and scientific development of
Haeckel and Wasmann, particularly focusing on the roles of empirical science,
religion, philosophy, and politics in the formation of their respective theories
of evolution. The study will allow entry into the several controversies that
surrounded Haeckel's development--his systematic studies of theoretical leaps
into human evolution; and his monistic philosophical views and founding of the
German Monist League (and its connection with the Nazis). Likewise, Professor
Richards will pursue Wasmann's remarkable conversion to evolutionary theory and
gauge the tidal-waves of consternation it produced both in the Catholic Church
and in the scientific community. These individual histories will be constructed
against a background of the more general incursion of evolutionary though into
Germany and the cultural reaction that it provoked. This history will be used
also to come to terms with several broader issues in history and philosophy--
particularly the multifaceted dispute between realists and relativists in their
interpretation of science and the historiographic problem of the explanatory
power of narrative in historical accounts. The research will use two important
repositories of unpublished manuscripts and papers--the Haeckel archives in
Jena, German Democratic Republic, and the Wasmann archives in Maastricht, the
Netherlands.