* 8821389
* Real and Nominal Effects of Alternative Exchange Rate       Regimes:  Interwar Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Barry Eichengreen, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1991
* USD 82,083.00

The purpose of this research is to examine the generality of recent findings
regarding exchange rate variability and to increase the number of observations
of distinct international monetary regimes by the assembly of a new data set for
the interwar period. The study consists of four components. The first involves
the gathering and assembling the relevant macroeconomic and financial data for
the interwar period. The remaining three components will utilize the data to
analyze the interwar experience. Part two will analyze the statistical
properties of and relationships among exchange rates and interest rates. The
goal will be to determine whether market efficiency and similar relationships
differed across exchange rate regimes. Part three will analyze the relationship
of the exchange rate system to the business cycle, with the goal of determining
whether the form of the exchange rate system had an independent impact on
cyclical fluctuations. The fourth part will focus on the origins, operation, and
demise of the interwar system of pegged rates, with goal of identifying domestic
and international preconditions for the establishment and successful maintenance
of fixed-rate systems. $$$ A disturbing feature of the system of floating, but
managed exchange rates that has prevailed since 1973 is the surprising degree of
exchange rate variability. In fact, exchange rates have been much more volatile
than early proponents of exchange rate flexibility anticipated. Some have argued
that recent increases in exchange rate volatility and the concurrent growth of
international trade imbalances are the direct consequences of abandoning the
fixed exchange rate regimes of the Bretton Woods System. However, it is not at
all clear why exchange have become more volatile or that this was necessarily a
bad thing, given the magnitude of recent shocks to the international monetary
system. This research is important because it will provide a better
understanding of the operating properties of alternative exchange rate regimes.
The study will involve the assembly and analysis of relevant macroeconomic and
international financial data for the interwar period. Gathering and analyzing
these data will help other scholars as well as policy makers to draw sounder
conclusions about the benefits and costs of alternative exchange rate
arrangements.