* 8821838
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Representation of Groups and Algebras
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Jonathan Alperin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christine French
* 05/31/1992
* USD 28,750.00

This award provides partial support for approximately twenty two reciprocal
research visits by US and West German mathematicians, coordinated by Jonathan L.
Alperin of the University of Chicago and Gerhard Michler of the University of
Essen. The research activities of the visitors fall into six areas: integral
representation theory, character theory, module methods (Clifford theory,
complexity and vertices of simple modules,) computer methods, Clifford matrices
and the representation theory of algebras. The Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG), the West German analog of NSF, is supporting a very large continuing
program in representation theory of groups and algebras. Under this program, the
DFG brings large numbers of mathematicians from around the world to West Germany
for extended periods to collaborate and communicate with German mathematicians
and others. Over the next two years, the DFG will support the living expenses of
twelve U.S. visitors to West Germany and travel expenses for ten Germans coming
to the U.S. to work in this area of mathematics. NSF will provide complementary
support for the U.S. mathematicians' travel costs and partial support of the
German visitors' expenses in the U.S. This award, shared by NSF's Division of
Mathematical Sciences, continues support provided in 1987 and 1988 for 26
research visits that proved to be highly productive and mutually beneficial. The
past and future visitors are an outstanding collection of mathematicians working
in an area that is very active and important in both the U.S. and West Germany.