* 8821847
* Viroids and Diseases of Unknown Etiology, U.S.-India Seminarand Workshop, November 18-26, 1989, New Delhi, India, Award in Indian and U.S. Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Karl Maramorosch, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1991
* USD 40,100.00

Description: This project supports participation by ten U.S. scientists in an U.
S.-India seminar-workshop on viroids and diseases of uncertain etiology, to be
held in New Delhi, India November 15-28, 1989. The Indian cooperating scientist
is Dr. S. P. Raychaudhuri, Chairman of the International Union of Forestry
Research Organization-Virus and Mycoplasma Diseases. The objectives include
exchange of information on new techniques for isolating and characterizing
viroids associated with diseases of tropical plants, and the testing of some of
these techniques on diseases of uncertain etiology. The participants are
expected to identify areas where cooperative research would be beneficial to the
U.S. and India. Scope: The U. S. and Indian directors of this seminar-workshop
are among world leaders in the study of plant diseases in particular, and
microbiology in general. The expertise and techniques available in the U. S. of
viroids and their characteristics would benefit and be sharpened from
applications to viroid diseases known to occur in India, such as potato spindle
tuber, citrus exocortis and other diseases for which no certain cause is
identified. Some of these diseases can be economically significant if
transmitted to the U. S. Thus cooperative research and exchange of information
in this field will be of value to science and to the agricultural industry in
the two countries.