* 8821414
* Group Travel International Cartographic Association         Meetings, Budapest, Hungary - August 1989
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1989,05/31/1990
* David Woodward, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 05/31/1990
* USD 12,000.00

Cartography has undergone rapid changes recently, as the growing use of
computers in the preparation, construction, and analysis of maps has transformed
the discipline. One of the most effective forums for the interchange of ideas
and information among cartographers from throughout the world has been the
biennial technical meetings of the International Cartographic Association (ICA).
Representatives from the ICA's 63 member nations will meet in Budapest, Hungary,
in August 1989 to present research papers, to convene multi-national commissions
that plan and oversee collaborative research projects, and to meet informally to
discuss scholarly matters of mutual interest. This award provides partial travel
support to enable roughly one dozen American cartographers to attend the 1989
ICA meeting. This participation will be especially timely, because this meeting
is the first ICA meeting held in 12 years in a Eastern Bloc country at which
American cartographers will be in attendance. It therefore will provide an
excellent opportunity for American cartographers to establish direct contacts
with many of their Eastern European counterparts. Group travel support to the
ICA meetings will improve scholarly activity by allowing more American
cartographers to present the results of their research and to hear the latest
conclusions of scholars from other nations. By enhancing the direct exchange of
ideas in both directions, more sophisticated and effective cartographic research
will result. The presence of more U.S. scholars at the ICA meeting also will
heighten American participation in the collaborative work of ICA commissions,
and this award will foster development of younger cartographers, because at
least one-half of all funds will be directed to scholars who have received their
Ph.D.s within the last seven years.