* 8821329
* Computational Fluid Dynamics,  Development of Joint ResearchPrograms With Scientists at the Indian Institute of Science,Award in Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1990
* R. Hung, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1990
* USD 8,380.00

Description: This project supports visits by two U.S. scientists from the
University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH) and Mississippi State University to
major Indian research institutes for development of a cooperative program in
computational fluid dynamics (CFD). The areas to be discussed include: a)
evaluation of solution algorithms from various different application areas in
CFD; b) adaption of existing schemes to concurrent computers, and in areas of
domain decomposition, computational Green's function methods, and extension of
fast Poisson solvers to more general problems; c) hybrid and cross fertilization
of existing grid generation methods; d) adaptive or moving grid systems; and e)
evaluation of existing software and development of more advanced software for
proper visualization and interpretation of flow field properties. Scope: The
topic of updating algorithms to take advantage of major advances in computer
architecture, is an important one. The capabilities in computer technology and
computation in the U.S. as in the case of the Consortium for Computational Fluid
Dynamics at UAH, can be complemented by the analytical and mathematical
capabilities in the top academic and research institutes in India. This project
will focus primarily on the Drs. S. M. Deshpandy and N. M. Reddy of the
aeronautical Engineering Department. Additional visits will be made to the
Indian Institutes of Technology in Bombay and Delhi. The collaborative projects
to be developed, could lead to participation by U.S. universities other than
UAH, and to improvement in the use of CFD in modeling and investigating three-
dimensional flows associated with realistic aerodynamic propulsion
configurations.