* 8821927
* The Inverse Kinematics for Control of a New Class of Robots for Computer-Integrated Flexible Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Joseph Davidson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Elbert L. Marsh
* 01/31/1993
* USD 189,482.00

Current six degree of freedom robot systems can meet the requirement of
accessing a broad range of locations and positions in a workspace, but they
frequently have the disadvantage of doing this in a suboptimal way. In
particular, actuator overspeeding effects are often encountered in an attempt to
maintain a constant speed during a particular class of operations or maneuvers,
i.e., arc welding. Failure to maintain constant speed can result in reduced
performance, i.e., degraded weld quality. Professor Davidson has designed a
class of seven degree of freedom robots which have the potential of avoiding the
overspeeding singularities. This project exploits that class of robots and
develops the design and synthesis of workcells which use such robots. Workcell
is defined as a unit comprising a robot, one or more tools placed at some angle
and position on the end effector link of the robot, and a fixture. The research
is accomplished through five steps including (1) developing the equations for
algebraic dimensional analysis of the manipulators, (2) exploring alternative
formulations of the synthesis equations to expand the number of design
variables, (3) determining the maximum number of precision locations used to
approximate a task, (4) prescribing the manipulator workspace in terms of
manipulator dimensions and excursion ranges at the joints, and (5) extracting
additional design conditions to enable maximizing the volume of workspace for
the class of robots considered in this study. The research's impact will be in
the area of future industrial robot technology. Specifically, the results could
reduce the engineering time required for manufacturing setup, provide for the
development of computer automated procedures of design for the placement of
tools and fixtures in workcells, and constitute an important step in the
computer automated programming of a robot to accomplish a specific manufacturing
task. *