* 8821839
* Observation and Analysis of Long-Term Optical Variations    of Active Galactic Nuclei
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Alex Smith, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 10/31/1992
* USD 125,400.00

Faculty members and students at the University of Florida are contributing
efforts to understand what are perhaps the most enigmatic objects in the
Universe -- the remote quasars and related active galaxies. The ultimate
objective is to comprehend the process that allows a quasar, within a volume
comparable to that of our tiny Solar System, to generate 100 times the energy of
a huge galaxy such as the Milky Way. Solution of this mystery undoubtedly will
contribute greatly to our understanding of the development of the galaxies
themselves. Because the study of variability has long been recognized as a
powerful tool in attacking astrophysical problems, we regularly follow the
unpredictable changes in brightness of over 220 quasars and active galaxies,
using the 76-cm telescope of the University's Rosemary Hill Observatory. Much of
our work is carried on in collaboration with other observatories and with
scientists using spacecraft such as the International Ultraviolet Explorer and
the Japanese x-ray satellite GINGA. Future collaborations involve experiments to
be carried by the Space Shuttle. Photographic research initiated to support the
quasar observations has resulted in innovative methods of increasing
photographic sensitivity that have been adopted world-wide; as an illustration
of "spin-off" from basic research, these methods are now being employed in
biomedical radiography and in industrial and biomedical microscopy. A new CCD
camera will be built and used for observations.