* 8821571
* The Sciences of New Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Robert Chang, Northwestern University
* Cooperative Agreement
* W. Lance Haworth
* 06/30/1993
* USD 8,434,600.00

The Materials Research Laboratory (MRL) at Northwestern University supports
interactive, interdisciplinary research in four primary thrust areas
investigating the sciences of new materials. The thrust on internal interfaces
in nanostructured materials addresses the growth of heteroepitaxial thin-film
structures, the electronic and optical properties of narrow-band semiconductor
superlattices, and the superconducting and mechanical properties of
superlattices involving metallic compounds and interleaved insulators. The
research program on high temperature superconducting materials begun in 1987
brings together faculty from physics, chemistry, materials science and
electrical engineering in a collaborative investigation of the theory, crystal
chemistry, processing and characterization of ceramic superconductors. The
electrical transport in molecular materials group is engaged in the design and
synthesis of new solid materials whose optical, magnetic and charge transport
properties test and extend basic understanding of the organic conductive state.
Its work focusses on two classes of molecular charge-transport materials:
polymer solid electrolytes, and metallomacrocyclic "metals" and conductive
polymers. The nonlinear optical polymers thrust begun in 1986 is now called
macromolecular and molecular nonlinear optical materials. Research in this group
includes the synthesis and processing, theory, and characterization of molecular
and polymeric nonlinear optical materials, and microfabrication studies directed
towards their potential application in devices. In addition to these four thrust
areas, the MRL supports research in sciences of high-strength steel at
Northwestern, part of a broad effort involving about 30 investigators from
universities, industry and government laboratories led by the Northwestern
group. This effort is directed at the scientific basis for new steels in two key
classes: martensitic alloy steels for advanced structural applications, and
ferrite-based microalloyed steels for high-formability sheet. The MRL also
supports the development, operation and maintenance of major central materials
research facilities at Northwestern, and provides seed funds for new faculty and
for high-risk research on materials. The program currently involves 31 faculty
members, 7 postdoctoral associates, 3 scientific and technical support staff, 31
graduate students and 8 undergraduates. The Northwestern MRL is under the
direction of Professor Stephen H. Carr.