* 8821721
* Unemployment Insurance, Recall, and Econometric Duration    Models
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Bruce Meyer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1992
* USD 70,195.00

The research consists of three closely related empirical projects focusing on
Unemployment Insurance (UI) and the layoff-recall process. In conjunction with
the empirical work is a theoretical component of econometric research, aimed at
developing and testing estimators for econometric duration models, which have
broad application and are less sensitive to a priori assumptions. The first
project examines the fraction of the unemployment of UI recipients arising
because of temporary layoffs and the effects of recall expectations on
unemployment spells. The second involves the analysis of re-employment bonus
experiments that are being conducted in several states. These experiments
provide large monetary awards to UI claimants who find jobs quickly. The third
project analyzes a data set that matches five years of longitudinal UI histories
from eight states containing 385,000 spells with information about firms. %%%
Unemployment Insurance (UI) is an important and expensive social welfare
program. In 1985, 2.6 million people received unemployment insurance at a cost
of over 15 billion dollars. Substantial theoretical work indicates that the (UI)
program has major effects on the behavior of both workers and firms. The purpose
of this research is to better understand these effects and to develope
techniques to better estimate the magnitude of some of these effects. This
research consists of three closely related empirical project focusing on the
effects of Unemployment Insurance. The first examines the disincentive effects
of UI on taking a job and the effect of expecting to be rehired on looking for a
new job. The second examines a new group of social experiments which are
designed to find ways of reducing the typical period of unemployment and, thus,
UI program costs. These experiments offer special bonus payments to people who
find work within a specified period of time. The third project will use a unique
data set to analyze the effects of UI benefits and taxes on the behavior of
workers and firms.