* 8821874
* Prototype Expert Protocol Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Elsa Angrist, J G Van Dyke & Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 06/30/1991
* USD 224,969.00

This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is designed to provide an
opportunity for small business, particularly the small high technology firm, to
participate in NSF research. Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to
select promising proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality
research. Phase II is the principal research project. Phase III is the
conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications and
technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture capital or other
non-federal financing. This is a Phase II project to develop a prototype expert
protocol analyzer, which is an expert system for analyzing problems arising
between two different implementations of a communications protocol. The expert
system tool will incorporate knowledge of the protocol specifications as well as
troubleshooting expertise of skilled protocol analysts. The prototype tool will
be developed to analyze the entire DoD protocol stack running on an Ethernet LAN
and will use an existing LAN monitor for capture and transmission of protocol
data on the LAN. The expert protocol analyzer could be combined with an existing
commercially available LAN monitor to provide additional analytic capabilities
for the monitor. The enhanced tool could be used for troubleshooting protocol
problems on operational networks, assisting in the installation of new
protocols, and testing for protocol conformance to specification.