* 8821852
* New Data Sources in Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1991
* Robert Gordon, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1991
* USD 145,529.00

The proposed research centers on measurement and substantive issues raised by
the investigator's recently completed book, The Measurement of Durable Goods
Prices, as well as by his newly released data and estimates on real GNP covering
the period 1869- 1908. The primary focus will be on the low rate of productivity
growth in the U.S. private economy in the 1968-84 interval. Many of the
conceptual and substantive questions involving the productivity slowdown are
directly related to the series on durable goods prices, particularly the role of
computers and other electronic equipment in changing the quality of consumer and
producer services in ways that do not enter present measures of output. In
addition to exploring the implications of previously collected data, the puzzle
of slow productivity growth outside of manufacturing in the U.S. will be
addressed by developing new output measures for individual industries, studying
the effects of different methods of measurement used in other major OECD
economies, and searching for new data that may reveal changes in the quantity
and quality of services. A secondary focus will be on issues raised by the
historical research on GNP. While the latter provided new measures only of
cyclical deviations of output from trend, not of the trend itself, it yet
uncovered new data sources that will improve estimates of those trends. Also, it
revealed puzzling contradictions in the measurement of real output and prices in
the important period after World War I, 1919-23, which need to be addressed by
primary data. Resolution of the conflict between major indicators of the depth
of the 1920-21 recession is extremely important in developing an understanding
of what went wrong in 1929-33. A third issue is the unsatisfactory state of
price data during the period between the end of Rees' classic (1961) study and
1947, when the period covered by the durable goods book begins. The overall
significance of the improvements in the historical as well as the more current
indicators of economic activity is the increased capability they create for the
effective analysis of the central problems of macroeconomics.