* 8821021
* Nonparametric and Semiparametric Inference in Econometric   Models
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Donald Andrews, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1992
* USD 146,395.00

This project develops nonparametric and semiparametric methods for estimation of
econometric models. The research consists of three main parts: 1) additive
interactive regression, 2) covariance matrix estimation in the presence of
heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation of unknown forms, and 3) general methods
for inference in semiparametric models. Additive Interactive Regression (AIR)
models are econometric models which put more structure on the regression
function than nonparametric models, and thus circumvent the problems of
dimensionality that severely hinder the use of fully nonparametric techniques in
applied econometrics. This project adds to that line of work by analyzing the
statistical properties of AIR models, and developing efficient estimation
techniques for them. The work on estimation of the covariance matric under
varying distributional assumptions extends existing work on comparing different
kernel estimators by determining suitable bandwidth/lag truncation parameters
for use with these estimators, and comparing the properties of these estimators
with those of other covariance estimators. In addition, computationally
efficient estimation techniques are developed for obtaining consistency against
arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity. %%% This project investigates the
properties of various estimation techniques used in econometric models. Such
models are used widely in all areas of applied economics, including
macroeconomics and government policy analysis, studies of the behavior of firms
and industries, and the dynamics of the international economy. Until recently,
all these types of econometric investigations started by postulating a
mathematical function or system of functions simulating the economic
relationships to be examined. Research has shown that in many cases the results
of these studies can be dependent on the particular mathematical specification
of the functions. During the last decade much econometric work has focused on
developing statistical estimation techniques which do not require a specified
mathematical function. These techniques, known generically as nonparametric
techniques, have obvious advantages over the nonparametric ones in that fewer
assumptions about the structure of the economy have to be made, and more
information about the economy is derived from the data themselves. However,
statistical problems arise with the use of nonparametric techniques. This
project adds significantly to the existing work on nonparametric estimation by
examining three of the most difficult problems, namely dimensionality,
covariance estimation, and computational efficiency.