* 8821205
* Some Issue on Modelling Unobservable Variables
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Cheng Hsiao, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 02/29/1992
* USD 86,619.00

Models based on variables which are inherently unobservable are found very often
in economics, psychology, and other social sciences. They might arise from
errors in the data being analyzed, or because the behavioral responses of agents
are in part determined by characteristics which cannot be observed or measured.
Obtaining meaningful insight from models in which unobservable variables play a
role requires either expanding the data set with more precise measurement or
developing an analytical framework to extract the relevant information on the
unobserved variables from the existing data. The former is often too costly or
even impossible, particularly when large Federal statistical data sets are being
studied. The project examines two analytical models widely used in econometric
studies using Federal data, namely the errors-in-variables model and the hedonic
model. The errors-in-variables model is studied from the standpoint of various
assumptions regarding the structure of the errors, and model identification, and
statistical inference. Using the hedonic model this project establishes
correspondences between the underlying characteristics and the observed
variables. It also derives conditions regarding identification, estimation, and
interpretation of the coefficients. %%% Models based on variables which are
inherently unobservable are found very often in economics, psychology, and other
social sciences. They might arise from errors in the data being analyzed, or
because the behavioral responses of agents are in part determined by
characteristics which cannot be observed or measured. Large Federal data sets,
such as those collected by the Bureau of the Census or the Bureau of Labor
Statistics, often contain grouped data. For reasons of confidentiality or ease
of collection, a household might be asked to list its income range, for instance
between $15,000 and $25,000, rather than its exact income. If an econometric
analysis uses these data on the assumption that they are precise measurements,
the results can be misleading or erroneous. Obtaining meaningful insight from
models in which unobservable variables play a role requires either expanding the
data set with more precise measurement or developing an analytical framework to
extract the relevant information on the unobserved variables from the existing
data. The former approach is more desirable, but often too costly, particularly
when a researcher is using large Federal statistical data sets. This project
focuses on the latter, more analytical strategy. It develops an econometric
framework to enhance the reliablity and usefulness of research based on Federal
data where latent variable models are appropriate.