* 8821831
* Decision Support System for Improving the Locational        Efficiency of Service Systems, Award in U.S. and Indian     Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,01/31/1994
* Gerard Rushton, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1994
* USD 56,936.00

Description: This project supports a joint research by Dr. Gerard Rushton,
Department of Geography, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa and Dr. Vinod
Tewari, Indian School of Management Bangalore (IIMB), India to develop and test
a decision-support system for improving the locational efficiency of service
systems appropriate to rural areas in India. Specifically the team will:
Identify the decision-making process and analyze the needs of the decision-
makers with reference to selected service systems in a sample study area;
develop an analysis procedure with optimizing models for resources allocation;
develop interactive software for the analysis in the form of a micro-computer
based system; evaluate alternative models in an interactive mode; and bring
together scholars, planners and decision-makers to refine the decision-support
system and to assist in its dissemination. The project should lead to enhancing
the quality of health services, banking services, education and other sectors
that consume large public resources. In addition the study should increase the
knowledge of the performance of rural service delivery systems in developing
countries and help define the generic features of service delivery systems and
develop rules for expert systems that will be more appropriate than any existing
at present. Scope: The University of Iowa has a Center for International
Cooperative Studies and Department of Geography each of which has excellent
resources including staff with relevant international experience as well as
scholars who are conducting research in this field. The IIMB has a mandate and
the needed facilities to play a major role in the design of new systems for
Indian conditions and to train managers in recent development in computer
assisted decision-making and information systems. These two institutes working
jointly should help make this project successful and produce meaningful results
of scientific benefit and of pertinent applications.