* 8821687
* Flow and Transport in Systems with Shape Change:  Mass      Transfer in Electrochemical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Robert Sani, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Foltz
* 07/31/1993
* USD 215,412.00

This project focuses on modelling the moving boundary in electrodeposition and
electroetching processes. Models successfully predicting shape change effects in
diffusion and migration dominated cases will be extended to include cases where
convective transport is important, such as electrochemical deposition of
magnetic material onto a rotating fixed-disk leaf. Model development will be
correlated with experimental studies. A modified Galerkin finite element
technique with a moving grid will be developed to solve the time dependent model
with convection. Many engineering applications in coating technology, crystal
growth, selective epitaxy, electrochemical platting, machining, and corrosion
involve a free and/or moving interfacial region. Often the shape or evolution of
the interface is of primary importance in processing, as in electromachining and
electroplating. This project singles out electrodeposition and etching systems,
which are of great importance in the electronics industry. Insights gleaned from
numerical simulation and physical experiments on prototype systems will lead to
increased fundamental understanding of these processes as well as insight into
scale-up and operation of new generation techniques currently being developed.
After minor adaptation the numerical techniques being developed will be
applicable to the other moving boundary/interface systems listed above.