* 8821415
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Geography and Regional Science
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* William Johnson, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 08/31/1990
* USD 12,000.00

Radiocarbon dating procedures have been an important means of establishing the
age of organic materials, such as buried soils. By dating materials,
geomorphologists, archeologists, paleontologists, and other scholars can use
modern evidence to reconstruct past patterns and processes. Different estimates
of dates have been derived from different facets of buried soils, however, that
uncertainty significantly limits the confidence that scholars may place in the
conclusions drawn from examination of those materials. This doctoral
dissertation research project will compare the dates of three characteristics of
buried soils -- the humic acid, the humin (fine residuals), and the soil in its
entirety -- from a set of samples gathered along the Republican River in
southern Nebraska. Dates estimated by two independent laboratories will be
compared to determine which types of dating procedures produce the most reliable
estimates, which then will be used to estimate rates of soil formation and river
deposition at the test site. Benefits from this research will be realized at a
number of levels. Most specifically, the findings will permit a more detailed
reconstruction of the soils and depositional history of the area. At a more
general level, this work will provide greater insights into the accuracy of
radiocarbon dating of buried soils. Although this analysis is based on an
examination of alluvial soils from the Great Plains, the results will have value
for scholars using other types of soils from other environments. As a result,
this work will have positive impacts on a wide range of Quaternary inquiries.