* 8821707
* Laser-Excited Lanthanide Ion Luminescence in Chemistry and  Biophysics                                       ,
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1992
* William Horrocks, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 07/31/1992
* USD 268,200.00

This project will be supported jointly by the Biophysics Program and the
Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program. The focus of the
project is the exploitation in chemistry and biophysics of the information about
individual metal environments in solution which can be obtained from the
luminescence which occurs as a result of laser excitation of the lanthanide
metal ions terbium(III) and europium(III). Imporant biological information, such
as the distances between calcium ion binding sites in blood proteins, can be
obtained from studies of the luminescence of these lanthanide ions when they are
substituted for the native metal ions. Laser-excited lanthanide ion luminescence
techniques will be developed further to determine the extent to which measured
parameters of the luminescence (intensities, frequencies, lifetimes, splittings)
can be used to obtain information about the number of distinct species present,
the total charge on the ligands surrounding Eu(III), the site symmetry of the
ion, the number of coordinated water molecules, energy transfer rates, and
ligand exchange kinetics. Energy transfer between luminescent lanthanide ions
and various freely-diffusing inorganic acceptor ions in solution will be
investigated to provide an understanding of the mechanism of resonant energy
transfer. The accessability of solvent to Ln(III) ions bound to macromolecules
will be probed, and the use of Eu(III) luminescence as a probe of the
interaction of DNA in its various conformations with metal ions will be
assessed. The structure of t-RNA, its metal ion binding characteristics, and
interactions with target molecules will be explored also using these methods. An
investigation of model membrane systems (phospholipid bilayer vesicles) will
establish the basic interactions of metal ions with these systems and allow the
study ofionophore-mediated transport of metal ions. The basic coordination
chemistry of Eu(III)-hydroxo species and several novel chelating agents with
potential applications as ionophores, nmr imaging agents and immunoassay labels
will be explored. A new class of macrocyclic ligand, crown sulfoxides, will be
synthesized and complexation with Ln(III) ions explored.