* 8821116
* An Epistemological Justification of Experiments Practices
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1989,02/28/1990
* Rose-Mary Sargent, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 02/28/1990
* USD 10,000.00

The "experimental method," it is commonly argued, arose with the Scientific
Revolution of the 17th century. This experimental method is one of the most
important traits of science which distinguish it from other kinds of knowledge
which make claims about the world (religion, the occult, astrology, for
example). Robert Boyle, a rich nobleman who became a leading chemical
experimenter of 17th century England, one of the founders of the Royal Society,
the discoverer of "Boyle's law" etc., is as important in the history and
philosophy of science for his justifications of the experimental method as he is
for the science he actually carried out. Yet, while Boyle's experimental
philosophy is considered important by all who examine them, there is no
agreement on what he is really arguing. Indeed, recent work within the European
tradition of the history and sociology of science has argued that Boyle's
practices "involved in the generation and justification of proper knowledge were
part of the settlement and protection of a certain kind of social order." Dr.
Sargent has taken this social construction of science approach head on and tries
to show the role Boyle had in pushing the experimental method not for social and
political purposes but for the advance of science. Under this grant, she will
examine unpublished manuscripts housed in the Royal Society of London in order
to carry out an in-depth systematic account of the details of Boyle's scientific
practice and the manner in which he defended it against the serious criticisms
of other natural philosophers of his day. This work will lead to a significant
contribution to Boyle scholarship. Further, because of Boyle's importance in
providing a sophisticated epistemological foundation for experimentation, this
study promises to make a valuable contribution to current issues in philosophy
of science as well as to current debates in the historiography of science.