* 8821180
* Estimating Long Run Economic Equilibrium
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Peter Phillips, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1992
* USD 143,112.00

This project focuses on three important topics in econometric analysis, namely
1) the estimation of long run economic equilibrium, 2) the dynamics of models
which are not fully identified, and 3) the unification of econometric
distribution theory. The first topic involves examining the properties of
economic time series data, in particular joint dependency of time series data
sets, and nonstationarity. This project serves to link the econometric
methodologies of cointegration models, vector-autoregression techniques, and
error correction models into a unified framework. In doing so it derives an
important relationship between correlation among time series variables and
economic equilibrium. The work on partially identified models concentrates on
two models in which identification is particularly important, namely
simultaneous equations models, and spurious regressions in time series.
Simultaneous equations models are analyzed in detail via systems methods of
estimation. The project will produce a complete theory for estimation systems in
which some equations are not fully identified or in which components of
equations are not identified. The third part of the project applies operational
algebra, a recently developed matrix calculus, to distributional problems in
econometrics and statistics. This approach avoids much of the complex polynomial
algebra that accompanies analysis of multivariate distribution theory. In
particular, it obviates the need for expansion series representation of
probability densities, and in turn greatly facilitates the derivation of both
asymptotic properties and finite sample properties of estimators. %%% This
research project is an analysis of the relationship between the statistical
properties exhibited by many sets of economic time series data and the concept
of econommic equilibrium. At the heart of most economic theory is the notion
that systems tend to move toward a point of stability, rather than fluctuating
randomly. From an empirical standpoint, however, the isolation of equilibrium
points in actual data has proven to be very difficult. This is particularly true
for time series data. When more than one series of data enter a model, for
instance income data and price data, deriving an economic interpretation to the
results of econometric analysis becomes problematic, since the values in both
set of data exhibit the same tendency to grow over time. By applying recently
developed statistical techniques this research isolates long run equilibrium in
economic time series data. Tests are developed for the stability of such
equilibruim points. Other econometric issues such as the identification of
models consisting of simultaneous equations and the derivation of asymptotic
properties of estimators are also addressed.