* 8821768
* Japan Long-Term Visit: Malic Dehydrogenases from Barophilic and Non-Barophilic Bacteria
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Leslie Berger, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Charles Wallace
* 07/31/1990
* USD 46,970.00

This award will enable Prof. Leslie R. Berger of the University of Hawaii at
Manoa to collaborate with Professor Yoshihiro Taniguchi of Ritsumeikan
University in Kyoto, Japan over a period of one year. They will study the
activity of malate dehydrogenases, MDH, to determine how barophilic,
barotolerant and barophobic enzymes with the same catalytic activity and
structure are different. MDH enzyme samples will be prepared in the U.S.
investigator's laboratory, and subsequently studied in Kyoto. Fluorometry will
be used to determine the total protein in each enzyme. The immediate activity,
and changes in activity of each enzyme system will then be measured as functions
of time, pressure, and rate of pressure change. The effects of pressure on
dissociation and reassociation will also be studied. The U.S. investigator has
long been involved in the characterization of hydrostatic pressure as an
environmental parameter in biological systems. The Japanese collaborators have
similar long experience in studying the effects of pressure on chemical systems.
The complemen- tary interests and equipment of these workers will greatly
increase the productivity of this research. These studies should have important
implications in the understanding of the adaptation in molecular structure which
has taken place in deep-sea organisms.