* 8821696
* Empirical Investigation of Saving
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1992
* Fumio Hayashi, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 03/31/1992
* USD 131,824.00

The proposed research is an extensive empirical study of family savings behavior
using various large micro data sets, with special emphasis on tests of the
dynasty model. Theories of saving can be usefully grouped into two strands: the
life-cycle hypothesis of Franco Modigliani and the dynastic view of saving due
to Robert Barro and Gary Becker. The former posits no altruism toward children
or parents, while in the dynastic view generations are interdependent through
altruism.The study first examines whether the retired decumulate bequeathable
wealth, and if they do, whether decumulation is brought about by negative
saving, or by the act of giving "inter vivos" gifts. The aggregate flow of
intergenerational transfers for the U.S., Japan, and Canada also is calculated
using cross-section data on wealth and flow of saving. A significant flow of
transfers is inconsistent with the view that gifts and bequests are exchange-
based rather than altruistically motivated. Next, the research turns to tests of
the dynasty model using micro data. The bench mark model is the "happy family"
model of Barro and Becker, where the family (dynasty) members share the same
objective. The tests should suggest whether the truth is closer to the dynasty
model or to the life-cycle hypothesis. A sample of parent households matched
with their adult offspring available from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics
(PSID) permits a test of the dynasty model's main proposition that each family
member's consumption is not affected by the distribution of resources within the
family. This is accomplished by examining the correlation between consumption
and income across family members. Also, using a sample of Japanese extended
families, a test is made of a corollary of the same proposition that the
structure of demand for various commodities by the extended family should not be
affected by the distribution of resources within the extended family. The
proposed Japan-U.S. comparisons should allow the investigator to a get a better
handle on the dynastic versus life-cycle issue by confronting these theories of
saving with more varied facts. They should also contribute to our understanding
of differences in the savings behavior between the two countries, which are
thought to underlie their differing macroeconomic performances.