* 8821233
* Learning and Evolution in Markets Under Uncertainty
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Rafael Rob, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1992
* USD 51,536.00

This project examines the investment decisions of firms in industries where new
products are introduced. In the Economics literature, certain patterns of growth
and evolution of new industries have been postulated theoretically, and verified
statistically. Commencing with the introduction of the new product, there is a
"growth era" during which existing firms make substantial profits and new
producers enter the market, then follows a "shakeout period" when prices and
profitability decrease and some firms leave the market. Finally a "mature era"
prevails, during which a stabilization in both prices and the number of firms
occurs. Previous studies of many industries have found common patterns of market
activity during these three evolutionary stages. For instance, during the
"growth era" productive capacity increases following an S-curve whereas output
rises at a decreasing rate. Prices decline over time at a decreasing rate, and
there is a substantial variance in the length of each stage, and the pattern of
diffusion for different products. This project applies Bayesian learning models
to study the investment decisions of firms at various stages in the evolutionary
process. These models incorporate uncertainty, typically concerning demand for
the products, time delays between action and the payoff to that action, and
learning from experience. The general types of models include capacity expansion
with fixed demand, capacity adjustment with changing demand, inventory
adjustment, and price setting. %%% This project examines the investment
decisions of firms in industries where new products are introduced. In the
Economics literature, certain patterns of growth and evolution of new industries
have been postulated theoretically, and verified statistically. Commencing with
the introduction of the new product, there is a "growth era" during which
existing firms make substantial profits and new producers enter the market, then
follows a "shakeout period" when prices and profitability decrease and some
firms leave the market. Finally a "mature era" prevails, during which a
stabilization in both prices and the number of firms occurs. These stages have
been observed in the adoption of steam power, diesel locomotives, computers, and
in a general cross-section of new industrial products. During the evolution of
the industry, firms gain more information about the market in which they are
operating, for example demand for the product, and about the actions of other
firms in the same market. This added information influences the firms' decisions
concerning investment in new production processes, output capacity, and hiring.
Gaining an understanding of the evolutionary process of industries and the
diffusion of new technologies holds the promise of increasing our knowledge
about productivity, investment in research and development, and industrial
innovation.