* 8821955
* Chemistry in the Scientific Revolution
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1990
* Edward Davis, Messiah College
* Standard Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 10/31/1990
* USD 9,000.00

"Scientific revolution" has many meanings, the most common being the overthrow
of one theory for another. The "revolution" concerning the theory of continental
drift and plate tectonics is a recent example of such a revolution. Much rarer,
however, has been those kinds of global scientific revolutions which radically
alter our view of the world around us. While there may be more, four readily
come to mind: the Scientific Revolution of the 16th and 17th Centuries, the
Darwinian Revolution, the Einsteinian Revolution and the Revolution ensuing from
Quantum Theory. These revolutions represent not just a change in theories or
sets of theories, but a radical shift of our views of ourselves and our place in
the Universe. Studies of these global revolutions consequently remain centrally
important for understanding both science and human nature itself. Dr. Davis is
examining the papers of one of the central figures in the first scientific
revolution, Robert Boyle. Boyle, second only to Newton, made lasting
contributions to the establishment of the mechanical philosophy. As an
experimental scientist and aggressive polemicist, Boyle sought to demonstrate
the philosophical, theological, and scientific deficiencies of the Aristotelian,
Renaissance and Cartesian systems of nature. It is in no small part owing to
Boyle's defense of atomism that Newton and his followers also rejected these
other systems. Despite his importance, Boyle's unpublished papers have never
been analyzed as a whole for what they reveal about the development of his
thought. Collaborating with Dr. Michael Hunter of the University of London, Dr.
Davis will undertake an analytical study of he relationship of Boyle's
unpublished and published writings. The long term goal is to complete a work
which will shed entirely new light on our understanding of a man whose work can
be seen as a microcosm of the scientific revolution.