* 8821514
* Establishment of a Tree-Ring Analysis Laboratory for        Utilization in Climatologic and Sedimentologic              Investigations
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* James Schmitt, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/1991
* USD 26,890.00

Dendrochronology (the temporal analysis of growth rings in woody plants) has
become an important field of research with many applications spanning geography,
biology, hydrology, climatology, ecology, geomorphology, and related sciences.
By analyzing the width and condition of growth rings, scientists gain valuable
information about plant growth and the conditions that enhance or inhibit
growth. Dendrochronological studies have permitted scientists to infer historic
conditions as far back in time as the plants from which growth rings are taken
have lived, which has been thousands of years under special circumstances. The
grant will support establishment of a tree- ring analysis laboratory at Montana
State University. This lab will contain equipment necessary for collection,
preparation, and analysis of woody plant growth-rings, and it will be used as an
integral component for climatic and sedimentologic research. One of the major
research projects underway at the laboratory site involves the use of
dendrochronology to reconstruct past temperature, precipitation, and air mass
patterns at both upper and lower timberlines in a region of the northern Rocky
Mountains. This work will add a substantial body of information to the minimal
amount of data currently available on the paleo-environmental conditions of that
region, and it will provide knowledge of recent environmental change and the
consequences of that change. The second ongoing project involves determination
of the frequency of debris flows generated by high-precipitation events on
modern alluvial fans in the northern Rocky Mountains. Analysis of the
sedimentology and frequency of debris flows caused by high- precipitation events
will provide extensive information about the volume and timing of debris flows
in temperate, semi-arid alluvial fans. Correlation of debris flows with local
patterns of climatic variation can also help to evaluate the degree to which
climate influences erosion. These results will also contribute toward refinement
of models commonly applied to interpret deposits in the stratigraphic record of
alluvial fans. There are few existing tree-ring analysis laboratories in the
United States. The establishment of such a laboratory at Montana State
University will facilitate the acquisition of dendrochronologic data in an
inexpensive and timely manner not now possible. This lab will provide data for
two major ongoing paleoclimatologic and sedimentologic investigations and for a
number of future projects planned by scholars at that institution and elsewhere.
These research projects will increase our understanding of the temporal
significance of climatic fluctuations and earth surface processes.