* 8821781
* The Interaction of Gas Phase Methyl Radicals with Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1993
* Peter Stair, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry N. Blount, III
* 07/31/1993
* USD 315,418.00

This project is in the general area of analytical and surface chemistry and in
the subfield of surface chemical reaction dynamics. The interaction of methyl
free radicals with well-defined surfaces of iron and molydenum metal single
crystals chemically modified by adsorption of one atomic layer of oxygen will be
investigated. Interactions of this radical species with polycrystalline iron and
molybdenum oxide surfaces will also be studied. Ultrahigh vacuum surface science
techniques will be employed to characterize the solid surfaces prior to their
exposure to the radicals and then to detect radical adsorption and reaction. The
resulting surface and gas-phase species will be identified and their yields
quantified as a function of time and temperature. These results will enable the
kinetics and mechanisms of radical adsorption, desorption and surface chemical
reactions to be elucidated. Chemical reactions that involve free radical
intermediates are important in chemistry and the interactions of these species
with surfaces are important in many technologies. The methyl radical is one of
the simplest and most reactive hydrocarbon radicals and is thought to be present
as an intermediate in many hydrocarbon reactions that follow free radical
reaction mechanisms. The oxygenated surfaces to be studied in this research
project will provide models for technological materials exposed to free radical
reaction environments.