* 8821521
* Experimental Bargaining Games
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1989,05/31/1993
* Kenneth Binmore, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1993
* USD 147,519.00

Recent research has shown much progress in the theory of games and its
applications to economic analysis, particularly to situations involving
bargaining. However, it has become evident that some parts of this theory are
likely to be relevant in realistic economic applications, and other parts show
little explanatory or predictive power. What remains unclear are the
circumstances under which even the simplest and most fundamental principles of
game theory can be expected to be useful as part of a genuinely predictive
theory of human behavior. This research examines the precepts of game theory,
namely the information available to the players either at the outset or through
learning, the rules of the game, and the likely outcomes, in a systematic and
rigorous manner. Starting with a two-person zero-sum game, the experiments
become more complex to include multi-stage bargaining games and auctions. At
each phase of the work careful analysis is done to allow for the the effects of
the environment of the game and the experience of the players on the outcome.
%%% One of the fundamental contributions to the analysis of human behavior is
the 1928 work of John von Neumann in which the concept of human interaction
modeled as a game between players is developed. The game has rules which must be
followed and penalties for breaking the rules. Each player has varying amounts
of information about the game, the other players, and the likely outcomes of
strategies. In this environment the players react to incentives provided by the
rules of the game, and endeavor to guide the game to an outcome in concert with
their own interests. During the past several decades game theoretic analysis has
been widely applied to economic environments including cartel formation and
stability, auctions and bidding, international trade, market analysis,
contracting and other types of bargaining, and the formulation of government
policy. However, the results of game theoretic studies have often been
questionable when they are used to explain economic behavior or predict the
future behavior of economic agents. In particular, game strategies which seem
optimal in the short run often break down over the longer term. The contribution
of this project is that it examines game theory applications to economic
analysis from a fundamental standpoint. It explains what aspects of game theory
are in concert with the basic precepts of economic theory. This research also
isolates the properties of game theoretic analysis which are inherently flawed
from the standpoint of economic behavior, and when applied to economic problems
will lead to ambiguous or erroneous conclusions.