* 8821944
* International Economic Transactions: A Conference on        Research and Measurement - Washington, DC, Fall l989
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Peter Hooper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* jerry blackmon
* 11/30/1990
* USD 27,000.00

The growing economic interdependence of the world economy, including the
internationalization of markets for goods, services, factors of production, and
financial assets is creating increasing demands for measuring and monitoring
economic influences from beyond a country's borders. The substantial impact on
the U.S. economy of the foreign oil shocks during the 1970s and the
international repercussions of sharp policy shifts and structural change in the
1980s have clearly rendered obsolete any lingering conventions of closed-economy
measurement and assessment. As efforts to consult on and coordinate policies
across countries mount in response to changing patterns of trade, growing
external imbalances, and fluctuating exchange rates, there is a further impetus
for each country's mneasurement and monitoring of international transactions to
be comparable to that of other countries. This proposal is to convene a two-day
conference in Washington, D.C. in the Fall of 1989 on international economic
transactions. The project commissions papers that advance measurement, policy
assessment and knowledge in this substantive area. Each paper is empirical, and
each attempts to answer an important research question using data from a choice
of sub-areas. Finally, each paper assesses the quality of data in one of these
sub-areas: prices and costs of traded goods and services; relations among trade,
output and consumption; trade in services; direct investment and embodied trade
in primary inputs; cross national stocks and flows of financial capital; and
measurement of policy. Illustrative of research questions addressed are how to
compare price indexes of traded goods and correct them for quality change, how
to identify determinants and size of trade and direct investment in services,
and how to measure non-tax, non-tariff policy initiatives and their effects.
Concern is increasing within the broader scientific community that international
economic data are in need of critical asssessment and significant overhaul. The
time is ripe for drawing together researchers, policy analysts, and statistical
staff of the highest professional reputation , with proven commitments to
measurement and research of outstanding quality.