* 8821079
* Integration of System Reliability in the Structural Design  Process System Reliability-Based Design of Transmission     Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* H.Joseph Dagher, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* Ken Chong
* 06/30/1992
* USD 64,003.00

While methods to estimate system reliability are being studied extensively, the
practical inclusion of system reliability at the design level has received
comparatively little attention. In designing a structure, the ultimate concern
is system reliability rather than individual component reliabilities. However,
existing Reliability-Based Design methods are component-based. The objective of
this project is to develop a model system- reliability-based-LRFD method. Since
the proposers have a wide experience with transmission structures, this model
LRFD method will apply to the design of electric transmission structures. The
project will be conducted in two phases. The first phase will develop a computer
program that designers and utilities can use to incorporate system reliability
in the design of transmission structures. The second phase will use the computer
program from phase one to extend the investigators component- based RBD method
for transmission structures to include system reliability capability. This
project is seeking 50% co-sponsorship from NSF. The U.S. power industry,
represented by the Electric Power Research Institute, has committed to obtain
the other 50% of the funds required for this project.