* 8821796
* Interest Rates, Financial Markets and Economic Activity     During the Great Depression
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Stephen Cecchetti, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1992
* USD 83,760.00

The proposed research will investigate the interaction between the financial
sector and the real economy of the United States during the 1930s. The research
will use data on the term structure of interest rates constructed in earlier
work to examine the role of monetary and financial factors in the propagation of
the Great Depression. The research can be divided into several related projects.
The first explores the severe deflation of 1930-32 and provides evidence that
the deflation was anticipated. This is followed by an analysis of the impact of
anticipated deflation. The result is a new theory for the propagation of the
Depression which states that anticipated deflation, caused by contractionary
monetary policy, brought on both an investment collapse and a fall in
consumption. This, in turn, caused bankruptcies and the collapse of the banking
system. The second project studies the evolution of interest rates during the
1930s. Bond yields contain substantial information about both the functioning of
financial markets and the state of the real economy. By analyzing movements in
the term structure, one can make inferences about the causes of the length and
depth of the Depression and differentiate among the various theories for its
causes. The final project examines the market for U.S. Government securities
during the 1930s. It will study both the methods of Treasury finance and issues
related to the pricing of bonds and notes. Most of the current empirical work on
the role of credit markets in exacerbating fluctuations in real activity has
been conducted at the firm level and has focussed on the importance of credit
constraints. The proposed research is distinctive in that it examines the role
of credit at the macro level using a large new data set on the Great Depression.
Resolution of still lingering debates over the nature and causes of the Great
Depression has the potential for clarifying controversies on theory and policy
in the present day.