* 8821715
*  U.S.-Thailand Cooperative Research on Crowding, Family      Relations, and Health.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* John Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1990
* USD 7,950.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. Theodore D. Fuller and John N.
Edwards, Department of Sociology, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State
University, to pursue with Dr. Santhat Sermsri, Department of Social Sciences,
and Dr. Sairudee Vorakitphokatorn, Institute for Population and Social Research,
Mahidol University, Thailand, for a period of 12 months, a program of
cooperative research on crowding, family relations, and health. The primary
objective of the project is to determine whether, in the Thai context, high
levels of household crowding have detrimental consequences for family relations
and health and, if so, to investigate whether there is a "tipping point," or
threshold beyond which crowding effects become greatly pronounced. Research on
mammals, such as various types of rats and deer, has shown crowding to be
associated with a variety of deleterious consequences for the overcrowded
animals. In sociological theory, crowding has been thought to be associated with
adverse social consequences. Bangkok, Thailand, is a highly appropriate site in
which to conduct this research because of the extreme rates of crowding found in
some Thai communities. The present project will enhance cooperative research
under NSF Grant No. SES 8618157 by providing funds for the two Thai Co-PI's to
visit the USA to collaborate with their US counterparts on the analysis phase of
their research. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.