* 8821407
* Opportunity, Choice, and Social Control:  Testing an        Integrated Theory of Criminal Victimization
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Terance Miethe, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1991
* USD 190,353.00

Over the last two decades, several theories have emerged to account for the
social distribution of criminal victimization. Testing these theories is
important to advancing our understanding of crime. In addition, public policy
regarding crime control also depends on the validity of victimization theories.
For example, citizen-initiated crime prevention activities such as private
security systems and neighborhood block watch are based on assumptions about the
causes of crime and the spatial distribution of crime and victimization.
Unfortunately, limitations of existing data preclude systematic study of
competing victimization theories and the utility of various crime control
activities. This project is designed to overcome the limitations of previous
victimization studies by collecting and compiling multiple sources of data (e.g.
census, archival, police reports, telephone survey, field observation) on 5400
residents of 90 neighborhoods in a single city. These data will be used to
describe changes in each neighborhood over time, test the predictive accuracy of
a structural-choice theory of criminal victimization at various levels of
analysis (i.e., neighborhoods, streets, and individuals), and examine whether
individuals benefit from the crime control activity of their neighbors.
Multivariate modeling approaches permit examining a range of issues, including
whether a displacement or free rider effect best characterizes the impact of
crime control activity on individuals' risks of victimization. This study will
result in a comprehensive data collection on victimization, social control
measures, and routine activities and lifestyles. No previous study has collected
data on such issues that have a sufficient number of observations for multi-
level analyses, include multiple measures of theoretically relevant variables,
involve several modes of observation, and simultaneously consider individual and
group processes. Through the examination of multiple primary and secondary data
sources, the research will provide a unique opportunity to evaluate current
victimization theories and the crime-reduction benefits of crime control
measures. The results should have an impact on theories of social change and
victimization as well as on programmatic strategies for crime reduction.