* 8821451
* Economic Effects of Alternative Compensation Systems
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1990
* Derek Jones, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 08/31/1990
* USD 47,733.00

The purpose of this project is to generate rigorous econometric evidence on the
economic effect of alternative, compensation systems. Particular emphasis is on
examining various profit sharing systems, studying the consequences of differing
institutional arrangements for levels and variability employment, analyzing
rates of investment, and examining the survival and productivity of firms. This
work will draw on results from the previous award where a very detail
longitudinal data set of profit sharing firms was assembled. The analysis of
this data has focused on exploring the relationship between levels of
unemployment and alternative compensation systems. $$$ Recently, considerable
attention has been paid to alternative forms of business organization and of
workers' renumeration schemes. In part, this reflects the disappointing
macroeconomic performance of most industrial nations during the past decade, and
a perception that many American industries were losing their ability to compete
with foreign firms. The failure of these economies to attain full employment
with stable prices has stimulated interest in alternative labor compensation
schemes that would link part of employee compensation to the performance of the
firm, and thereby improve worker productivity and the firm's competitiveness.
These compensation arrangements include profit sharing, employee share
ownership, and productivity gain sharing. This project is important because it
will provide a better understanding of how alternative worker compensation
systems might improve the performance of the US economy.