* 8821542
* CSU/TTU Cooperative Research Program for Wind Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1989,12/31/1996
* Robert Meroney, Colorado State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* J. Eleonora Sabadell
* 12/31/1996
* USD 1,639,842.00

A five-year Cooperative Research Program in Wind Engineering (CRPWE) between
Colorado State University and Texas Tech University has been set in motion with
two major objectives. The first, to focus an interdisciplinary effort on
selected wind engineering research problems related to the quality and safety of
the human environment. The second, to contribute the results of research to the
activities of the upcoming United States Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction
(USDNDR) and to the International Decade for Natural Disaster Reduction (IDNDR).
The CRPWE will be guided by an external Technology Assessment and Advisory
Council (TAAC) consisting of ten to twelve nationally and internationally
recognized experts in wind engineering. Faculty, graduate and undergraduate
students from different Departments and from both Universities will exchange
freely between the two institutions. Several tasks identifying specific research
problems in wind engineering will be addressed by CRPWE by focussing on the
measurement of flow and structural behavior of full-scale buildings and
structures, physical models of the same and similar configurations in
meteorological wind tunnels, validation of analytical and numerical wind
engineering models, and extrapolation of the results to design codes and
engineering practice. Wind loads on low- rise buildings, non-boundary layer
simulation, building roofing performance, prediction of extreme wind, and
numerical modeling of flow are some of the topics to be investigated
interdisciplinarily. The data gathered, the evaluations performed and the design
recommendations prepared from the research performed will lead to a safer and
economically more viable building environment, better able to protect people,
and capable of withstanding the onslaught of hurricanes, tornadoes, and
windstorms.