* 8821059
* Group Travel Support for U.S. Participants in Tokyo         International Symposium on the Human Response to Global     Change, September 19-22, 1988
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1989
* Harold Jacobson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1989
* USD 18,084.00

This group travel proposal requests funds to cover the travel and subsistence of
U.S. participants in the Tokyo International Symposium on the Human Response to
Global Change on September 19- 22,1988. The symposium has the potential of being
an important step in the process of developing an international social science
research program that could become part of, or be parallel and complementary to,
the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme: A Study of Global Change
(IGBP). The International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme, as currently conceived,
includes very little social science research. To comprehend global change fully
it will be necessary to understand the human dimensions of global change. Human
activities have consequences for the Earth system, and changes in the Earth
system will have consequences for mankind. The potential importance of social
science research for IGBP has been broadly acknowledged, and initial steps have
been taken to launch an international social science research program to be part
of or to complement IGBP. The National Science Foundation provided funds to
support two workshops on the human dimensions of global change: the Ann Arbor
workshop, held in September 1987 which was comprised primarily of U.S. social
scientists, and the Chinese-U.S. workshop, which was held in Beijing in May
1988. The Tokyo symposium will be the first meeting on the human dimensions of
global change with broad international representation. It could make a major
contribution to defining an international research program on the human
dimensions of global change. To insure that the results of the two NSF-supported
workshops influence the outcome of the Tokyo symposium, it is important that
U.S. participants in the two workshops be able to take part in the Tokyo
symposium.