* 8822445
* US-Norway Cooperative Research:  Investigation of Core-     ionization Energies, Acidities and Related Chemical         Properties
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1990
* T. Darrah Thomas, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1990
* USD 4,950.00

This award supports Professor T. Darrah Thomas of Oregon State University and
Dr. Michele R. Siggel of Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory for research collaboration
with Professor Leif J. Saethre of the Department of Chemistry of the University
of Tromso, Norway. They share an interest in understanding the factors that
affect the ability of a molecule to accept charge. They are studying the
relationships between core-ionization energies, proton affinities, and the rates
and orientations of additions reactions. They will also investigate substituent
effects in thiopenes and the charge distri- bution in nonplanar amides. Their
research uses experimental measurements of core-ionization energies and Augur
kinetic energies, comparison of these energies with each other and with gas-
phase acidities, and ab initio electronic structure calculations. The
experimental facilities for the research, including primarily an electron
spectrometer, are at Oregon State University. Some of the theoretical work is
done at all three locations, but the main focus of theoretical capabilities and
facilities is the University of Tromso. It has a well developed set of
theoretical programs, computers for efficiently exploiting them, and a core of
theoretical chemists to help in developing further insights into these problems.
Many important chemical processes depend on the ability of a molecule to accept
charge. This ability is affected by two factors: the charge distribution in the
neutral molecule and the ability of valence electrons to rearrange after the
charge is added. This research investigates the deficiencies of simple models
that have long been used to understand these effects. It should produce a better
understanding of the electronic structure of small molecules and of the factors
that affect the ability of molecules to accept charge.