* 8822565
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Almost Periodicity and Asymptotics for Semigroups of        Operators
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* W. Summers, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1993
* USD 10,237.00

This award supports Professor W. H. Summers of the University of Arkansas to
collaborate in research with Professor Wolfgang M. Ruess of the Mathematics
Department, University of Essen, West Germany. In previous joint work, these
investigators have combined complementary backgrounds to develop criteria and
techniques which have proved useful in resolving some longstanding problems by
providing new insight into dynamical phenomena that are asymptotically close to
being almost periodic. The proposed cooperative research program will continue
this line of investigation. The goal of the research is to identify conditions
on the semigroup, its generator, and the initial values under which trajectories
are asymptotically almost periodic in some appropriate sense. Both the expected
and existing results in this direction will be applied to questions concerning
the existence and description of strong or weak limits of ergodic means,
asymptotic behavior of solutions to the Cauchy problem and functional
differential equations with infinite delay, and asymptotic behavior of age-
dependent population models. Mathematical models for many time-dependent
processes in physics, chemistry and biology take the form of a Cauchy problem
associated with the generator of a semigroup of operators on an appropriate
Banach state space. The future-time behavior of the process can then be
investigated by studying asymptotic properties of motions and almost-orbits of
the corresponding semigroup. There has been considerable effort devoted by many
researchers in recent years to classifying the asymptotic behavior of nonlinear
semigroups. A great variety of results has been established by different
methods. Drs. Summers and Ruess have brought new techniques and insights to the
problem, and have recently produced some very interesting contributions to this
subject. They are now beginning to seek new applications of their results, in
particular to nonlinear functional differential equations.