* 8822574
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Photosynthetic        Electron Transfer Reactions
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1990
* David Knaff, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1990
* USD 3,181.00

This award provides modest support to Dr. David B. Knaff of Texas Tech
University to facilitate a long term research visit to the University of Zurich,
Switzerland. There he will collaborate in two lines of research with Professor
Hans R. Bosshard of the Biochemistry Institute and Professor Reinhard Bachofen
of the Plant Biology Institute. Both collaborative projects represent logical
extensions of Dr. Knaff's current research; however, his laboratory is not
adequately equipped to carry out certain aspects of the work alone.
Collaboration with Professor Bosshard centers on elucidating the details of an
electrostatically stabilized complex between two plant electron transfer
proteins, ferredoxin and ferredoxin:NADP+ oxidoreductase (FNR). FNR is a key
enzyme of the photosynthetic electron transfer chain of all oxygen-evolving
photosynthetic organisms. Chemical modification of specific amino acid groups
will be employed to identify the charged groups that are involved in holding the
two proteins together. Antibodies prepared against different sites on FNR will
be used to identify the specific roles of different domains on FNR in catalyzing
electron transfer from ferredoxin to NADP+. Characterization of the detailed
geometry of the ferrodoxin:FNR complex may provide clues to the likely
configuration of other ferrodoxin:enzyme complexes. It may also provide insights
into the functioning of related protein complexes in mammalian metabolism.
Professor Bosshard has state-of-the-art facilities for protein sequencing and he
is an acknowledged world-leader in using the technique of differential chemical
modification to identify specific amino acid residues involved in the formation
of protein complexes. Collaboration with Professor Bachofen will focus on
identifying changes in electron-carrying protein constituents in one region of
the electron transfer chain of Rhodopseudomonas viridis that occur when the
bacterium is grown under aerobic versus photosynthetic conditions. The electron
transfer chains of such photosynthetic purple non-sulfur bacteria have become
increasingly better understood in recent years. However, much less is known
about the respiratory chain than about its photosynthetic electron transfer
chain. Resemblances between electron flow in photosynthetic purple bacteria and
in mitochondria, chloroplasts and cyanobacteria increase the potential relevance
and significance of this work. Professor Bachofen's group offers valuable state-
of-the-art computer-controlled apparatus for growing photosynthetic bacteria and
expertise in the molecular biology of such bacteria.