* 8822491
* Testing Numerical Approaches to Phylogenetic Inference
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Robert Sokal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David Schindel
* 07/31/1992
* USD 133,400.00

Evolutionary relationships among organisms are central to research in the
biological sciences. Understanding the history of branching and divergence
through the history of a group of organisms must precede an understanding of
their function, ecology, geographic distribution, even their relevance for
medical research. Drs. Robert Sokal and F. James Rohlf have, for the past three
decades, pioneered the use of computers for reconstructing evolutionary
relationships among organisms based on morphological and molecular data sets.
Several different approaches have been proposed for reconstructing phylogenies
(e.g., maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood, overall similarity). Past work by
Sokal and Rohlf has shown that under different circumstances, each of these
alternate methods produces the most accurate and stable reconstruction of a
computer- generated branching history. They now propose to develop new methods
with which investigators can select the most appropriate tool for analyzing real
data, for which the underlying branching history is unknown. The methods and
advice to be developed will have a wide audience, including systematists working
on all organisms, and functional morphologists and biogeographers, for whom
evolutionary relationships provide the framework for their research.