* 8822657
* The University of Chicago Computer Science Laboratory
* CSE,EIA
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1995
* Michael O'Donnell, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 06/30/1995
* USD 2,154,142.00

This award will provide funds to develop computing infrastructure for a wide
variety of research, with the primary areas being equational logic, case-based
reasoning, computer vision and graphics, numerical solution of partial
differential equations, and computer science theory. The infrastructure to be
set up will include a VLSI design facility to be used by students and faculty in
developing and testing circuit designs. This facility will be used be used by a
number of other research projects. The research in equational logic is concerned
with the development of useful implementations of an equational logic
programming. The following issues will be addressed: compiler optimizations,
radical new implementation techniques based on congruence closure, extensions of
the language to provide modularity, implementation of indeterminate systems
without the Church-Rosser property, more powerful techniques for guaranteeing
determinacy, more flexible input-output interfaces integrating equational
programming with structure editors and debuggers, and parallel evaluation of
equational programs. The research on case-based reasoning is concerned with the
analysis and implementation of reasoning by remembering previous results and
adapting them to new situations. This approach will be applied to four projects:
evaluating student applications, diagnosing mechanical failures, routing
delivery vehicles, and tutoring high school students in geometry. The research
on computer vision and graphics involves the study of a new efficient general
purpose algorithm for recognizing polyhedral objects in arbitrary orientations.
Practical applicability of the algorithm will be tested and generalizations of
the algorithm will be investigated. The research on numerical solutions of
partial differential equations involves several projects dealing with particle
methods, multigrid methods, variational inequalities, and superconvergent
recovery of information in finite element methods. The research also involves
studying operator-splitting and time-splitting methods for the simulation of
fluid flow in porous media, and dealing with singularities in solutions of the
Navier-Stokes equations. The theoretical areas of research include complexity
theory and algorithms, programming language semantics, recursion theory, and the
application of recursion theoretic concepts and techniques to the theoretical
foundations of learning.