* 8822851
* Engineering Analysis of Cerebral Microvascular Tissue
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1988,05/15/1989
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 05/15/1989
* USD 14,885.00

A computerized video microscope system will be used to digitize, store and
reconstruct complete microvascular networks in the cerebral cortex of the rat in
vitro. A mathematical model of cerebral microcirculation based on the
reconstructed course, branching pattern and diameter of the vessels and a model
of apparent blood viscosity will be developed. The model will be used for a
computer simulation of vascular growth and adaptation to mechanical strain and
changing blood flow representing growth of or injury to brain tissue and/or a
change in local tissue metabolism. The cerebral microcirculation plays a
critical role in the maintenance of an optimum internal environment for neuronal
function. The response and adaptation of microvascular architecture and blood
flow to mechanical and biochemical stimuli from normal or injured nervous tissue
is, however, poorly understood. A computer simulation of cerebral microvascular
growth based on real vascular architecture and geometry is developed to study
possible mechanical/hemodynamic determinants of microvascular reorganization.
Until now, the measurement and modeling of the essentially 3-dimensional
cerebrovascular architecture has been essentially impossible. Using novel
methods of computerized video microscopy, the true 3-dimensional Topological and
geometrical organization of complete microvascular networks of the brain cortex
can be determined for the first time. This allows the engineering analysis of
distribution of blood flow in the reconstructed microvascular system and, in
turn, the computer simulation of the adaptive growth of vascular tissue in
response to mechanical and functional stimuli.