* 8822296
* Methods of Crystal and Molecular Structure Determination
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Herbert Hauptman, Hauptman-Woodward Medical Research Institute Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 09/30/1992
* USD 351,640.00

Dr. Herbert Hauptman is supported by a grant from The Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to continue his work in the application of
direct methods to the solution of protein crystal structures. The direct method
techniques have been very successful in solving the difficult "phase problem"
associated with the determination of X-ray crystal structures of small and
medium sized molecules. The current approach being used by Hauptman and
coworkers attempts to combine this powerful method with other currently used
techniques to assist in the determination of crystal structures for proteins. A
potential benefit of the proposed research is a rapid and routine technique for
the determination of 3 dimensional structures of large enzyme structures. A more
detailed understanding of enzyme structure and function is the first step in
designing drugs to treat many infectious diseases. Drs. Herbert Hauptman and
Jerome Karle received the 1985 Nobel Prize in Chemistry for their contributions
to the development of the direct method for solving the phase problem in X-ray
crystallography. This method is now used routinely throughout the world for
automated solution of X-ray crystal structures of small and medium sized
molecules. Hauptman's current research attempts to combine direct methods with
other current phasing techniques such as isomorphous replacement and anomalous
dispersion in order to develop a more powerful tool for solving crystal
structures of biologically important macromolecular species.