* 8822746
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  High Resolution ESCA       Studies of Surface Electronic States In Cu/ZnO Methanol     Synthesis Catalysts
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1990
* Gary Simmons, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 09/30/1990
* USD 13,000.00

This award will support collaborative research in heterogeneous catalysis
between Dr. Gary Simmons, Lehigh University and Profs. Ulrik Gelius and Nils
Martensson, Physics Institute, University of Uppsala, Sweden. X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (ESCA) is a tool of major importance in materials
science. Recent developments in this field promise unprecedented advances, as
well as precision in the understanding of properties of materials that stem from
interfacial phenomena. In this joint project, Dr. Simmons will use ESCA
instruments developed in Sweden to study the interaction between copper and zinc
oxide that is believed to account for the activity of Cu/ZnO methanol synthesis
catalysts. The Uppsala instrument has the highest sensitivity at high energy
resolution in the world, and thus has the capability of resolving the copper-
zinc oxide interaction from the valence band photo electron spectrum of the
Cu/ZnO catalyst. High resolution spectra of the core electron levels, as well as
the Auger electron transition, may provide further evidence for the copper-zinc
oxide interaction. In addition, participation in the ongoing programs at the
Physics Institute will afford the principal investigator the opportunity to
learn about the theoretical basis of new information that will likely be
resolved by the new generation of high resolution ESCA instruments. The project
will benefit from the significant background and experience in heterogeneous
catalysis of the principal investigator, as well as the recent interest by the
Uppsala group in the application of high energy resolution ESCA to solid state
problems, including catalysis.