* 8822003
* Development of Space-Time Finite Elements for Nonlinear     Transient Response of Flexible Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/1989,04/30/1993
* David Peters, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Devendra P. Garg
* 04/30/1993
* USD 154,418.00

This project focuses on the computational difficulties associated with steep
gradients in the velocity and displacement fields in structures subjected to
impulsive loadings. The conventional finite element approach would suggest
creating a finer element mesh around the areas with large gradients, but since
the gradients move through the structure, such a procedure is not efficient.
This could be solved by increasing the number of finite elements throughout the
structure, but it would be computationally impractical to do so. An alternative
approach would call for formulation of the problem in terms of a modal analysis.
The large number of modes thereby required to model the structure implies
similar computational difficulties. A third alternative, finite differences in
space and time is computationally inefficient for use in design oriented
analysis. The approach adopted herein, finite elements formulated in the space
time domain, offers the possibility of overcoming these computational problems.
Three classes of physical systems will be analyzed including a string under
constant tension, a string under nonuniform tension, and a linear Timoshenko
beam. For the string models, initial value problems including those for which a
wave travels down the string will be solved as well as those involving moving
load and impulsive load problems. For the Timoshenko beam, moving loads and
moving constraint problems will be considered. The project comprises three
phases including: (1) determining shape functions and convergence criteria for
finite elements that cut across space and time; (2) computing solutions for
string problems and study of convergence properties, and set up of the general
solution for a space time finite element formulation for Timoshenko beams; and
(3) determining solutions for beam problems with moving loads and moving
constraints. The impact of this research will be on the methods of analysis for
systems with moving loads or constraints, deployment problems, and flexible
manipulator arms.