* 8822130
* A Decision-Making Approach to Technological Change
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Robert Thomas, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 10/31/1991
* USD 119,981.00

One of the key aspects of the economic competitiveness of a nation's industry is
its organization of production work, particulary in the face of industry-wide
changes in technology. How do organizations actually make decisions about
developing or acquiring and then deploying new technology? How do differences in
organizational structure, organizational politics and change processes affect
the utilization of new technology? What effects on the acceptance and benefits
of new technology does the timely involvement of shopfloor management, workers,
and different layers of middle and upper management have? This research will
pursue these and related questions. The proposals offers a preliminary theory of
the politics of organizational decision-making around new technology and
proposes to test the propositions of this theory in a detailed examination of
twelve cases of technological change in four major U.S. - based manufacturing
firms (one each from the aerospace, automotive, electronics and steel
industries). The individual cases will be compared to official company policy
and with one another to generate a profile of each company's practice. These
profiles will then be compared against briefer profiles obtained from other
companies in the same industry and across industries to learn how generalizable
to a wider segment of American industry are the conclusions from these case
studies. This study of organizational decision making should contribute to a
social scientific understanding of the processes which shape the organization of
work, to ongoing efforts to transform labor-management relations and to policy
deliberations surrounding the impacts of technological change. Access to the
firms involved grows out of an extraordinary larger joint program betgween
participating companies and the Schools of Management and Engineering at MIT
("Leaders in Manufacturing" program).