* 8822421
* US-Finland Joint Workshop on Control of Particulate Process Operation; August 14-18,1989; Helsinki, Finland
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1990
* John Herbst, United Engineering Trustees, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1990
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides partial support for the participation of approxi- mately 15
U.S. engineers in a small conference intended to examine the state of the art in
the control of particulate process operations. The meeting was organized jointly
by Professors K. Rajamani and John A. Herbst of the University of Utah and Antti
Niemi of the Control Engineering Laboratory of the Helsinki University of
Technology, Espoo, Finland. The conference will deal with all aspects of the
control of particulate processes, including modeling, optimization and computer
control. The processes of interest are: solid-solid and solid-liquid separation,
agglomeration, comminution, crystallization, solvent extraction and leaching.
Topics for sessions are: dynamic models, control strategies, theoretical aspects
of control and expert systems, and process optimization. Advancement in the
field of control in the past decade has been furthered primarily by three
factors: new computer hardware, process instrumentation and process control
theory. Much of the advanced work combining these three elements has been done
in the U.S. and Finland. In fact, the earliest plant scale control application
was implemented in Finland in the 1960's. Thus, Finnish research and operating
experience leads the world in important respects, and it is highly appropriate
that a joint U.S.-Finnish meeting be held to examine the state of the art and
identify directions for future research. The particulate process industries,
i.e., those involved with the processing of minerals, chemicals, cement and
coal, face serious problems in energy costs and the declining reserve of raw
materials. Thus they must constantly seek new technologies to remain
competitive. Process control, or the regulation of their processing operations
by computer, has emerged as one of the most important options available to these
industries to improve plant productivity without enormous capital investment.
This meeting of researchers and practitioners from the U.S., Finland, and
several other countries, will contribute to the synthesis and enhancement of
existing knowledge in this important field and set directions for needed future
research.