* 8822508
* Multiple Metal-Carbon Bonds, Metallacycles, and Catalytic   Reactions Involving Olefins and Acetylenes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Richard Schrock, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* E. Kent Barefield
* 08/31/1992
* USD 640,924.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic chemistry Program
is in the area of transition metal organometallic chemistry. The results of the
project will enhance fundamental knowledge in an area critical to the
development of new catalysts for chemical synthesis and hydrocarbon conversion.
The foci of the research are the monoimido alkylidene chemistry of Mo and W and
the chemistry of alkylidyne, alkylidene and imido complexes of Re. Mechanistic
studies will be carried out on olefin metathesis reactions involving Mo and W
complexes of the type M(CHR')(NAr)(OR)2, where Ar=2,6-diisopropylphenyl. The
goal of these experiments will be to sort out the role of trigonal bipyramidal
metallacyclobutane complexes versus square pyramidal metallacyclobutane
complexes, and how precisely olefin metathesis activity is controlled by varying
the nature of the OR group. Another goal will be to develop a practical
synthetic route to molybdenum catalysts, since molybdenum is more tolerant of
functional groups than is tungsten. A third goal will be to extend what has been
learned to rhenium, i.e.,to prepare rhenium acetylene and olefin metathesis
catalysts whose activity can be controlled by the choice of alkoxide ligands, in
part because rhenium is likely to be the most tolerant of these metals toward
functional groups. The behavior of monoimido alkylidyne complexes of the type
Re(CR')(NAr)(OR)2 as acetylene metathesis catalysts will be investigated also,
since at least one related complex is known already to be an active catalyst for
internal acetylenes. The organometallic chemistry of Re(VII) in general will be
developed as routes to such compounds become available.