* 8822281
* Imperfect Competition and Macroeconomic Fluctuations
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Russell Cooper, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1991
* USD 78,227.00

The macroeconomic consequences of imperfect competition have attracted
increasing research interest in recent years. Models of imperfectly competitive
product markets have been developed by the principal investigator which provide
important insights into economies with inefficient but rankable equilibrium
outcomes. The coordination problem, on which he focuses, consists in how
individual agents acting non-cooperatively may move from an inferior equilibrium
position to a better one. If optimizing individual agents lack the capability to
coordinate their actions to reach a preferred equilibrium, then an economy can
become stuck at bad outcomes relative to the set of equilibria. A key question
that arises is what role the government might play in obtaining or facilitating
the necessary coordination. One emphasis of the proposed research is on the
dynamic behavior of these economies through both entry and exit of firms and the
intertemporal linkage created by inventory holdings. Second, it is planned to
analyze the role of strategic complementarities in synchronizing discrete
decisions of firms. Strategic complementarity appears in multi-sector models of
imperfectly competitive economies due to the demand flows across sectors. As a
consequence of these complementarities, shocks in these models also are
propagated across time and over sectors. The third main research emphasis of the
research is on extensive form games. These are studied to gain a better
understanding of the game theoretic foundation of coordination problems and to
shed light on the equilibrium selection process in economic settings with
multiple, (Pareto-)ranked, equilibria.