* 8822472
* Climatology of the Arctic Planetary Boundary Layer and      Temperature Inversion
* O/D,OPP
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* Russell Schnell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/1992
* USD 65,161.00

This project will compile a climatological data set of the temperature structure
of the lower troposphere north of 65 deg N latitude with particular emphasis on
the boundary layer depth and temperature inversion strength. Existing
temperature soundings will be collated to produce a homogeneous arctic-wide data
base. The lower tropospheric temperature inversion that is characteristic of the
arctic exerts a substantial influence on many aspects of coupled arctic air-sea-
ice processes by affecting, for example, the energy and momentum exchange, trace
gas and pollutant dispersion, ice crystal formation, and boundary layer ozone
destruction. Given the fact that climatic models predict that trace gas induced
warming will be most pronounced in polar regions, climate changes may be most
easily detectable in secular changes in the structure of the boundary layer. An
understanding of the spatial and temporal scales of the arctic boundary layer
characteristics is central to a number of atmospheric processes. The primary
goal is to establish a single comprehensive data set from which to develop a
representative climatology of arctic temperature inversions and boundary layer
parameters. Rawinsonde data from land stations, ships, and ice islands, as well
as aircraft dropsonde data will be analyzed to determine spatial and temporal
trends of such parameters as inversion depth, inversion base, and vertical
gradients of wind, temperature, and humidity.