* 8822860
* Replacement of the Research Vessel CONRAD
* GEO,OCE
* 12/21/1988,12/31/1995
* Arnold Gordon, Columbia University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Richard W. West
* 12/31/1995
* USD 12,062,003.00

The Lamont.Doherty Geological Observatory (L.DGO) of Columbia University will
replace the R/V CONRAD with the M/V BERNIER and modify the BERNIER for use in
support of ocean science research. L.DGO currently operates the 209.foot,
Navy.owned R/V CONRAD. The CONRAD is 26 years old and its capabilities regarding
future research project needs are severely restricted by size, load capacity,
laboratory space, endurance and machinery limitations. The Navy has scheduled
CONRAD for retirement by 1991 or sooner. The 239.foot, 5.year old R/V BERNIER,
with the planned modifications, meets all of the University.National
Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS) projected science requirements for a
medium.to.high endurance, general purpose oceanographic research vessel. It will
also provide enhanced capabilities for marine geology and geophysics field
programs including multichannel seismic studies. A modern and efficiently
operated academic research fleet is essential to field programs in the ocean
sciences. The capabilities of the existing research fleet must be substantially
improved if forefront ocean sciences research is to be successfully pursued
during the next decade. Better sea.keeping ability, higher performance, improved
over.the.side handling arrangements, and modern state.of.the.art ship board
laboratories are needed to meet these requirements. The replacement of the
CONRAD by the BERNIER will assist with the required upgrading of the national
academic research fleet to provide support for high.latitude field research
studies in the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), the Global Ocean Flux
Study (GOFS) and other geoscience programs. It will provide support for
multichannel seismic studies required by the Ridge Interdisciplinary Global
Experiments (RIDGE) program and capabilities for site surveys in support of the
Ocean Drilling Program.