* 8822345
* Studies on the Evolutionary Genetics of Pocket Gophers GenusThomomys
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1993
* David Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1993
* USD 208,591.00

Pocket gophers, subterranean rodents of western North America, are among the
world's most variable mammals with respect to their genetic and morphological
features. They occur in all available soil types from desert valleys to mountain
tops, across an extremely wide range of ecological settings. They are, in fact,
major agricultural pests in many areas of their range, particularly in areas
where the native vegetation has been replaced by monocultures of alfalfa or
other crops. Over the past 20 years, James Patton has studied aspects of the
genetic differentiation among populations of pocket gophers in features such as
chromosomal changes and shifts in gene frequencies. These have provided clues to
the processes involved in the development of the enormous degree of evolutionary
divergence that is readily observable among populations of pocket gophers. The
current proposal will be directed primarily to aspects of morphological change
among pocket gopher populations, with particular emphasis on body size variation
and its influence on various aspects of life history, such as density, litter
size, number of litters per year, and so forth. The focus of the study is on
comparisons between populations of pocket gophers from natural desertscrub
vegetation communities in the deserts of eastern California and those that have
invaded recently developed monocultures of alfalfa. Observations to date show
that in as few as a dozen years or so, the average body size in alfalfa
populations increases over two-fold, and that there are major shifts in
reproductive performances associated with these body size changes. These
reproductive changes are of such magnitude that alfalfa farmers are, in fact,
also farming pocket gophers. The principal investigator will investigate the
causal basis of this size variation by a series of transplant experiments,
shifting animals from natural vegetation to alfalfa fields, by observing growth
rates of individuals in both habitats, and by rearing young, born in the
laboratory to mothers caught in both habitat types, under a common nutritional
regime. By so doing, it will be determined if the body size increase is merely a
reflection of the radical change in diet represented by alfalfa, or whether it
represents a major change in genetical constitution due to natural selection.
These studies will incorporate several different paired natural and alfalfa
populations, and the relationships among the pairs will be ascertained by
genetic techniques, such as protein electrophoresis and DNA sequence analysis.