* 8822525
* US-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Structure and Dynamic of the Earth's Interior Long-term Research Visit to Cambridge
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1990
* David Loper, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 10/31/1990
* USD 14,550.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. David Loper Florida
State University and Professor H. K. Moffatt, Department of Applied Mathematics
and Theoretical Physics, University of Cambridge, England. During a one year
research visit at Cambridge, Dr. Loper will study the structure and dynamics of
the Earth's interior, including the structure of core motions driven by
compositional buoyancy, dynamo action of fluid motions and fundamental studies
of partially solidified systems. The past decade has seen significant advances
in our understanding of the structure and dynamics of the Earth's deep interior,
brought about by the application of physical principles and mathematical
analysis. Dr. Loper has carried out previous work on the nature of the dynamo
energy supply and the structure of the D" layer at the base of the mantle.
During the proposed visit, these topics will be extended in several directions.
In particular, he will investigate specific motion fields in the Earth's outer
core which may sustain the geodynamo. Dr. Moffat and his colleagues at Cambridge
have significant expertise in this area of research. Dr. Loper is an applied
mathematician, who has become an expert theoretical geophysicist through his
research on dynamical and thermodynamical properties of the core and mantle of
the Earth.