* 8822541
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research: Struc- tural Studies of Very Unstable Compounds of Theoretical     Interest by Low Temperature X-ray Crystallography
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1990
* W. Billups, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1990
* USD 4,970.00

This award supports Professor W. E. Billups of Rice University to collaborate in
research with Dr. Roland Boese of the Institute for Inorganic Chemistry of the
University of Essen, West Germany. The objective of their joint research is to
determine the structures of very unstable molecules of theoretical interest. Dr.
Boese and his co-workers have developed an apparatus to crystallize liquids on
an x-ray diffractometer at low temperatures by means of a miniature zone melting
procedure with focused infrared light. He has been able to determine very
accurate structures of unstable inorganic compounds. Dr. Billups has developed a
vacuum gas phase procedure for the synthesis of small ring cycloalkanes and
other highly strained organic compounds. The innovative experimental techniques
they have introduced have had wide but separate applicability. The plan for the
collaboration combines their virtually unique expertise through the synthesis
and preliminary characterization of the compounds at Rice University and then
determination of their precise structures using the unusual equipment at Essen.
Small ring cycloalkanes have aroused great interest because their high energy
content relative to their acyclic isomers often results in unexpected
properties. Progress in this area has been slowed by the extreme difficulty of
structural analysis of such highly unstable compounds. The successful
application of the Boese technique to the acquisition of good structural data by
low temperature x-ray crystallography would be a boon to physical organic
chemists engaged in structural chemistry. In addition, the technique, once
accessible to the chemical community as a whole, will find wide application in
the structural analysis of small unstable molecules.