* 8822783
* Regulation of Delayed Rectification in Heart by Protein Kinase A and C
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Robert Kass, University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry
* Continuing grant
* Maryanna P. Henkart
* 01/31/1993
* USD 243,400.00

One of the fundamental properties of heart cells is their ability to alter their
electrical characteristics in response to neuro- hormonal stimulation. This
property allows the heart to adapt its physiological function to the range of
activity it must meet. The proposed work focuses upon one ionic channel in the
membranes of mammalian ventricular cardiac muscle cells: the delayed rectifier
potassium channel. This channel contributes outward current that regulates the
duration of the action potential of heart ventricular muscle cells. Thus,
changes in potassium current through this channel are critical to maintaining
the proper relationship between systole (contraction) and diastole (filling
time) as heart rate changes. In addition, because calcium ions enter heart cells
during the period of depolarization of the action potential known as the plateau
phase, changes in potassium current will indirectly affect calcium entry by
controlling the action potential duration. With prior NSF support, this
laboratory has demonstrated that the delayed rectifier potassium channel is
regulated by two enzyme systems (protein kinase A and C) and that this
regulation has a unique temperature requirement that distinguishes its control
from that of the cardiac (L-type) calcium channel. The aim of the present
proposal is to determine the mechanism(s) by which protein kinases A and C
regulate the delayed rectifier potassium channel. Experiments will be designed
to identify differences in the activity of channels modulated by the two kinase
systems. Analysis of differences in expressed channel activity will be used to
test for the location of the sites of protein phosphorylation by protein kinase
A and protein kinase C. In addition, experiments are proposed to investigate the
basis for the unique temperature-dependent response of the K channel protein to
protein kinase stimulation. The opening and closing of specific ion channels in
a precise sequence underlie the electrical activity of heart cells and
ultimately are responsible for controlling the regular contraction and
relaxation of the heart. The results of this research will be a more precise
understanding of the biochemical mechanisms regulating one of these specific ion
channels, the "delayed rectifier" potassium channel. Since similar ion channels
occur in other cell types including neurons and certain gland cells, this
contribution to our understanding of how ion channels are regulated will be of
fundamental interest.