* 8822658
* Cladistic Analyses of Viburnum Based on Molecular Characters
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1991
* Michael Donoghue, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 11/30/1991
* USD 120,185.00

Dr. Michael Donoghue of the University of Arizona, working initially with
colleague Dr. Kenneth Sytsma at University of Wisconsin, plans to study
evolutionary relationships within the flowering plant genus Viburnum and
relationships to other groups, emphasizing characters obtained from chloroplast
DNA. The chloroplast genome will be digested with a battery of restriction
enzymes, each of which cleaves the molecule at specific sites, and the exact
position of these sites on the molecule will be determined. Comparison of
nucleotide site similarities and differences among the species will allow
determination of the evolutionary pattern of mutations separating taxa. In
assessing more distant relationships, between genera and families, complete
nucleotide sequences of chloroplast genes will be obtained and compared, using
computer-aided methods. Phylogenies derived from molecular data will be compared
to trees obtained previously based on morphological characteristics, and the
nature and extent of congruence will be evaluated. Molecular data are likely to
resolve relationships that remain equivocal based on morphology alone. Further,
resolved phylogenetic trees will provide a framework for study of the evolution
of particular morphological traits of interest. This will be especially vaulable
in the case of fruit characters, because these have recently been studied in
detail by Dr. Donoghue and developmental data are available for these. The use
of phylogenetic information to analyze developmental changes will contribute to
emerging analyses of the evolution of form and function in organisms.