* 8822156
* Relation Between Water Drainage and Short-term              Strain/velocity Events on Storglaciaren, Sweden, and        Geomorphic Implications
* O/D,OPP
* 01/15/1990,12/31/1993
* Roger Hooke, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 12/31/1993
* USD 313,542.00

There is an overdeepening in the bed of Storglaciaren, a predominantly temperate
valley glacier in northern Sweden. In the overdeepening the glacier is, at least
locally, underlain by a layer of water-saturated deformable till, the glacial
drainage system is englacial, and water pressures are consistently high. Here
also, diurnal variations in water input appear to result in long, low waves in
the water table. These waves seem to become amplified as they move downglacier,
resulting in a local diurnal uplift of the glacier surface. Downglacier from the
overdeepening the drainage is subglacial and there are large (often &gt; 7 b)
diurnal variations in water pressure. Here, peak velocities seem to occur during
rising and falling water pressures, rather than during the peak pressure. Tracer
experiments and measurements of surface tilt, strain, velocity, internal
deformation, and water pressure will be undertaken to study these phenomena. The
results are expected to not only clarify their causes, but also to contribute to
a general understanding of the response of glaciers to variations in water
pressure. The results are also expected to shed light in a classical problem of
glacial geology: the origin of cirques and overdeepening in glacier beds. As
part of the study of this problem, a post- doctoral research associate will be
investigating processes of glacial quarrying.