* 8822244
* The Edwin Sutherland Conference on White-Collar Crime:      Fifty Years of Research and Beyond, Indiana University,     May 12 - May 15, 1990
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Kip Schlegel, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 11/30/1990
* USD 30,000.00

In his 1939 presidential address to the American Sociological Association,
Indiana University sociologist Edwin Sutherland voiced concern over the dearth
of research on "crime in the upper, or white-collar, class." The term "white
collar crime" has since become an established part of our vocabulary. The growth
of the modern corporation, the expansion of professional classes, the advent of
computer technologies, and the increasing complexity and interdependence of
national and international financial markets have brought about changes in the
form of crime with which Sutherland was concerned. In response, the study of
white-collar crime has become an important field of research in its own right.
Research has been sporadic, however, and there is a need to take stock of the
scholarship over the years and begin to map out a strategy for the future. Under
this grant, a conference will be convened in May of 1990 at Indiana University
to assess the field of reserch on white-collar crime fifty years after
Sutherland's 1939 address. The purpose of the conference is to address the
theoretical, empirical, and practical issues facing the study and control of
white-collar crime. Panelists from around the world will convene for three days
to (1) review the research which has taken place over the years; (2) provide new
research and information which will be useful to both scholars and practitioners
interested in the control of white-collar crime; (3) identify gaps in our
present state of knowledge and suggest directions for future research; and (4)
develop a network of individuals interested in the study and regulation of
white-collar crime so as to facilitate research and public policy efforts in
this area. The problem of white-collar crime raises important theoretical issues
ranging from organizational theories of deviance to micro- level theories of
decisionmaking. Organizational traits such as hierarchical structures, reward
structures, operating policies and procedures, and codes of ethics integrated
with subcultural, opportunity, labeling, and control theories offer exciting
possibilities for accounting for differences in criminogenic organizations and
their more law-abiding counterparts. This conference will bring together
scholars across different disciplines to discuss new research relating to
etiology, enforcement strategies, international perspectives and methodological
issues which will provide directions for future research in this important
field.