* 8822578
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Characterization of Air   Currents in Relation to the Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Spiders
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Joseph Humphrey, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1991
* USD 5,700.00

This proposal on "Characterization of Air Currents in Relation to the Sensory
Physiology and Behavior of Spiders" between Dr. Joseph A. Humphrey of the
University of California at Berkeley and Dr. F.G. Barth of the University of
Wien, Austria, is jointly approved by NSF and the FWF of Austria under the US-
Austria Cooperative Science Program. The principal investigators propose a one-
year program of research to investigate macroscopic fluid mechanic observables
affecting prey capture and the "ballooning" phenomena in spiders and the
relation of these to microscopic aspects of air motion-sensilla interactions.
The highly interdisciplinary nature of this work combines the "zoological"
expertise in Vienna and "engineering" expertise in Berkeley to advance knowledge
in sensory physiology. Work in Berkeley will address the measurement and
physico-mathema- tical modelling of the air motions relevant to behavior. The
characteristics of the flows that stimulate and maintain the ballooning
activity, as well as prey capture, will be experimentally determined in an
especially constructed apparatus using laser-Doppler anemometry and flow
visualization techniques. Time histories, averages and spectral frequency
determinations of prescribed velocity fields will allow the investigators to
elucidate the characteristics of the flows that elicit these activities.
Theoretical work will focus on improving the fundamental under- standing, models
and numerical predictability of the detailed distributions of velocity and
pressure of such flows. In particular, various hypotheses advanced in a seminal
paper by Humphrey Ä±1987! on the subject of ballooning will be rigorously
checked. Closed form theoretical analysis will also be performed to model the
response of the trichobothria sensilla, single or in groups, to natural
fluctuations in the air flow. From this, estimates will be obtained of the
forces that deflect the trichobothria, as well as the magnitudes and directions
of the deflections themselves. Part of the experimental instrumentation (but not
the apparatus) and the numerical procedures required to undertake this research
are already available. With the necessary upgrades and adaptations they can both
be applied to a range of problems of interest here and in related bio-fluid
mechanics fields. The significance of this work lies in the impact that the
experimental and theoretical findings will have in the fields of sensory
physiology and biomechanics.