* 8822932
* Collaborative Research on Organized Group Influence         on Federal Judicial Nominations
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* John Wright, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 04/30/1992
* USD 70,626.00

During the 1980s, interest groups have expanded their lobbying efforts on behalf
of or in opposition to federal judicial nominations. As the federal judiciary
has become more evenly divided along ideological lines, organized interests have
clashed in the Senate Judiciary Committee and on the floor of the Senate. The
extraordinary degree of mobilization and the intensity and numbers of interest
groups involved in the debate over the nomination of Judge Bork as an Associate
Justice of the Supreme Court and of other less visible appointments suggest a
new style of judicial nominating politics: Organized interest groups are
activated to influence judicial nominations, and they demonstrate a commitment
to continue to do so. It is difficult, however, to isolate and trace the
influence that interest groups might have on such battles. Little is known about
why, whether, how, and under what circumstances interest groups affect the
judicial nomination process. This project will be the first in-depth
quantitative analysis of interest group lobbying of the U.S. Senate on federal
judicial nominations. Individuals from hundreds of groups and coalitions at the
national, state, and local levels that participated in these contests will be
identified and interviewed. Questions will focus on such issues as the relative
lobbying efforts devoted to different senators, the use of different tactics
(e.g., direct mail, media advertising), the size of active membership in each
state, the decision within an organization to take part in a particular
nomination or join a coalition, and patterns of communication among organized
interests. The objectives of the study are to (1) assess the impact of organized
lobbying efforts on the decisions of senators to support or oppose controversial
nominations to the federal judiciary, (2) determine how organized groups
allocate their lobbying resources across states and senators, and (3) develop
and test a model of organizational decisions to participate in judicial
nomination battles. This research will provide new insights into the
mobilization, collective action strategies, and impact of organized interests in
a specific and well-defined legislative process. The study should aid in the
development of a unified theory of how interest groups maneuver into and out of
the various political and legal arenas. Because judicial confirmation is at the
intersection of legislative and judicial policymaking, the research should also
add to our understanding of the ability of organized interests to shape the
personnel of the Court and thus future interpretations of the Constitution,
statutes, and administrative regulations.