* 8822637
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Experimental Studies of Helium Microclusters
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1993
* Jan Northby, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 03/31/1993
* USD 12,250.00

This award supports Professor Jan A. Northby of the University of Rhode Island
for collaboration in research with Professor J. Peter Toennies of the Max Planck
Institute for Flow Research in Gottingen, West Germany. They are collaborating
in the study of the properties of microscopic helium clusters which are formed
in cryogenic free jet expansions. Their approach involves producing and studying
helium cluster ions at the U.S. lab and neutral helium clusters at the German
lab, then comparing results. The broad objective of their research is to examine
the evolution of macroscopic phenomena, in particular of superfluidity, as the
number of atoms increases. Their current efforts are concentrated in developing
the technology for producing and characterizing helium cluster beams covering
the size range where departures from macroscopic behavior can be expected. The
German laboratory has two molecular beam machines dedicated to helium cluster
experiments and uniquely suited to the proposed collaborative research; however,
they have only recently begun working with condensed helium. Professor Northby
has had considerable experience with rare gas clusters initially formed as ions
and has benefited from Dr. Toennies expertise in molecular beam work. The
complementary expertise and facilities of the investigators create a very strong
collaborative arrangement. Clusters of atoms form the bridge between atomic
properties and the properties of the bulk. Interest in the study of size-
dependent properties in clusters of all kinds of materials has grown
dramatically in the past decade. From the experimental side, this has been
driven by the development of free jet expansion techniques for the production of
cluster beams. From the theoretical side, growth has been driven by the
tremendous expansion in computer power which now permits detailed ab initio
calculations of the properties of quite large finite systems. The proposed
research should lead to fundamental new understanding of superfluidity and the
transition of matter from the atomic to the bulk state. This could have a
practical spin-off for film growth and other areas.