* 8822098
* Submersible Investigation of Temperate Glacimarine          Sedimentation, S.E. Alaska
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1993
* Ross Powell, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 11/30/1993
* USD 325,184.00

This proposal seeks support for a three-year investigation of sedimentation
processes at grounding lines of tidewater glaciers, and at a deltaic system, in
SE Alaska. The study is designed around an unmanned cruise-submersible to
collect data that is extremely difficult to obtain using any other means. This
will be the first attempt to directly observe and quantify processes at a modern
grounding-line with such vigor. A group of four researchers will study
retreating, slowly advancing, and rapidly advancing tidewater fronts, as well as
older grounding-line deposits. The submersible will also be used to evaluate
submarine mass movement processes and the settling of particles from suspension
which produce laminate deposits. The field program will emphasize collection of
data provided by side-scan sonar, seismic reflection profiling, video tapes,
stereo still photography, CTD surveys, current meter measurements, and samples
of suspended and bottom sediment. Most data will be recorded in a manner that
will allow an evaluation of the field procedures, and modify them if necessary.
The study will provide critical data for modelling the processes and
depositional systems of glacial grounding lines. The results will contribute to
current models of quasi-stability and advance of marine glaciers. The data will
increase the reliability of sedimentological models for interpreting
stratigraphic successions, and for predicting sediment budgets in different
glacimarine depocenters. An evaluation of the ability of sediment gravity flow
channels to be eroded in different glacimarine basinal systems will be made.
Lastly, the research will test a new hypothesis on how laminitis can be
produced. The process is thought to be applicable to both glacial and non-
glacial marine environments.