* 8822356
* Relevance and Risk:  Pilot Studies of Risk Information,     Risk Perception and Intended Protective Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Timothy Earle, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 06/30/1990
* USD 29,997.00

Effective risk communication has been shown to depend on a number of factors,
including the level of involvement of the audience, the relevance of the message
for the audience and the ability of the audience to process the information. The
objective of this project is to explore the determinants of risk relevance in a
series of pilot studies. It begins with the assumption that judgments of
relevance are based on the similarity between the object of the relevance
judgment (an individual or community, etc.) and the object of the risk
information. For any individual, information about oneself is most relevant.
Relative to expert judgments, public judgments of relevance can be valid or
biased, i.e. based on features of similarity that are not related to the level
of risk faced by the individual. To test this theory of the determinants of
relevance, the features of similarity will be manipulated in a laboratory
setting. This should reveal what features of similarity have the most effect on
relevance and risk. Further, an information acquisition task will permit the
study of how relevance judgments are made as well as the relations between
relevance and denial. Focus-group discussions will help in understanding how
relevance is dealt with spontaneously in interpersonal settings. Self
descriptions will provide information about the features individuals use to
characterize themselves in varying contexts. Finally, the judgments of expert
risk analysts will used as the basis for assessing the validity of lay judgments
of relevance. All these pilot studies will be used to develop a theory of
relevance in risk communication and to refine methods for its study. Not only
does this research promise to advance thinking about risk information and
response to it, but it is also likely to have broader application to other areas
of information processing and reception.