* 8822905
* Solid State Strutural Chemistry of Inorganic Phosphates -   U.S. - Morocco
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Elizabeth Holt, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 01/31/1991
* USD 9,548.00

Abstract Narrative Description: This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr.
Elizabeth M. Holt, Professor of Chemistry, Oklahoma State University, and Dr. A.
Boukhari and his graduate student, Mr. Ahmed Alaoui of the Department de Chemie
of the Mohammed V University of Rabat, Morocco. As background, Morocco possesses
the largest reserves of phosphate of any country in the world. This proposed
research into phosphates continues research collaboration began in 1986 between
the solid state laboratory of Mohammed V University and OSU. The Moroccan
investigators have been carrying out in their laboratory a systematic study of a
binary system of phosphates. It is proposed to bring Mr. Alaoui to OSU for six
months to learn single crystal diffraction methods and to carry out X-ray
diffraction studies on a number of crystalline phosphates, which are previously
unknown materials. Near the end of the six months, Dr. Boukhari, Mr. Alaoui's
research director, will visit OSU to evaluate the progress of research and to
determine the course of their future research. In addition, he will familiarize
himself with the high temperature synthesis research being conducted by Dr.
Holt. After the completion of the research by the visiting Moroccan
investigators and their return to Morocco, Dr. Holt will visit the solid state
laboratory of the Mohammed V University to use the dielectric equipment
capabilities of that laboratory to complete the final phase of this proposal.
The visit will provide an opportunity for planning further collaboration. Scope:
This proposal brings together investigators from universities of two countries
working in the field of the solid state chemistry of phosphates. The
investigators have differing but complementary knowledge and experience in the
chemical research of phosphates. Their laboratories have distinct and valuable
technical capabilities that may assist them singly or collectively to higher
levels of scientific achievement. This proposal does meet the objectives of the
Science in Developing Countries Program of advancing the international exchange
of scientific knowledge and does contribute to the enhancement of science in the
developing country.