* 8822811
* StressGraph: An Integrated Computer Graphical Structural    Zooming System
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Malcolm Panthaki, RE Spec Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 12/31/1991
* USD 225,049.00

Engineering problems sometimes involve the numerical solution of boundary value
problems over domains containing geometric features with widely varying scales.
Often, a detailed solution is required at one or more of these features. Small
details (for example, cracks and flaws) in large structures may have profound
effects upon global structural performance. Conversely, large-scale conditions
may have effect on local performance (for example, tectonic stresses may cause
rock failures near tunnels). Many man-hours and CPU-hours are currently spent in
modeling such problems. With the proposed structural zooming technique, it is
now possible to design an integrated program which allows the analyst to
interactively focus upon a small region of interest, to modify the local
geometry, and then to obtain highly accurate responses in that region which
reflect both the properties of the overall structure and the local detail. The
structural zooming technique is a general technique that can be applied to the
numerical solution of a set of partial differential equations. It can be applied
to problems in computational structural mechanics (for example, in automobile
and aerospace engineering), fluid mechanics, geomechanics and geotectonics,
fracture mechanics, and electromagnetics. Problems with widely varying geometric
scales of interest exist in each of these areas. The use of the structural
zooming technique could result in more accurate analysis at specific regions of
interest at a lower cost. During Phase II of this project, the Principal
Investigator proposes to concentrate the research in the area of structural
mechanics.