* 8822875
* Mathematical Sciences: Ergodic Theory and Topological       Dynamics
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1993
* William Veech, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* James Glazebrook
* 04/30/1993
* USD 177,970.00

The situation of a group acting on a space, for instance the group of real
numbers acting by time evolution on the state space of a physical system, is
encountered quite often in mathematics and its applications. One is interested
in what happens overall, on average, in the long run, which may be quite
difficult to infer solely from what happens over short intervals of time. A
seemingly straightforward example figures prominently in the project of
Professor Veech, namely the flow described by billiard balls careening about
inside a triangular region. Trajectories will either essentially fill out the
whole triangle over time or be periodic, coming back on themselves after a
finite number of bounces. Classifying and describing the periodic trajectories
requires some surprisingly sophisticated mathematics. In particular, it turns
out to be advantageous to relate billiard flows to flows and other group actions
on more exotic geometric objects. At a technical level, this has to do with the
ergodic theory and dynamics of the action of SL(2,R) on Teichmueller space.
Professor Veech is studying the prevalence of points in this space whose
isotropy subgroups for the action are lattices. Certain such points arise from
triangular billiards. The difficult problem of length spectrum for a flow, i.e.
of what lengths of periodic orbits can occur, will be studied in various
geometric contexts.