* 8822931
* Mechanisms of Kelp Forest Regeneration
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Alfred Ebeling, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/1992
* USD 248,328.00

This investigation is a continuation of long-term research on the causal
mechanisms producing widespread loss and regeneration of temperate kelp forests.
In southern California, kelp forest regeneration usually involves the
simultaneous colonization of several species of brown algae. The regenerative
processes involving the microscopic recruit stages of these algae, however , are
poorly understood. This research will focus on the mechanisms promoting
simultaneous algal colonization. The major areas of study will be 1) patterns
and environmental causes of spore release in three extremely morphologically
distinct taxa of colonizing brown algae (the large kelps Macrocystis pyrifera
and Pterygophora californica and much smaller filamentous brown algae), and 2)
mechanisms promoting competition between these algae once spore settlement
occurs. In the mature forest, algal assemblages are regulated largely by adult
interactions. Established patches or canopies can persist for many generations
by resisting invasion from other species. Consequently, following widespread
forest loss, regenerative processes pertaining to spore availability and early
competition may be of crucial importance because these processes can have long
term consequences affecting the structure of the mature forest community.