* 8822297
* Dark Matter and the Clustering of Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 04/15/1989,09/30/1992
* Simon White, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Millissa J. Evans
* 09/30/1992
* USD 272,000.00

A long-term program of computer simulations to study how galaxies form, evolve
and cluster in one specific and very successful theory will be continued. The
galaxy distribution traces the structure of the universe on the largest scales
accessible to observation; it reflects both the processes which generated
irregularities on the cosmos and the nature of its material contents. Most of
the universe appears to be in an unknown "dark" component, which may be an
entirely new form of matter, a relic of the very early history of the Big Bang.
Computer simulations of cosmic evolution based on this assumption lead to galaxy
clustering which agrees well with that observed. They suggest that our Universe
may contain enough "cold dark matter" that it will eventually stop expanding and
recollapse. Such simulations can be "observed" in the same way as the real
Universe, allowing a very direct comparison between theory and observation. The
research will involve studies of interactions between close pairs of galaxies to
see whether such pairs always merge into a single system. Finally, the extent of
the distribution of dark matter around individual spiral galaxies will be
estimated. Even if the theoretical premises of the cold dark matter theory turn
out to be false, this program will deepen our understanding of the structure and
origin of galaxies and galaxy clusters.