* 8822085
* Major Anions and Cations, Total Acidity and Ionic Balance   Program for GISP II
* O/D,OPP
* 03/31/1989,08/31/1994
* Paul Mayewski, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Charles E. Myers
* 08/31/1994
* USD 1,136,755.00

This award is in support of the chemical aspects of the second Greenland Ice
Sheet Project (GISP II). Ice core samples retrieved from the GISP II project
will be analyzed for major cations and anions, total acidity and ionic balances.
The data will be used for several purposes, which may be broadly categorized as
identification of climate change indicators, examination of the history of
volcanic eruptions, determination of changes in global atmospheric chemistry
(both natural and anthropogenic), identification of solar phenomena, and
comparison with other chemical and physical measurements involved in GISP II.
These objectives will be achieved by a program which includes processing the
core samples, conducting the chemical analyses of the samples, and performing
data analysis. Core processing will involve ultra- clean procedures to prepare
the samples for analysis. The chemical analyses will be conducted primarily by
ion chromatography. The data will be treated to determine statistical features
such as trends over time, episodic events, and dominant frequencies for cyclic
variations in concentration. The results of the project, when combined with
other types of data from GISP II will be used to further our understanding of
global change. The findings will also enhance our understanding of the impact of
man's activities on the global atmosphere.