* 8822153
* Catalytic Combustion of Waste Halogenated Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1992
* James Kittrell, KSE Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1992
* USD 225,000.00

A novel preparation method has been adapted to a catalyst for oxidation of
halogens in dilute air streams. This procedure produces a highly active
oxidation/reduction catalyst from stainless steel screen, which is resistant to
the attack by the reactor product, HCl, and exhibits good stability and
selectivity. Mechanistic insights into the preparation variables, primary
reaction kinetics, and potential deactivation limitations will be developed. New
relationships should be elucidated between catalyst activity and surface
morphology changes evident in electron microprobe and microscope patterns.
Chlorinated hydrocarbons (CHCs) represent a serious health risk if present in
groundwater or the air. Incineration can be used to convert them to HCl, which
can then be neutralized in a scrubbing operation. Two difficulties are
associated with this technology: the requirement of adding significant amounts
of auxiliary fuel if the waste stream has a sufficiently low heating value, and
the possibility of creating unsavory products of incomplete combustion.
Catalytic oxidation provides an alternative route from CHC to HCl plus CO2, and
is ideal for dilute hydrocarbon mixtures provided the catalyst activation
temperature is maintained and poisoning can be avoided. Research will
concentrate on these last two requirements. The temperature of the catalyst will
be maintained by ohmic heating, and poisoning will be avoided by a judicious
selection of the active catalytic agent.