* 8822728
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Crystal Structure of Plakalbumin
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Harlan Wright, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1990
* USD 4,600.00

This award supports Dr. H. Tonie Wright of Virginia Commonwealth University for
a three month visit to the laboratory of Dr. Robert Huber of the Max Planck
Institute for Biochemistry in Martinsried, Federal Republic of Germany. They
share an interest in the structures of a class of proteins called serpins, which
includes antithrombin III, alpha-1-proteinase inhibitor (API), and ovalbumin
(the principal protein constituent of egg white, and not a protease inhibitor.)
The goal of their collaboration is to establish the degree of similarity between
the tertiary structures of plakalbumin (a cleavage product of ovalbumin) and
API. The amino acid sequences of ovalbumin and API are about thirty percent
identical, and the many close sequence identities among the other members of
this protein family has supported the assumption that these proteins share a
common tertiary structure. Dr. Huber has determined the crystal structure of API
and refined it to high resolution. His laboratory is highly regarded for its
success in solving structures by means of the molecular replacement method and
other procedures and programs developed there. Dr. Wright has been determining
the structure of plakalbumin and has recently produced an electron density map
using multiple isomorphous replacement (MIR) data. The resultant structure
appears completely different from that of API. Since Dr. Wright heads a small
x-ray crystallography group, the collaborative arrangement with Dr. Huber's
larger and more experienced laboratory offers access to equipment and an
opportunity to gain experience in methods not available in Virginia to resolve
this discrepancy. Identities of sequence among proteins are used extensively to
establish evolutionary and functional relationships. It has been known for some
time that proteins of widely divergent sequence can share common structural
features as a result of convergent evolution. However, the converse case, of
common or similar structures in two proteins with no relationship of tertiary
structure, has long been considered impossible, since sequence is the primary
determinant of protein structure. The planned collaboration focuses on a
discrepancy that, if confirmed, would force a reconsideration of the
relationship between amino acid sequence identities and the folding of proteins,
as well as the evolutionary relationships of the proteins in the serpin family.
Further interpretation, refinement and comparison of the plakalbumin structure
with that of API is necessary to determine whether this significant discrepancy
is real or whether some error or other explanation can be discovered to account
for it.