* 8822596
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:  Low   Frequency ESR Studies of Cu-Cu Interactions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1993
* William Antholine, Medical College of Wisconsin
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 08/31/1993
* USD 16,795.00

This proposal for research on "Low Frequency ESR Studies of Cu-Cu Interactions"
between Dr. William E. Antholine of the Medical College of Wisconsin and Dr.
Peter M. H. Kroneck of the Universitaet Konstanz, FRG, is sponsored by NSF under
the U.S.-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research Program. This research
will attempt to demonstrate the efficiency of low- frequency (S-band) electron
spin resonance (ESR) for unravelling the ESR spectra from ESR detectable
binuclear copper sites. The researchers will compare ESR data from
Cu(1.5)Cu(1.5) sites in N2OR (nitrous oxide reductase)to ESR data from
cytochrome oxidase, to determine whether the Cu/a site is a mixed valence
binuclear copper site. Analysis of line widths and strain parameters through
spectral simulation is expected to account for the shape of these ESR signals. A
demonstration of the enhanced sensitivity of the half field lines at S-band for
Cu(II)Cu(II) dimers in nitric oxide treated tyrosinase, ceruloplasim, and
nitrous oxide reductase will be a useful result, by itself, for copper dimers.
The ESR group in Wisconsin has pioneered the use of multifrequency ESR as a
prime spectroscopic modality for analysis of Cu(II) sites in biological systems.
The group in Konstanz has studied the relationship between structure and
function of catalytic centers in multicopper proteins such as ascorbate oxidase
and nitrous ovide reductase. Thus, the two groups will complement each other in
carrying out the long term goal of the project: to develop techniques to extract
physical chemical data from cupric complexes in cells and eventually in animal
systems.