* 8822590
* US-U.K. Cooperative Research: Genetics of Physiological Differentiation in the Mussel Mytilus
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1989,08/31/1993
* Thomas Hilbish, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 08/31/1993
* USD 15,310.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Thomas J. Hilbish,
University of South Carolina, and Dr. Brian Bayne, Institute for Marine
Environmental Research, Plymouth, England. The objective of the research is to
investigate the genetic basis of physiological variation in two species of the
mussel Mytilus in an area of apparent hybridization in southwest England. The
research represents a unique opportunity to analyze the behavior of potential
gene complexes in traits known to be important to the survival of an organism in
its natural environment. In addition the work should shed light on the dynamics
of gene flow in an area of species overlap. Genetic and physiological
differentiation occurred between allopatric populations of Mytilus during the
Pleistocene. One taxon occurs predominantely in cold-water, while the other is a
warm-water form. In southwest England the two taxa hybridize and certain
populations provide an array of genotypic combinations that will allow the
investigators to analyze the genetics of physiological differentiation of the
two taxa. The investigators will utilize physiological traits that may explain
the differences in biogeography of the two taxa. This project will benefit from
Dr. Bayne's expertise in evolutionary physiology of the Dr. Hilbish's background
in physiological-evolutionary genetics.