* 8822051
* Cation Radicals in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Nathan Bauld, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/1992
* USD 269,988.00

This research is being funded by the Synthetic Organic Chemistry Program for the
research of Dr. Nathan L. Bauld of the Department of Chemistry at the University
of Texas at Austin. The work will develop new mild reactions for forming complex
ring structures. These structures are found in many of the substances used in
agriculture and medicine. The research continues the development of hole-
catalyzed pericyclic reactions, both for synthetic purposes and to gain
fundamental understanding of the structures and reaction paths of organic cation
radicals. The hole-catalyzed Diels-Alder reaction (DA) has undergone extensive
development and has recently been exemplified in the synthesis of the
sesquiterpene natural product (-)-B-selinene. Further mechanistic,
stereochemical, and kinetic studies of this and other pericyclic reactions are
planned in order to answer more decisively fundamental questions relating to
reaction concert, role selectivity, and directness vs. indirectness. A new and
powerful methodology for indirect addition in a net DA sense to highly hindered
dienes has been developed and will be refined, extended, and illustrated in the
synthesis of compounds in the drimane series. Previous hole-catalyzed direct
Diels-Alder applications (e.g. B-selinene) have emphasized the diene/electron
rich alkene format. A new and very promising strategy for effecting Diels-Alder
cycloadditions in the diene/diene format, which nevertheless produces highly
differentiated alkene functionalities, has been observed and will be developed.
The newly developed hole-catalyzed vinylcyclobutane rearrangement can be used to
achieve net Diels-Alder addition. The hole-catalyzed vinylcyclobutane reaction
will also be developed extensively in both a mechanistic and synthetic sense.