* 8822633
* 3-D Computer Graphics and Analysis of Microscopic Images of Biological Structures
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1992
* Stephen Young, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/1992
* USD 44,897.00

An advanced interactive serial reconstruction system will be developed, and
programs will be implemented for the derivation and visualization of data from
thick section electron microscopy tilt series. This award will provide an
initial basis for these efforts. The facilities of the San Diego Supercomputer
Center will be utilized to implement and explore computer graphic methods for
the three dimensional reconstruction and visualization of data represented as a
series of planes or cross sections through a three dimensional medium. The
computer software tools will be available not only for biologists but also for
meteorologists, oceanographers and geologists who wish to explore three
dimensional distributional aspects of data collected in the form of layers or
strata. The programs are being implemented on an Ardent Titan and a Silicon
Graphics IRIS workstation. The electron microscopic images are being analyzed to
obtain substantial three dimensional information about the structure of
biological specimens. The methods employ tomographic reconstruction of two
dimensional images and exploit prior developments for registration of digitized
tilt series and three dimensional energy distribution. The computer advances
will be applied to three dimensional reconstruction of cellular images from both
electron and light microscopy, to images of molecular and macromolecular
assemblies, and to neuroanatomical mapping systems.