* 8822444
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Nonlinear Wave Motion
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1989,11/01/1989
* Harvey Segur, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 11/01/1989
* USD 14,400.00

8822444 Segur This project includes three separate lines of research in
nonlinear wave motion in evolutionary systems. The three ideas are largely
independent. Part A concerns the development of an effective method to determine
whether or not a particular solution of an evolution equation is stable to small
changes in initial data. Stability theory advanced significantly after the
discovery by Arnol'd (1965) and others of a systematic method to construct
Lyapunov functionals. Even so, the methods currently available are unable to
determine whether a flow as simple as stably statified, paralled shear flow is a
stable solution of Euler's equations in two dimensions. One goal is to devise a
generalization of current methods that might settle the question. The focus in
part B is on the Kadomstev-Peviashvili (KP) equation with periodic boundary
conditions. The equation is known to be completely integrable, so there is
reason to believe that the initial value problem for the KP equation with
periodic boundary conditions is solvable. The KP equation also provides accurate
models of a class of water waves, and it is intimately connected with the theory
of Riemann surfaces in algebraic geometry. In fact, the problem is so rich that
progress in almost any direction would valuable. The objective in part C is to
construct a new kinetic theory for a large collection of wavepackets that
interact primarily through resonant triads. If successful, the theory would
result in a Boltzmann-type equation, whose equilibrium solutions would provide
an equilibrium spectrum of wave energies, analogous to the Maxwell-Boltzmann
distribution for molecules. An earlier version of such a theory was given by
Segur (1984); the work in this part of the project would correct a deficiency in
that model.