* 8822573
* A Collaborative Study of the Origins of Compositional and   Mineralogical Zonation in La Gloria Pluton, Central Chilean Andes
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Gail Mahood, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1991
* USD 14,655.00

This award supports U.S. - Chile cooperative research in mineralogical origins
to be carried out by Gail Mahood of Stanford University and Miguel Angel Parada
of the University of Chile. They propose to study compositional and
mineralogical zoning possibly caused by crystallization and convective
fractionation in liquid magmas. Chilean granites will be searched for evidence
of predictive model features such as trapped boundary layers, banding indicating
vertical magma flow, rock zones and horizontal layering reflecting convection
cells. The La Gloria pluton (granitelike, crystalline rock formed far below the
earth surface under high heat and pressure and slowly cooled) exhibits 2.5 km of
vertical relief and extensive features of this formation history. Prof. Parada,
well-trained and Chile's most active petrologist, knows the regional geologic
relations. His expertise will complement Dr. Mahood's on mineralogical chemistry
and, through the cooperation with Stanford, he will be able to use high quality
analytical equipment and modern petrological programs. A Chilean graduate
student, chosen competitively, will receive valuable training and will study at
Stanford. Dr. Mahood will hold a NSF Visiting Professorship for Women at the
University of Michigan during part of this study. All in all, the mix of talents
and opportunities amply fulfill the goals of the Science in Developing Countries
program.