* 8822314
* Arctic Ice Balance: A Diagnosis Using Satellite Microwave   and Drifting Buoy Data
* O/D,OPP
* 07/15/1989,06/30/1992
* D. Andrew Rothrock, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/1992
* USD 226,369.00

The goal of this project is to describe the state of the oceanic sea ice cover
and to understand the physical processes that combine to produce the observed
distribution of open water, first-year, and multi-year sea ice. The project will
integrate satellite-based microwave data from the Scanning Multichannel
Microwave Radiometer (SMMR) and the Special Sensor Microwave/Imager (SSM/I), and
ice drift and deformation data from the Arctic Buoy Program data set, in a
quantitative estimate of the sea ice mass budget and the arctic ice balance. On
the scale of the Arctic Ocean, the quasi-permanent sea ice cover is not uniform,
but rather is composed of a mixture of ice types which differ with respect to
age, thickness, salinity, surface roughness, and snow depth. The various ice
types also determine the surface radiation budget and the rates at which heat
and momentum is transferred between the atmosphere and the ocean. The nature of
the sea ice cover therefore becomes a significant geophysical variable in the
polar climate. The satellite microwave data carries information about ice type,
and open water areas, while the buoy data provides data on surface temperatures
and ice motion and deformation fields. The combined data set removes ambiguities
present in the microwave signatures and provides an overdetermined data set for
presently used ice thickness distribution models.