* 8822656
* Evidence and the Higher Classification of Snakes
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Arnold Kluge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 05/31/1991
* USD 108,000.00

Snakes are one of the largest historical groups of tetrapods (approximately
2500 currently recognized species), and they have figured prominently in many
ecological and evolutionary theories. Snakes are especially well known for loss
of anatomical structure during evolution (e.g., limbs and associated girdles and
visual system) and a wide variety of correlated behavioral and morphological
specializations (e.g., prey capture and locomotion, especially below the earth's
surface). Still, our understanding of snake diversity has been significantly
retarded relative to all other major groups of tetrapods because we lack a
historical higher classification of serpents. Such a classification is important
because all speculations concerning snake ecology and evolution must be
logically consistent with the framework provided by the classification. The
present study focuses on discovering the earliest lines of snake evolution and
providing a consistent nomenclature for their major pathways of evolution. The
second goal of this study is to better understand the nature of the evidence
necessary and sufficient to infer species history, so called phylogeny. Specific
theoretical and methodological considerations concern the importance of
including fossils in studies of phylogenetic inference, how one discerns the
historical independence of the evidence used to confirm a hypothesized lineage
or group of lineages, and whether consensus patterns among taxa (predicted
historical groups) or characters (shared novelties) are most important. While
examined empirically in the context of snake phylogeny, findings in this part of
the study are expected to be relevant to attempts to infer all parts of
evolutionary history.