* 8822158
* Support for Data Sharing in a Heterogeneous Distributed     System.
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Barbara Liskov, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 02/28/1993
* USD 231,007.00

Increasingly, powerful and inexpensive computers are situated near individual
users, and these computers are linked together either locally or across long
distances. The computers are heterogeneous because users require different
capabilities; legislating the use of identical systems in any organization seems
as unlikely in the future as it has been in the past. Together with parallel
processing, heterogenity and distribution are likely to be the dominant
characteristics of computer systems during the next decade. The advent of
distributed, heterogeneous systems has led to some new problems. One
particularly important problem is the lack of support for sharing of programs
and data in a safe and convenient manner across a heterogeneous network. This
project is aimed at correcting this problem by providing a language-independent
object repository. The repository can be used by programs written in different
programming languages, and running on different hardware and under different
operating systems, to share information. The new repository will be language
independent, will store typed, structured objects, will support atomic
transactions, will be both highly reliable and highly available, will control
access to its objects, will perform well, and will be scalable, so that it can
support a wide range of system sizes.