* 8822467
* Composition of Bromine Aerosols Related to Ozone            Destruction in the Arctic
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Russell Schnell, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/1992
* USD 81,253.00

One process for the destruction of ozone in the lower arctic troposphere appears
to be the reaction between gaseous bromine and ozone, producing filterable
bromine aerosols whose abundance exceeds that expected from the sea salt in the
atmosphere. Similar excess bromine aerosols is observed in the lower arctic
stratosphere, implying that gaseous bromine may be responsible for ozone
destruction there as well. In the Spring of 1989, the aircraft component of the
Arctic Radiation and Chemistry Experiment collected particulate aerosol samples
in profiles form near the surface to the stratosphere. These samples will be
examined with a high resolution analytical electron microscope to determine
individual particle morphology and composition. The system is able to provide
quantitative analyses for elements from Carbon to Uranium (atomic number range
of 6 to 92). Concurrently, bulk aerosol samples will be collected and analyzed
for elemental composition using x-ray fluorescence techniques. It will then be
possible to determine whether the excess bromine in the boundary layer aerosol
is of natural or anthropogenic origin, whether it reacts with ozone to produce a
bromide aerosol, and whether the excess filterable bromine aerosol observed in
the lower stratosphere may also be the product of a bromine gas-ozone
destruction reaction.