* 8822607
* U.S. - Finland Joint Workshop on Ionospheric and Magneto-   spheric Phenomena in the Auroral Zone; December 11-15 1989; Palo Alto, California
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Peter Banks, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1990
* USD 30,714.00

This award supports the participation of approximately fifteen U.S. scientists
in a U.S.-Finnish workshop on ionospheric and magnetospheric phenomena in the
auroral zone and polar cap. The meeting has been co- organized by Drs. Peter M.
Banks and C. Robert Clauer of Stanford University and Drs. Risto Pellinen and
Hannu Koskinen of the Finnish Meteorological Institute, and others from the
University of Oulu and the Sodankyla Geophysical Observatory. The objectives of
the workshop are to review the results from past cooperative research efforts
and to assess the opportunities for expanded or new collaborative research
activities. The scope of the workshop includes radar activities, correlations
with VIKING data (in particular the PROMIS interval and upcoming CDAW-9
activities), other topics in auroral and space plasma research where cooperation
has been active, and coordinated data analysis using new computer data
management and display techniques. Working groups will form to identify specific
collaborative investiga- tions for both the near term and long term. Significant
new opportunities for collaboration in this field are likely to exist due to new
scientific initiatives in both the U.S. and Finnish research programs in
auroral, magnetospheric and space research. The Finnish research program has
grown tremendously in the last three years. The scientific staff in the Division
of Geophysics at the Finnish Meteorological Institute has quadrupled, and the
University of Oulu has founded a Space Institute and acts as a national center
for EISCAT research. Finland has committed significant financial resources to
space research through associate membership in the European Space Agency, and
new ground based observational activities have been developed. In the U.S., the
Aeronomy and Solar - Terrestrial Programs of the National Science Foundation are
developing major new observational and modeling initiatives (CEDAR - Coupling,
Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions, and GEM - Geospace Environment
Modeling.) These NSF Programs are contributing support to the meeting, and some
support is expected from NASA as well. Coordination of these major U.S.
observational programs with other international activities is extremely
important to obtain the maximum scientific benefit.