* 8822628
* A Comparative Study of Social Structure, Social Inequality, and Class Consciousness in the United States and the Soviet Union
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1990
* Michael Hout, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 07/31/1990
* USD 49,997.00

Political change in socialist countries and increasing global economic
interdependence and competition is leading to a reassessment of authority,
hierarchy and individual decision-making in capitalist and socialist countries
alike. Within countries, constraints on individual and family social mobility,
attitudes towards workplace issues, and gender-divided labor within dual-earner
household economies are increasingly interwoven social facts, yet shaped by
political and economic forces not confined to each country. In such a context,
comparative sociological research on these topics, such as that indirectly
supported with this grant, is a vital tool of national understanding and
reassessment. This award will support the beginnings of a timely U.S.
contribution of data to a multi-nation comparative survey by means of a pilot
survey of households in the Oakland- San Francisco area. The final form of the
survey instrument being tested here and later collected from a broader survey of
American households will contain questions paralleling those in instruments
administered in the USSR, Hungary, Taiwan, Spain and possibly China. The
recipients of this award comprise a individually productive and influential team
of sociologists whose skill in survey methods and data analysis, experience in
cross-national survey and field work and international reputation from their
past research and writing commands the respect of distinguished collaborators
abroad.