* 8822529
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Molecular Analysis of Host Range in Several Rhizobium Species
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1992
* Steven Pueppke, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 07/31/1992
* USD 13,970.00

This proposal on "Molecular Analysis of Host Range in Several Rhizo- bium
Species" between Dr. Steven G. Pueppke of the University of Missouri, Columbia,
and Dr. William J. Broughton of the Laboratoire de Biologie Moleculaire des
Plantes Superieures, Chambesy/Geneva, Switzerland, is approved by NSF under the
US-Switzerland Cooperative Science Program. The researchers propose to
understand how soybean, cowpea, and other legumes are nodulated by broad host-
range rhizobia. The model microor- ganisms are rhizobium fredii 257 (researched
at Columbia) and rhizo- bium sp. NGR234 (researched at Geneva). Using Tn5
mutagenesis, the investigators already have isolated two unusual mutants of
strain 257 that nodulate soybean cultivars not nodulated by the parental strain.
The intend to coordinate analysis of these two mutants with that of Rhizobium
sp. NGR234 to exploit distinctions which can be exploited to help elucidate the
basis of host specificity. One mutant of strain 257 has Tn5 in the chromosome
while the other has the transposon in the sym plasmid. The investigators have
isolated cosmids containing DNA flanking the sites of the Tn5 insertion,
subcloned the fragments of interest, and are mapping them. This proposal hopes
to define the negatively-acting host range genes contained in these clones and
search for counterparts in NGR234. Dr. Broughton has isolated a series of
positively-acting host range genes and is defining them physically and
genetically. A second objective of the collaboration is to seek analogous genes
in strain 257. Achievement of these objectives will help determine the relative
contributions of positively and negatively acting genes in specifying host range
in broad host-range rhizobia.