* 8822227
* Spring School/Workshop on Supernovae and Stellar Evolution, March 8-17, 1989, Bombay, India, Award in Indian and U.S.   Currencies
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1989
* David Helfand, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1989
* USD 24,434.00

Description: This project supports participation by seven U.S. scientists in a
"Spring School and Workshop on Supernovae and Stellar Evolution" to be held at
the Tata Institute of Fundamental Research in Bombay, India, March 8-17, 1989.
The Indian organizers are Drs. Alak Ray and T. Velusamy of TIFR. Topics to be
discussed include: stellar evolution of single stars, stellar evolution in close
binaries; gravitational collapse; nuclear physics in the collapse and bounce
phases, equation of state of supernovae matter; neutrino diffusion and
interactions; shock formation and propagation; neutron star formation and early
cooling; supernovae light curves and spectra; products of supernovae; and
statistics of supernovae, pulsar and supernova remnants. It is expected that
35-40 relatively young scientists from India and other countries will participat
by invitations, in addition to the lectures from India and the U.S. The
objectives of the workshop are: 1) To discuss advances in the field especially
since the occurance of the Supernovae of 1987 (SN1987A); and 2) to identify
areas for possible joint research. Scope: This workshop will bring scientists
from India and the U.S. together to discuss a topic in which activities have
been strong in the two countries. The recently observed phenomena SN1987A has
stimulated new thinking and new approaches to theories and data interpretation
regarding stellar evolution. There is already a level of Indo-U.S. cooperation
in research in the field, and this workshop is likely to enhance it as well as
provide for exchage of information among the participants.