* 8822721
* REU Supplement:  CISE Infrastructure Instrumentation:       ACTIVE (Animated Color 3D Interactive Visual Environments)
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Philip Lewis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 06/30/1993
* USD 1,003,340.00

This award will provide funds for a network of high-performance graphics
workstations to support research on building visualization environments. The
goals of the research are to: 1. Create tools that can be used to rapidly
generate application- specific, visually-oriented computing environments on
high-performance workstations; 2. Build prototype environments in the
application areas of massively- parallel algorithms and architectures,
asynchronous and distributed systems, and VLSI design; 3. Use these prototypes
for research within the three application areas. The approach to building
environments will be based on a declarative semantic conceptual architecture, in
which each environment is specified as an interface to an underlying semantic
model with which the user interacts. The environment always maintains the screen
display as a presentation of the current state of the underlying model, so that
the presentation automatically changes when the state of the model changes. The
mapping between the states of the underlying model and the screen display is
defined declaratively, in terms of the desired relationship that must be
maintained, and not on the precise program used to maintain it. This approach
will require advances in user interface management, knowledge bases, and
declarative languages, which are active research areas in the department.