* 8822976
* Oceanographic Instrumentation
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1989,03/31/1991
* James Griffin, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 03/31/1991
* USD 191,839.00

The Graduate School of Oceanography at the Univ. of Rhode Island will acquire
several items of oceanographic instrumen- tation to be placed in a pool of
shared use equipment. This equipment is maintained for use on or in association
with the R/V ENDEAVOR, a research vessel owned by the NSF and operated by the
university. A substantial part of the ship's opera- ting schedule during 1989 is
in support of NSF-sponsored research projects. The instrumentation will also
increase the capabilities of the ship and of the University to support research
and engineering activities. The instrumentation includes: -MicroVax shipboard
data management system and components for real-time acquisition and display of
large data sets, -Optical disk drive system and other equipment for increasing
shared-use, sea-going computing capabilities, -A precision salinometer for
determining the salinity of seawater. -Transmissometer for measuring turbidity
and other optical properties in the water column, -Niskin bottles for collecting
discrete seawater samples at various depths in the water column, -Precision
acoustic pinger for determining position of an instrument package relative to
the surface or seafloor, and, -Equipment transport cases for safely shipping
equipment to and from the ship. The instrumentation described above will
increase the capability of the organization to support NSF-sponsored research
and engineering projects.