* 8822515
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Structural Analyses ofZeolites, Molecular Sieves and Related Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1989,02/28/1993
* Richard Kirchner, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 02/28/1993
* USD 9,070.00

This proposal on "Structural Analyses of Zeolites, Molecular Sieves and Related
Materials" between Dr. Richard M. Kirchner of Manhattan College and Prof. Walter
M. Meier of the Institute for Crystallography, Zurich, Switzerland, is jointly
approved by NSF and the Swiss National Science Foundation under the
U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Science Program. Solving the structure of a new
molecular sieve often takes many years using a combination of presently
available techniques. A new approach (the Bennett/Schomaker method) has already
been successful in solving the structures of four unknown molecular sieves.
However, this method needs to be expanded to work in all space groups for a
variety of framework materials of various chemical composition. This proposal
would bring together experts who together could develop a more powerful and
useful program. Specifically, the researchers of two new aluminophosphate
framework materials (KAPPA and ALPO4-11) will be characterized from X-ray powder
diffraction data. Knowledge of the KAPPA structure will enable a comparison of
chemically substituted frameworks of similar topology to be made. A well
characterized structure of ALPO4-11 would provide details of the interaction
between the aluminophosphate framework and the organic template used to
synthesize this material. In addition, since not many well characterized
structures of aluminophosphate framework materials are known, each new structure
is of considerable interest in order to understand the properties of this new
family of materials (including chemically substituted ones) that have great
potential for commercial application.