* 8822835
* Solvent Sublation (Floto-Extraction) for the Removal of Law Solubility Hydrophobic Compounds for Aqueous Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1992
* Louis Thibodeaux, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 04/30/1992
* USD 125,601.00

The objective of this project is to establish rate determining steps and rate
data for model evaluation of an adsorptive bubble separation technique called
solvent sublation for removal of hydrophobic compounds from water. The process
has been found to be of some promise as an advanced wastewater treatment process
for removing hydrophobic compounds of low aqueous solubility and low vapor
pressure from the aqueous phase. Laboratory experiments will be conducted to
elucidate the effects of co-solutes and co- solvents upon the sublation of
chlorinated aromatic compounds, polychlorinated aromatics, polynuclear aromatics
and chlorinated pesticides. The method will be extended to include ionic
compounds such as chloro-and nitrophenols which are more soluble in water.
Results will be compared against currently available mathematical models of
solvent sublation. A new method of generating air bubbles called colloidal gas
aphrons will be considered and evaluated as an alternative to sparging. This is
expected to provide information that can be used in increasing the efficiency of
conventional bubble aeration processes. Results of this research may prove to be
applicable for use in engineering design of a process for removal of organic
substances from water and wastewater. Target substances include the
polychlorinated biphenyls and other nonpolar hydrophobic chemicals, of
significance in contamination of surface and groundwater.