* 8822167
* Godel Editorial Project
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1994
* Solomon Feferman, Association For Symbolic Logic
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald J. Overmann
* 04/30/1994
* USD 176,009.00

In 1931, Kurt Godel published an article which ended nearly a century of
attempts to establish axioms which would provide a rigorous basis for all of
mathematics. He proved that within any rigidly logical mathematical system,
there are propositions that cannot be proved or disproved on the basis of the
axioms of that system. Thus, the search for a demonstration of the self-
consistency of mathematics was dealt a shattering blow. If mathematics is
actually consistent, Godel showed that the fact of this consistency cannot be
proved within the rules of mathematics itself. Mathematicians can never be
certain that the basic axioms of arithmetic will not give rise to contradictions
and the foundations of mathematics must ultimately always remain a mystery.
Godel went on from this brilliant start to make contributions which would
profoundly affect logic, physics, philosophy, the foundations of computer
science, and other aspects of the foundations of mathematics. The purpose of
this project is to publish the works of Kurt Godel and make them available to a
wider audience of mathematicians, philosophers and historians. Under previous
NSF grants, Professor Feferman and his editorial staff have published the first
volume of what is now projected to be a four volume collection of the papers of
the mathematician and logician, Kurt Godel. Volume one contains Godel's
collected publications of 1929-1936. Volume two, which is currently being
finished, contains his publications form 1936 to 1974. Under this new grant,
Godel's notes from his courses, letters, lectures, scientific notebooks and
drafts of unpublished manuscripts will be prepared for publication. These papers
will be published in an additional two volumes. The editorial work includes
translations of many documents from the German to English and the preparation of
introductions and notes to the documents in order to make these materials of
maximum scientific, historical and philosophical significance.