* 8822317
* Dissertation Research:  Occupational History of an Early    Ceramic Age Settlement on the North Coast of Puerto Rico
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1989,02/28/1991
*  Albert Jr. Dekin, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 02/28/1991
* USD 7,375.00

Dr. Dekin and graduate student Peter Siegel will obtain dates on a series of
archaeological materials from the site of Maisable which is located on the north
coast of Puerto Rico. Through careful excavation, Mr. Siegel has exposed
portions of an early village and delineated both houses and associated mounds.
He has also uncovered a number of human skeletons. Based on associated artifacts
and several radiocarbon dates, it appears that two consecutive occupations,
possibly by different cultural groups, took place at Maisable but the evidence
is not conclusive. Mr. Siegel will submit both bone samples and carbonized wood
to the University of Arizona for radiocarbon dating. A series of potsherds will
be sent to the University of Durham for thermolumenescent dating. The results
should allow more secure chronological placement of the different phases of
occupation. Archaeologists have proposed several models for the population of
Caribbean islands such as Puerto Rico. The "wave theory" postulates successive
series of immigrants who move across the island chain. Cultural changes observed
in the archaeological record are attributed to the influx of new immigrants.
Other prehistorians envision greater population continuity and argue that much
change occurs through in situ development with no population replacement.
Unfortunately, the data are not available to evaluate these contrasting
hypotheses. Careful dating of Maisable should contribute to an answer. This
research is important for several reasons. Relatively little archaeological
research has been conducted in Puerto Rico and Maisable will help to rectify
this situation. Secondly, this project should increase our understanding of how
cultures change, and how this change can be discerned in the archaeological
record. Finally, since the results will be used by Mr. Siegel in his doctoral
research, they will assist in the professional development of a promising young
scientist.