* 8822564
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Direct Imaging of Surface Phase Separation Using LEERM
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Ellen Williams, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1992
* USD 12,755.00

This award supports Professor Ellen D. Williams and Dr. Raymond Phanuef of the
University of Maryland to collaborate with Professor Ernst G. Bauer of the
Physics Institute of the Technical University of Clausthal, Federal Republic of
Germany, in a study of phase separation of silicon surfaces. At the University
of Maryland, a phase separation of surfaces vicinal to Si(111) has been
discovered and characterized using Low Energy Electron Diffraction (LEED). A
thermodynamical description of the transition has been developed, but major
questions about the mechanisms of mass transport remain. At the Technical
University of Clausthal, a remarkable new instrument called the Low-Energy
Electron Reflection Microscope (LEERM) has been developed. This instrument can
be used to image surfaces in real time with better than 200 angstroms
resolution. It is currently the only such instrument in the world. Experiments
previously performed using LEED at the University of Maryland will be repeated
using the LEERM at Clausthal. Silicon surfaces will be imaged at the temperature
of the transition so that the motion of the surface steps involved in the phase
separation can be observed directly. The results will be used to test
theoretical models for step wandering, surface self-diffusion and the energetics
of the Si(111) surface reconstruction. Faceting is a widespread phenomenon in
which a surface rearranges via large scale mass transport to form planes of
different orientations. The occurrence of faceting is important in catalysts,
where it is linked to catalyst deactivation and also possibly to oscillations in
reaction ranges. Faceting may also cause the smoothness of epitaxial interfaces
to be degraded during growth. Finally, the mechanisms of faceting may be
important in understanding surface roughness related to adhesion and
lubrication. Little progress has been made in developing a detailed
understanding of faceting in the past 20 years due to lack of experimental data
to support theoretical speculations. This work proposes use of real time imaging
to follow surface-faceting under well controlled conditions.