* 8822993
* Dissertation Research: A Biosystematic Investigation of the Genus Cornus in the Americas
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Robert Wilbur, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 11/30/1991
* USD 6,286.00

Under the guidance of faculty adviser Dr. Robert Wilbur, graduate student Zack
Murrell of Duke University will study the Mexican species of dogwoods with the
ultimate goal of providing a taxonomic revision of the genus Cornus from a
worldwide perspective. Field collections will facilitate study of variation
within and between species in features of plant architecture (overall growth
form), stem color, fruit color, and habitat. Seeds will be collected in order to
grow the plants in a common-garden environment, to examine germination
requirements, and to study seedling morphology. The collected material will be
used in scanning electron microscopy studies, chromosome investigations,
anatomical studies, and examination of developmental patterns of growth. The
dogwood genus, Cornus, comprises a group of approximately 60 species growing in
temperate regions of eastern Asia, Pacific Northwest, eastern North America, and
the mountains of Mexico. Although all the dogwoods have similar leaves, flowers,
and pubescence, they exhibit great variation in growth forms (trees, shrubs, and
perennial herbs with woody rhizomes) and in the arrangement of flowers on the
plants, which can vary from an open branched structure to a tightly packed head
of flowers surrounded by showy white leaves (bracts). Attempts to distinguish
species have been controversial and have had to rely upon subtle differences in
recondite characters. Completion of Murrell's multifaceted study will improve
greatly our understanding of variation in the dogwoods and set the stage for a
worldwide taxonomic revision.