* 8822679
* Mathematical Sciences: Some Questions in Nonlinear          Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1992
* Paul Rabinowitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 04/30/1992
* USD 144,741.00

Models for the motion of a finite number of particlies where no frictional
forces are present are usually given by means of differential equations called
Hamiltonian systems. During the past decade there has been intensive research
focusing on the existence of periodic solutions of such systems. The work
sponsored by this award is in part an outgrowth of a more general development of
variational methods, expecially minimax and Morse theoretic methods, and their
application to nonlinear differential equations. It illustrates the
effectiveness which can be achieved when the power of abstract mathematical
research is driven by external stimuli. One focus of this work concerns the
Hamiltonian itself, a function of two (vector) variables which contains the
position and velocity information about the particles. Traditionally one assumes
that the Hamiltonians are continuously differentiable. Many interesting
problems, however, involve singular Hamitonians. The classical n-body problem of
celestial mechanics is an example. Using minimax arguments, one can show that
there are infinitely many periodic solutions with distinct periods. The present
work will seek to clarify whether or not multiple periodic solutions can exist
with the same period. In addition, with the advent of singular Hamiltonians, the
possibility arises for collision orbits. Work will be done in determining
conditions where one can distinguish between regular and collision orbits.
Efforts will also be made to find periodic solutions with prescribed energy.
Branching away from periodic solutions, research will begin on investigations
into the next simplest class, those orbits which tend to equilibrium solutions
as times increases indefinitely. These are known as connecting orbits, for they
join period ones. Some results are available for so-called superquadratic
Hamiltonian systems, but the area is still in its infancy.