* 8822991
* Dissertation Research:  Population Structure of the Green   Sea Turtle Chelonia mydas
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1991
* John Avise, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tarri Joyner
* 04/30/1991
* USD 13,000.00

The goal of this research is to define population structure of the endangered
green sea turtle, Chelonia mydas. Green sea turtles are known to migrate
extensively between shallow feeding pastures and surf-built nesting beaches.
Tagging studies have demonstrated that female turtles return to the same beach
to nest in successive nesting seasons. This remarkable site fidelity led
researchers to suggest that female turtles return to nest on their natal beach.
If green sea turtles do return to their natal beach, then each rookery should
constitute an isolated breeding unit. In this study mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
restriction analysis will be used to (1) test the natal homing hypothesis, and
(2) define population structure of the green sea turtle. Samples are obtained by
removing one egg per nest from 10-20 nests per rookery. Given the large number
of eggs (about 100) per nest and the extremely low survival rate of eggs and
hatching in nature, this sampling strategy has a negligible impact on population
size. Preliminary results are consistent with the natal homing hypothesis. This
proposal requests funding to complete a global survey of green sea turtle
rookeries in order to genetically define major nesting assemblages. These data
bear directly on questions about the reproductive behavior and dispersal of
green sea turtles. Since populations are the fundamental units of species
management, results are of immediate use to conservation and management
agencies. In addition, it may be possible to use genetic markers generated in
this study to identify the origin of green sea turtles harvested on feeding
grounds in the Caribbean and elsewhere. Thus, the findings can substantially
improve the data upon which international management policy must be based.