* 8822910
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research on      "Transitive Inference" in Animals and Humans (Behavioral    Science)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* John E. R. Staddon, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1991
* USD 11,000.00

This award supports Professor John E. R. Staddon of Duke University to
collaborate in behavioral research with Professor Juan D. Delius of the
Department of Social Sciences of the University of Konstanz, Federal Republic of
Germany. They are interested in the "transitive inference" paradigm, a form of
serial learning task in which subjects are given information about the relative
values of stimuli presented in pairs, and then asked to infer the relation
between novel pairs. In their research, they plan to investigate the mechanisms
used by several different species to solve this task. They are considering a
number of theories ("associative linkage", "rule stack", and "inference engine")
that could account for successful solution of the serial learning problem. In
addition, Dr. Staddon has developed a novel theory ("value transfer") that seems
capable of describing many of the experimental results in Dr. Delius'
laboratory, as well as others in the literature. They will collaborate in a set
of new experiments designed to compare the four theories, then focus further
experimental effort on the details of the most successful theory. Dr. Staddon
has an outstanding reputation for formulating and experimentally testing formal
models that explain complex adaptive behaviors of animals in terms of simple
rules. His contributions to the collaborative research will be theoretical
expertise, experimental design and some experimen- tal work. Dr. Delius is
internationally recognized for his studies of comparative cognition. His
laboratory and research team are excellently equipped to train pigeons in
complex tasks in ecologically valid environments. Most of the experimental work
will be carried out there. Recent research by these investigators and others
suggests that animals are able to solve tasks traditionally held to require
deductive logic. These results raise important questions about the phylogenetic
distribution of reasoning and its underlying mechanisms. Drs. Staddon and Delius
do not assume that success in serial learning tasks is positive proof of an
ability to reason logically using cognitive representations. Instead, they
propose to examine four different mechanisms that could account for success in
the transitive inference task without recourse to symbolic reasoning.