* 8822756
* Analyzing Job Opportunities
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Orlando Patterson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Shelton White
* 12/31/1991
* USD 65,001.00

Job opportunities have long been recognized as playing a crucial role in a wide
range of important academic and policy issues. However, it is not clear what
impact the continuing shift from a manufacturing to a service economy has had on
the number and type of job opportunities that the economy has generated in
recent years, and on the changing ability of various segments of the population
to successfully compete for these opportunities. Has the declining need for low-
skilled labor generated the growth of an underclass? What are the blue-collar
opportunities for middle income jobs? How have shifts in the economy affected
the efforts by women and minorities to reduce the occupation and wage
differentials they experience? This research examines the implications of
changes in the nation's occupations and industries by examining the job
opportunities that arose as a consequence of these changes. The project will
obtain estimates of the number of job opportunities that arose in each year from
1968 to 1984, and will examine how trends in job opportunities over these years
have contributed to the changing occupational status of important sub-
populations (including women, minorities, and workers in traditionally blue-
collar manufacturing jobs). The study will draw on data from the Current
Population Survey to estimate the total number of opportunities generated during
each year, and will distinguish these job opportunities by industry and
occupation. This will permit a description of trends in job opportunities by
occupation from 1968 to 1984, with particular attention to questions of how job
opportunities are changing. The principal investigator will also develop new
statistical models of the influence of economic opportunities on the likelihood
that workers will move from one job strata to another. The project in its
entirety should considerably advance our knowledge of the job opportunities
created in the past two decades and of ways in which changing opportunities have
affected the labor market experiences of important segments of the population.
It should also improve our understanding of the career trajectories of workers
with various skills and characteristics who are confronted with a changing labor
market.