* 8822591
* U.S.- United Kingdom Cooperative Science:  Competition,     Herbivory and Size Variability in Plant Populations
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Jacob Weiner, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 07/31/1991
* USD 14,615.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Jacob Weiner,
Swarthmore College and Dr. Michael J. Crawey, Imperial College at Silwood Park,
England. The objective of the project is to examine the interactions between
competition and herbivory in determining the size variability in plant
populations. This will be accomplished in two ways. First, the investigators
will execute a large multifactoral experiment which will look at the effects and
interactions between plant density and slug herbivory on size distributions in
greenhouse populations of white clover. This will enable them to test several
hypotheses about the influence of herbivory on plant size distributions, and how
the effects of herbivory are mediated by competition between plants. Second, the
investigators will use new statistical methods to analyze large data sets which
have been collected over several years at Silwood Park on the effect of rabbit
herbivory on populations of winter wheat. This will submit the hypotheses to the
more rigorous test of field conditions. This project will combine Dr. Crawley's
expertise with herbivory and Dr. Weiner's expertise in the analysis of plant
population structure. The performance of this study at Silwood Park is
particularly important, due to the strong research faculty present. The results
of this research will contribute to our understanding of the mechanisms that
produce size variation in plant population.