* 8822598
* Public Views of Corporate Responsibility for Wrong doing
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1993
* Valerie Hans, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberley C. Johnson
* 04/30/1993
* USD 142,892.00

One of the most striking phenomena in the contemporary legal world is the shift
toward holding group entities such as corporations responsible for harm. Legal
and social changes have produced a gradual movement away from individual
responsibility for injuries toward a collective source of responsibility--the
organization. Today business corporations are expected to provide compensation
for injuries that in earlier times would have been attributed to individuals or
to fate. Despite a good deal of legal scholarship on the shift toward holding
businesses culpable for harms, little systematic work has been done on lay views
of corporate responsibility. Basic knowledge about public views is critical
because public attitudes influence substantive law and legal procedure in a
variety of ways and likely also affect the behavior of corporations. This
research is intended to provide the first systematic account of lay views of
corporate responsibility for wrongdoing. A series of interrelated studies
employing multiple methods will be conducted to examine why people hold
corporations responsible. The first approach is a telephone survey of a random
sample of 450 residents from a single mid-Atlantic state. The survey will
provide a profile of the content, structure, and individual determinants of
general attitudes toward corporate wrongdoing. The second approach is an
interview study of jurors who have participated in civil trials with
corporations or businesses as parties. Comparisons of interview and public
opinion data will show whether jurors who decide issues of corporate
responsibility within a rich and detailed legal setting reflect the same
concerns and attitudinal structures of survey respondents. A final set of
studies uses the experimental method of mock jury simulation to examine factors
affecting judgments of corporate responsibility for wrongdoing. These
experiments will test the impact of financial resources and identity (individual
versus type of corporation) of the defendant on judgments of wrongdoing. The
project is designed to provide convergent data on the key factors that lead the
public to hold corporations responsible for harmdoing. Often, the failure to
take action against corporate lawlessness has been justified by claims that the
public sees such lawlessness as "morally neutral" behavior. This research will
illuminate the conditions under which citizens support intervention in the
corporate community. More generally, the research will advance understanding of
the problem of collective responsibility. Collective responsibility issues arise
for a variety of groups and organizations such as governments, political
parties, and voluntary associations. Furthermore, the responsibility of groups
is an important matter in the criminal justice system in cases involving
conspiracy, complicity, and accessories to crime.