* 8822528
* US-UK Cooperative Research:  Identification of Ligands for  Carbohydrate-Recognition Domains
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* Kurt Drickamer, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 05/31/1992
* USD 11,850.00

This award will support collaborative research in biochemistry between Dr. Kurt
Drickamer, Columbia University and Dr. Ten Feizi, Medical Research Council
Clinical Research Center, Harrow, Middlesex, England. The objective of the
project is to study the detailed carbohydrate binding specificities of certain
animal proteins called mammalian lectins. A type of common carbohydrate-
recognition domain (CRD) has been identified in proteins with diverse biological
functions. Proteins containing these homologous domains include serum mannose
binding proteins and the hepatic membrane receptor, which mediates endocytosis
of asialoglycoproteins. Based on primary structure information, CRDs have been
predicted and found in other proteins, such as pulmonary surfactant apoprotein
and core protein of cartilage proteoglycan. Expression systems for producing
these domains in Eschericia coli are being developed in the laboratory of
_______________ the principal investigator in the United States. In this
project, a collaboration is proposed with Dr. Ten Feizi; his research group has
developed a method of blotting neoglycolipids which will allow the investigators
to determine the detailed saccharide-binding specificity of the various CRDs and
which will also be used to identify endogenous ligands for the domains. By
combining the protein and molecular biology expertise of Dr. Drickamer's
laboratory with the carbohydrate technology of Dr. Feizi's group, it will be
possible to initiate a powerful new approach to analysis of the biological role
of carbohydrate recognition. Dr. Drickamer is a leader in the molecular biology
of mammalian lectins and related proteins and has demonstrated his ability to
use recombinant DNA approaches for expression of the carbohydrate binding domain
of these proteins.