* 8822710
* REU:  Exploiting Conserved and Variable Regions of the      Mitochondrial Genome for Evolutionary Studies
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1989,04/30/1991
* Rachel Laudan, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 04/30/1991
* USD 148,700.00

Current evolutionary research focuses on problems associated with genetic
changes that accompany the formation of new species and the maintenance of the
integrity of species in the face of hybridization with closely related species.
In order to understand processes involved in genetic differentiation, a pattern
of evolutionary relationships must be constructed and the traits under study
must be viewed with reference to this pattern. Evolutionary relationships have
in the past proven difficult to construct for newly formed (very closely
related) species but new techniques are available which allow the collection of
data from the most variable DNA gene regions. These techniques are used in this
research. The insect species known as the periodical cicadas have proved to be
ideal study organisms to address problems of evolutionary tree construction and
species divergence; they are easy to work with and the six species have a unique
set of distributional patterns within which are various degrees of spatial
isolation, temporal isolation, and genetic variability. Results from previous
work established higher level evolutionary relationships, identified differences
in genetic variability among species, discovered areas where hybridization is
likely, and provided genetic evidence for life cycle plasticity which has
important implications for evolutionary theory. The proposed research will
examine suspected areas of hybridization among otherwise isolated groups and
will extend phylogenetic analyses to the closely related, unstudied year classes
which we suggest represent incipient species. What is learned about the
usefulness of particular gene regions for constructing evolutionary
relationships will be directly applicable to the study of relationships among
other animals and plants and will lead to a better understanding of rates and
mechanisms of evolution at the DNA level.