* 8822553
* Experimental Hadron, Photon and Lepton Research Using       Calorimetric Spectrometers (Physics)
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Juliet Lee-Franzini, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David Berley
* 11/30/1991
* USD 892,980.00

This research program is made up of two major scientific missions: 1) The
completion of the CUSB-II Upsilon Spectroscopy studies at Cornell Electron
Storage Ring accelerator, CESR. 2) Complete construction and begin data taking
with the D0 detector at Fermilab. This group, in collaboration (CUSB-II) with a
group from Columbia University, have been the world leaders in studies of atoms
(upsilon) made up of a "b quark" and an "anti b quark". The b quark is the
heaviest quark known and is approximately five times as heavy as the proton.
Studies of these "atoms" provide detailed information about the strong forces
between b quarks. The D0 experiment is a large collaborative effort amongst more
than twenty institutions working together at Fermilab. The research activity is
the development, and use in physics measurements, of a particle detector system
for the D0 intersection region of the proton-antiproton collider at Fermilab.
This detector system is expected to be one of the most important instruments for
elementary particle physics research during the next decade. The DO detector
will be used to measure the properties of the "weak bosons", carriers of the
weak nuclear force; study the properties of the strong nuclear force (quantum
chromodynamics); and search for yet undiscovered phenomena. The field of
research is that of experimental elementary particle physics. This research
studies the basic building blocks of matter (e.g., electrons, positrons, quarks,
and weak bosons) at very high energies. The experiments use accelerators
(colliders) which provide the highest energy particles made in the laboratory.
The data is collected and analyzed using highly complex and sophisticated
apparatus and techniques.