* 8822307
* Estimating Policy Preferences Using Expert Data
* SBE,SES
* 01/15/1989,06/30/1990
* Michael Laver, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1990
* USD 46,423.00

This project will assemble information on a range of matters that are central
to our understanding of voting and party competition in Western democracies. It
is the first stage in the construction of a comprehensive database on the policy
preferences of key political actors in a large number of representative
democracies. This phase of the research involves a major survey of approximately
1,000 country specialists and is designed to establish the preferred positions
of party elites on a range of policy dimensions. Most of these aspects of party
policy have not before been the subject of comprehensive cross- national
research. In addition, the study will estimate differences between the policy
preferences of party leaders and those of other key sections of the parties
concerned, including legislators, activists and voters. It will also estimate
the importance attributed by leaders to particular policy dimensions; the number
of policy dimensions that are important in each party system; the extent to
which party leaders trade off the desire to get into office against the desire
to affect policy outputs; and the extent to which the leaders of each party have
control over party policy. The overall results will bring theoretical and
empirical analyses of voting and party competition much closer together. They
will also open up new approaches to the understanding of party competition that
have hitherto been closed off because of even the vaguest estimates of a number
of key variables.