* 8822036
* Dissertation Improvement Research on the Vegetational       Environment of Evolving Homo Sapiens in Western Kenya
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1991
* Daniel Livingstone, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1991
* USD 19,950.00

This proposal requests funds to support the doctoral dissertation research of
Mr. Joseph Mworia Maitima under the direction of Dr. Daniel A. Livingstone,
Department of Zoology, Duke University. Mr. Maitima is Head, Palynological
Laboratory, National Museum of Kenya. He will do field research on the
vegetational environment of evolving Homo sapiens in Western Kenya. East African
hominid fossil and human cultural sites span the known period of human cultural
evolution. They are close to lake and swamp deposits with a fossil record of the
vegetation during many millions of years. By coring the sedimentary deposits and
studying their microfossil assemblages, it is possible to record the changing
environment to which human species and human culture were adapted. Previous
research has emphasized the last 30,000 years, too short a time to include the
evolution of Homo sapiens sapiens, or the early change from Early Stone Age to
modern technologies. The present project will extend the record far enough to
reveal the vegetational environment of the immediately post-Acheulian Sangoan
culture, the oldest known from presently-forested parts of Africa. Pollen grains
and grass leaf cuticles from sediment and swamp deposits will be used to
reconstruct the vegetational history around Lake Simbi in western Kenya. Through
this research the hypothesis that the landscape was forested at the time of its
Sangoan occupation will be tested. The present project is unique in that while
funds are requested for a dissertation improvement grant, Dr. Livingstone and
Mr. Maitima have collaborated in the past; that collaboration has resulted in
the publication of their research; and future, postdoctoral collaboration is
planned, using the items of equipment and supplies provided through this
project. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in Developing
Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing countries through
the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and
through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.