* 8822916
* Preworkshop and Mini-Symposium for the Assessment of        Transgenic Large Animals as Bioreactors to be held in       Mountain Lake, Virginia, November 16-18, 1988
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1989
* William Velander, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Dov Jaron
* 10/31/1989
* USD 7,500.00

The expression of mammalian proteins in conventional procaryotic and eukaryotic
culture systems has many inadequacies. These shortcomings may preclude their
successful utilization in bioreactors for the large-scale production of post-
translational modified proteins. It is important to note that most human
proteins possess a significant degree of post-translational modification. Even
mammalian tissue culture systems which possess the necessary enzymatic machinery
to make these modifications have limitations both with respect to inherent
culture instability and expression levels. This is complicated by the high cost
of culture media required for tissue culture. Preliminary research indicates
that all of the above problems may be overcome by transgenic expression in large
animals. An assessment of the current developments in basic transgenic biology
is necessary such that its potential can be focused and advanced to become a
part of the current gamut of emerging biotechnologies. This is a main goal of
the workshop entitled, "Mt. Lake Va. Preworkshop and Minisymposium on Large
Transgenic Animals as Bioreactors." The large-scale production of proteins which
have therapeutic value is now performed for only a very few proteins. These
proteins are either very simple molecules such as insulin or are effective in
small quantities for one-time catastrophic events. This is the case for tissue
plasminogen activator (TPA) which is a protein used in the treatment of a heart
attack which is in progress. TPA is an illustrative example as its cost and
limited availability are so prohibitive as to confine its use to (almost
exclusively) emergency room situations| Proteins which are only effective as
chronic therapies (ergo, on a long term basis) are not as a rule available in
sufficient quantity or in a biologically active form as produced by current
bioreactor technology. The use of transgenic cows as bioreactors may provide the
solution to these protein production impasses through its unsurpassed ability to
make protein in milk. Conservative estimates have put a single, average
(transgenic) cow's annual production of any given important therapeutic protein
in excess of tens of millions of dollars. This agricultural- biotechnological
marriage would necessarily breathe new life into both the dairy and cattle
industries as well as the people who now die as result of the unavailability of
therapeutic proteins.