* 8822405
* A New Tool for Analyzing Embodied Technological Change and  Its Implications for Competitiveness, Obsolescence, Employ- ment, Profits and the Structure of the US Industrial Base
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1989,02/28/1993
* Joel Popkin, Joel Popkin & Company
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 02/28/1993
* USD 198,834.00

Worldwide manufacturing capacity expanded markedly in the 1980- 1984 period,
prompted in important ways by the strength of the U.S. dollar. Newly
industrialized countries have emerged who, because such a substantial portion of
their capital is relatively new, are able to compete very effectively with U.S.
producers. They do so, in part, because this new investment embodies cost
structures associated with the latest technology, while U.S. industrial pricing
reflects the use of plant and equipment of less recent vintage in many
industries. The U.S. government is faced with major policy issues as a result of
this competition. Similarly, the U.S. firms which face this competition directly
must make decisions about investing in new technologies, and if so, whether the
investment should be here or abroad. This project is a Phase II award funded
under the Small Business Innovation Research Program. The purpose of this
research is to develop and test a new analytical technique for determining the
range of technologies in use each of the four-digit U.S. manufacturing
industries. The research will utilize data from both the 1982 and 1987 Census of
Manufacturing. In addition, a longitudinal data series on new investment by a
single establishment will be prepared. This will be accomplished by working
directly with the micro data at the Census Bureau, which also provides an
opportunity to do advanced basic research and develop marketable tools in a
manner never before possible. The research will culminate in the creation of a
data base that will clearly identify the range of technologies in use in each
industry and identify unit costs and other aspects of production associated with
each technology. These data will be utilized on an ongoing basis for evaluating
the effects of investments in new technologies on competitiveness, employment,
costs and profits at the industry level and by geographic regions. The database
will also be useful in predicting the pace at which investment will be
undertaken in each industry.