* 8822563
* US-Austria Cooperative Research:  Evaluating Sensible Heat  Flux Density above Smooth and Rough Vegetation
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Lloyd Gay, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 06/30/1993
* USD 13,290.00

This award supports Professor Lloyd W. Gay of the University of Arizona to
collaborate in research with Professor Inge Dirmhirn of the Institute of
Meteorology, Climatology and Applied Physics, Agricultural University of Vienna.
The goal of their research is to improve the techniques for measuring the
natural transfer of thermal energy between the surface of the earth and the
atmosphere, and, thereby, to improve our understanding of the processes that
control this transfer of heat. Part of the challenge is that techniques which
work reasonably well on smooth landscapes do not provide reliable results over
rougher environments such as forests. They will evaluate sensible heat flux
using three different methods at two locations that offer contrasting
aerodynamic roughness. Their research sites will be a uniform, relatively smooth
agricultural site in Arizona, and a rougher oak forest site (the Hochleitenwald)
in Austria, where the Austrians have built an elevated tower for research on the
surface of that 19 meter-high forest. The collaborators bring to the research
complementary strengths in methodology as well, since Dr. Gay is an expert in
the Bowen ratio method and the Austrians are very experienced in eddy
correlation; both groups have experience with aerodynamic models, which is the
third technique they will use. The exchange of momentum, energy and mass between
the surface and the atmosphere is extremely important to a variety of
environmental phenomena that affect humans. Efforts to expand our knowledge of
meteorological, hydrological and ecological processes from local to global scale
require improved tools for evaluating these exchanges. The rather complex Bowen
ratio and eddy correlation techniques for surface exchange are currently the
methods of choice. However, interpretation of surface exchange from air and
space-based remote sensors has generated renewed interest in simple, aerodynamic
exchange models, even though early promise of these models did not hold up well
in applications to rougher surfaces. The proposed experiments, drawing upon the
substantial advances in instrumentation and experimental techniques of the past
decade, will refine our understanding of surface exchange processes, and provide
guidance for application of exchange models to aerodynamically rough, complex
surfaces.