* 8822204
* Trade Policy:  Some Strategic Considerations
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1989,12/31/1991
* Kala Krishna, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 12/31/1991
* USD 48,756.00

Because of the continuing integration of the world's economy, the role of trade
policy is very important and likely to increase in importance in the future.
Pressures in the international market lead to institutionalized trade barriers,
such as the Multifiber Agreement restricting trade in textiles, and voluntary
export agreements on steel and automobiles. An understanding of the effects of
tax/subsidy policies as well as non-tariff trade barriers like quotas is
fundamental to the formulation of effective trade policy. This project has two
themes. The first is a study of the information contained in partial equilibrium
models as a guide to formulating trade policy in oligopolistic markets. Game
theoretic models are employed to examine qualitative, quantitative, and
distributive effects of trade policies in these markets. In such markets direct
trade intervention by the government can have unexpected effects as the firms
react to the trade policies. These interaction effects can change the nature of
the game, and alter the equilibrium outcome. The second aspect of the project
concerns the negotiation of agreements under the principle of most-favored
nation clauses. When might such negotiations have favorable implications for the
outcome of trade policy? The most-favored nation policy is typically considered
to be a trade liberalizing mechanism rather than a trade restricting one.
Working against this notion is the fact that such agreements create a free-ride
problem in that countries can receive the benefits of most-favored nation
policies without making the argeement themselves. This is done simply by trading
with countries which have the most-favored nation status. This project uses a
game theoretic framework to develop both cooperative and non-cooperative models
of international trade incorporating aspects of the most-favored nation trading
envrionment. The theoretical results of these studies are applied to many
international trading situations including direct policies and regime changes,
auction quotas, trigger prices, and tax and subsidy policies. %%% A very
important aspect of U.S. foreign trade is the trade policy set by the
government. Because of the continuing integration of the world economy, this
aspect is likely to increase in importance in the future. Pressures in the
international economy, like voluntary exports on steel and automobiles, have
tended to cartelize rather than liberalize international trade. For this reason,
a better understanding of the implications of various governmental policies like
taxes and subsidies, as well as non-tariff trade barriers like quotas is
fundamental to formulating effective trade agreements. Using a game theoretic
framework, this project analyzes the effects deriving from government trade
policies such as most-favored nation agreements, quotas and other non-tariff
trade barriers, and import taxes and subsidies.