* 8822605
* US-Federal Republic of Germany Cooperative Research:        Geometric Techniques in Group Theory                                                                                   ,
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Stephen Smith, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 10/31/1992
* USD 18,502.00

This award supports five U.S. mathematicians for collaborative research in group
theory with a number of German mathematicians at several universities in the
Federal Republic of Germany (FRG). The collaborative framework was organized by
Professor Stephen D. Smith of the University of Illinois at Chicago and
Professors Franz G. Timmesfeld of the University of Geissen and Gernot Stroth of
the Free University, Berlin. The proposed visits will permit continuation of
some highly productive collaborative relationships previously supported by the
U.S.-FRG Program, while also introducing some new participants. Reciprocal
visits by the Germans to several U.S. universities are being supported by the
DFG (the German equivalent of NSF.) The various partnerships among the two
groups will focus on several closely related problems: axiomatization and
classification of geometries for simple groups, universal covers of finite
geometries, the theory of trees and more general amalgams for geometric groups;
and the application of such results to the study of maximal subgroups and
representation of simple groups. Most of the leaders in this area of mathematics
are working in the U.S. and West Germany, so fruitful collaboration is expected.
Both geometry and group theory have important applications in twentieth century
science - for example, geometry in the physics of relativity, and group theory
in physics and chemistry at the quantum and particle levels. Natural
interrelations between the two theories have long been studied. The use of
techniques from discrete geometry in problems of finite group theory is a
particularly vigorous area of modern mathematical research.