* 8822634
* US-Sweden Cooperative Research:  System Identification and  Control of the Clarification Process
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Paul Ossenbruggen, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Pierre Perrolle
* 11/30/1990
* USD 19,526.00

This award will support collaborative research between Dr. Paul J. Ossenbruggen,
University of New Hampshire and Professor Gustaf Olsson, Lund Institute of
Technology, Sweden. The proposed project focuses on the clarification phase of
the activated sludge treatment (AST) process, a highly complex, biological
method of treating wastewater. In spite of its popularity around the world, our
understanding of the process is limited, and at present there are not adequate
methods to control the process. Frequent violations of effluent standards are
common even at well-operated plants. The interaction of a number of physical,
hydraulic and biological factors in the AST process make system identification
and development of effective dynamic control algorithms difficult. In this
project, a factorial experiment to identify parameters that significantly affect
the clarification process is proposed. The factors of concern are: mixed liquor
suspended solids, return sludge flow rate, dissolved oxygen, and sludge blanket
depth. Measurements of response, controlled and uncontrolled parameters will be
measured at a frequency of one observation per minute. Time series of these
critical factors will be analyzed using Box-Jenkins techniques to formulate
mathematical models and to develop a control algorithm. All experiments and
controller validation studies will be performed on full-scale treatment plants.
This research effort will be conducted at the Lund Institute of Technology in
cooperation with Professor Olsson, a recognized expert on system modelling and
control. The study builds on previous research conducted in Houston and Canada
using full-scale treatment plants. By providing data from experiments
specifically designed for the special needs of time-series techniques and cause-
effect studies, the research should lead to a better understanding of the AST
process and its control.