* 8822990
* RUI: Polarization Dynamics in a Polarization-Isotropic      Standing Wave Laser
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Robert Gioggia, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 10/31/1991
* USD 79,669.00

Polarization pulsations in lasers represent one of the simplest forms of coupled
mode dynamics and have led to the study of increasingly complex forms of field-
atom interactions. Research under this RUI grant will conduct detailed
experimental studies of a coupled mode polarization-isotropic standing wave
laser in which the two modes have the same spatial pattern and same frequency
and differ only in the polarization of the electromagnetic fields. In the
absence of symmetry breaking, recently developed models predict new types of
behavior (depending on laser parameters) such as: a) bistability between the two
modes; b) pulsations in the total laser intensity; c) more complex and partially
anticorrelated pulsations between the two modes. Experiments will be initiated
with 3.39 micron He-Ne lasers and may be extended to 3.51 micron He-Xe lasers.
Measurements will be made on individual phases, phase differences, individual
amplitudes, and amplitude changes as a function of adjustments in operating
conditions such as gas pressure, gas mixtures, cavity length, cavity losses, and
excitation. Using digitized data, the oscillations will be analyzed to determine
whether they occur chaotically or are merely random. Theoretical and numerical
work, extending or modifying existing models to match conditions, will be used
for comparisons with the experimental results and used to predict amplitude and
phase dynamics.