* 8822128
* U.S. Thailand Cooperative Research:  Feeding Deterrence of  Herbivorous Coral Reef Fishes as an Indicator of Chemical   Defenses of Tropical Marine Algae
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1989,02/29/1992
* Steven Amesbury, University of Guam
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/1992
* USD 24,494.00

This proposal requests funds to permit Drs. Stephen G. Nelson, Valerie J. Paul,
and Steven Amesbury, Marine Laboratory, University of Guam, to pursue with Dr.
Hansa Chansang, Phuket Marine Biological Center, Thailand, for a period of 24
months, a program of cooperative research on the chemical ecology of marine
plant-herbivore interactions. Metabolites of marine plants will be screened to
determine whether they serve as chemical defenses against tropical herbivorous
fishes. The biologically active metabolites will be isolated, chemically
defined, and further studied for useful properties. The collaborators will test
the hypothesis that those organisms that are most deterrent toward feeding by
reef fishes are the richest sources of natural products. Those metabolites that
show such deterrence will be studied further to determine whether they possess
properties which are of interest to the biotechnological industries. The field
of chemical ecology has yielded valuable biological and ecological information
about plant-herbivore and other predator-prey interactions in terrestrial
habitats, but much less is known about the natural functions of plant
metabolites in the marine environment. Investigations of the role of these
metabolites as antimicrobial, antifouling, and/or predator deterrent agents may
provide a rationale for developing future applications for these compounds. Many
unique metabolites isolated from marine organisms may be a resource for future
biotechnological applications. The scientists will compare chemical and
biological results already obtained on Guam with results of these proposed
studies in the more diverse coral reef habitats of Phuket, Thailand. The
collaborators are highly respected scientists in the field of this research. The
present project will allow them to combine their talents and interests for
mutual benefit. This project is relevant to the objectives of the Science in
Developing Countries Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. scientists and engineers and their counterparts in developing
countries through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.