* 8822354
* Airborne Studies of Aerosols, Trace Gases, Stratus Clouds   and Ice Leads in the North American Arctic
* O/D,OPP
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Lawrence Radke, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 08/31/1990
* USD 63,007.00

This project is an airborne laser radar (Lidar) study of the characteristics of
arctic haze and stratus clouds. It will focus specifically on aerosol and trace
gas concentrations in the arctic atmosphere, and on the effects of combustion
products, sulfur species (DMS), and water vapor generated locally and introduced
at the surface. The lidar will be flown on board a WP-3D aircraft operated by
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), and a C-131A
research aircraft operated by the University of Washington. The lidar will
provide information on the spatial characteristics of arctic haze layers, the
presence and height of the surface temperature inversion, and the size and
spacing of cracks and open areas in the arctic sea ice. It does this through the
observed backscatter characteristics of particles in conjunction with
simultaneous supporting observations of the scattering function of the
particles. The lidar is capable of resolving vertical structure on the order of
ten meters, and horizontal structure on the order of one hundred meters, and has
a demonstrated ability to observe the multiple laminated nature of arctic haze,
particularly in summer when observations have heretofore been rare. Simultaneous
dropwindsondes will indicate whether the haze layers are passively advected or
if they are actively advecting into the surrounding air mass.