* 8822093
* The Chemistry of Organosamarium(II) and Related Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1992
* William Evans, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 01/31/1992
* USD 211,149.00

This project in the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program
deals with the organometallic chemistry of the lanthanide metals, especially
samarium. Organosamarium complexes have been shown by the Principal Investigator
to be unusually powerful reducing agents which have the advantage of being
soluble in a number of common organic solvents, in which they effect a variety
of highly unusual transformations of organic molecules. Further studies of these
complexes are expected both to define better their utility as synthetic reagents
and to provide an understanding of their chemical reactivity. The objective of
this project is to determine the factors which control the special reactivity of
organolanthanide(II) complexes, especially of organosamarium(II) complexes. Of
special interest is a series of related Sm(II)-mediated reactions in which
carbon-carbon double or triple bonds, or nitrogen-nitrogen double bonds, are
activated and reacted with CO to give significantly transformed products. These
will provide excellent opportunities to probe the principles of Sm(II)
reactivity and therefore will be studied in detail. This chemistry will be
extended to C-C bond cleavage reactions and the use of Sm(II)-generated
dihaptoacyl complexes to effect cyclization of straight-chain alkyls. The effect
of the Lewis acid center on Sm(II) reactions will be examined by studying
reductive transformations using an external reductant in the presence of
bis(pentamethylcyclopentadiene)- bis(THF)samarium(III) and
bis(pentamethylcyclopentadiene)- (THF)europium(II). The results of these
experiments, together with studies of methods for effecting reductive Sm-O bond
cleavage, are expected to lead to reductive transformation systems which are
catalytic in samarium. The synthesis of reactive bridged bimetallic Sm(II)
reagents will be explored also, as will the chemical consequences of the unusual
bent structure of the bis(pentamethylcyclopentadiene)samarium(II) in the
activation of alkenes by this reagent.