* 8822044
* Distributions of Input-Output Coefficients and ProbabilisticInput-Output Models
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Randall Jackson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 06/30/1992
* USD 90,400.00

Input-output analyses of the structure and dynamics of economic systems
recently have entered into a new phase of development, as more sophisticated
modelling techniques have been used to evaluate larger and more complex data
sets. A particularly promising line of inquiry has been the development of
probabilistic distribution approaches to provide operational solutions for
models. This project will continue development of these new probabilistic
solution techniques in order to examine the regional variation in input-output
coefficients, which reflect the ratios of transaction flows to total outputs for
different sectors in specific locales over given time periods. The main thrust
of the research will be analyses of U.S. national input-output data in order to
refine solution techniques and to estimate probability density-derived
coefficients of industry sectors for different regions and for the nation as a
whole. The geographic variation of the coefficients will be analyzed to
determine patterns of cross-regional variation and other sources of systematic
variation, such as the size or type of industrial establishment. Analyses also
will be made of the impacts of differences in regional technological development
on economic activity. By exploring new techniques of input-output analyses on a
previously untapped set of national industrial data, this project will be
valuable from theoretical, methodological, and empirical perspectives. The
enhancement of techniques based on probabilistic distributions will further
general understandings of the utility of these types of techniques in comparison
with more conventional forms of stochastic model solution procedures.
Methodological developments will provide a foundation for future work on data
sets for all scales, locations, and time periods, and the outcome of these tests
should contribute new knowledge about the changing regional composition of the
contemporary American economy.