* 8823054
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis, Special Functions and Separation of Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1989,01/31/1992
* Willard Miller, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 01/31/1992
* USD 35,944.00

Separation of variables is the best known method of reducing partial
differential equations to simpler form. It is taught in undergraduate
mathematics courses and is often viewed as nothing more than a serendipitous
accident. There are, in fact, deep mathematical and physical reasons why
separation of variables works and why it actually applies across a large class
of equations. The purpose of this work is to continue a long-term investigation
into the circumstances and applicable methods for treating equations which can
be decomposed. The work divides into several parts. First is the problem of
determining a general definition of variable separation that applies to all
(systems of) partial differential equations and working out the structure theory
of possible separation types. Second is the problem of intrinsic
characterization of separable coordinates. For Hamilton-Jacobi and Schrodinger
equations this problem is essentially solved. For systems of equations such as
the Dirac and linear elasticity equations, it remains open. Work will continue
in this area. Finally, there is the problem of determining the special functions
that arise when variables are separated in a particular equation and
establishing properties of these functions. Particular emphasis is placed on
those properties which are a consequence of the symmetry of the associated
equation.