* 8823007
* FASEB Conference on Ubiquitin and Intracellular Protein     Degradation; July 2-7, 1989, in Saxtons River, CT
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1989,06/30/1990
* Milton Schlesinger, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* M.  Paige
* 06/30/1990
* USD 4,000.00

The FASEB Conference on Ubiquitin and Intracellular Protein Degradation will
bring together scientists studying the different systems which regulate protein
breakdown within the cell as well as those studying ubiquitin genes, their
expression and their potential regulatory roles in cell metabolism. Ubiquitin
was first isolated and characterized about 15 years ago as a major protein
extract with strong mitogenic activity. Based on specific antibodies, its
presence was detected in many biological species. Its sequence of 76 amino acids
was determined from several species and shown to be surprisingly conserved. The
purified ubiquitin was found not to be a mitogen but its first function was
detected when it was identified as the cofactor required in an ATP-dependent
pathway for degradation of proteins. Until recently, this was ubiquitin's only
apparent role in the cell. However, the isolation of genes encoding ubiquitin
revealed additonal sites for its function - in particular in DNA repair and
ribosomal RNA synthesis. A role in DNA metabolism had been suggested from the
early detection of ubiquitin sequences covalently linked to histone H2A and H2B
in interphase chromatin. Similar ubiquitin-conjugates have been found in insect
muscle actin, in cell surface receptors, in virus structural proteins and in
cytoskeleton proteins. An increasing number of scientists from widely divergent
disciplines are studying the role of ubiquitin in conjugates, their relationship
to the ATP-dependent proteolytic degradation system (which has been found
essential for normal cell growth and metabolism), the factors that regulate
expression of ubiquitin and the meaning of the unusual and unique organization
of ubiquitin genes. This conference will bring these investigators together in
an atmosphere that will provide meaningful exchange of the latest developments
in these areas of research which will contribute to our understanding of basic
cell functions.