* 8823071
* REU Supplement:  Characterization of Polymer Interphases    Using Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1989,11/30/1993
* F. James Boerio, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 11/30/1993
* USD 218,424.00

An innovative analytical technique known as surface-enhanced Raman scattering
(SERS) is being used in combination with other surface analysis techniques for
the non-destructive characterization of "interphases" formed when polymer
systems are adsorbed onto or cured against metal substrates. SERS is being used
to investigate the adsorption of block copolymers and mixtures of homopolymers
onto substrates such as silver and copper. SERS is also being used to determine
the effect that metal substrates have on the molecular structure of polymers
cured against them. The goal is to obtain fundamental information regarding
catalysis or inhibition of curing reactions by metals, configurations of
polymers adsorbed onto metal substrates, preferential adsorption of components
of polymer systems onto metals, mechanisms by which polymers and small molecules
interact with metals, extent of cure as a function distance away from a metal
surface and into a polymer cured against the metal, and migration of metal ions
into polymers cured against metal substrates. Processes such as preferential
adsorption of components of a polymer systems onto a substrate and catalysis or
inhibition of reactions within the polymer by the substrate lead to the
formation of an interphase in the polymer adjacent to the substrate that has
chemical and physical properties distinct from those of the bulk polymer. Since
the macroscopic properties of adhesive bonds and composites are controlled by
the interphase, it is essential to determine and control the molecular structure
of interphases. SERS is ideal for this purpose since it is inherently surface
selective and does not require a polymer to be separated from a substrate for
the interphase to be examined as do virtually all other surface analysis
techniques. The results obtained are being used to tailor the molecular
structure of interphases so as to obtain enhanced environmental stability in
structural adhesive joints and composites.