* 8823091
* Trophic Interactions between Phagotrophic Protozoa and      Bacterioplankton in Coastal Waters
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1989,02/22/1990
* Barry Sherr, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/22/1990
* USD 57,761.00

It is now firmly established that heterotrophic microbes, bacteria and
phagotrophic protozoa are responsible for a largepart of carbon/energy flow in
marine food webs. Using fluorescently labeled bacteria prepared from
naturalbacterioplankton assemblages, it has been demonstrated that &lt;20um
ciliates, from waters in a salt marsh estuary and fromcoastal waters in the
NWMediterranean Sea, could grazebacteria at high clearance rates. And these
ciliatespreferentially ingest freely suspended, rather that particle-attached,
bacteria. Previous studies have provided indirectevidence for a positive
feedback effect of bacterivorousprotozoa on bacterial growth. Continued
investigations will beconducted on protozoa-bacteria trophic interactions in
coastal pelagic food webs emphasizing the: 1) evaluation of short-termand fine
spatial scale variations in both bacterioplanktonproductivity and protozoan
bacterivory within discrete watermasses; 2) examination of the extent of
resource partitioningamong bacterivorous protozoa, especially with respect to
the size spectra of bacteria grazed by flagellates and ciliates; 3)determination
of the efficiency of conversion of ingestedbacteria into protozoan biomass; and
4) testing the hypothesisthat decoupling estuarine bacteria from their protozoan
grazersresults in a change in bacterial metabolism.