* 8823085
* Functions of the Secretory Cocktail of Chromaffin Cells in aTeleost Model
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1994
* August Epple, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 11/30/1994
* USD 509,017.00

The adrenal medulla is involved in the control of cardiovascular functions,
especially during stress reactions. Epinephrine and norepinephrine are the
hormones by which it exerts these effects. This picture has changed drastically
with the discovery of adrenomedullary peptide hormones, called enkephalins, that
act like opiates when given via injections. The function(s) of these hormones,
when released by the adrenal, are unknown though it has been speculated that
they have euphoric and analgesic effects. However, being peptides, these
enkephalins do not have access to several regions of the central nervous system
(because of the presence of a blood-brain barrier). To make matters more
confusing, it is now clear that even true opiates, codeine and morphine, are
produced by the adrenal gland. These true opiates have access to many regions of
the central nervous system. Obviously, an understanding of the interactions of
these three different types of substances, which seem to be released
simultaneously during stress, is of utmost importance for basic scientific and
potentially therapeutic reasons. Unfortunately, mammals have rather low levels
of circulating opiates, and are therefore only of limited value for pertinent
research. However, the American eel is an ideal model for work on plasma
opiates. Its adrenal medulla equivalent contains high concentrations of all
three types of hormones, and it can be studied easily in vivo and in vitro. In
addition, the plasma levels of codeine and morphine are several times higher
than in mammals. Furthermore, the eel is much hardier under experimental
conditions than warm-blooded animals, and its central nervous system is much
easier to study than that of the latter. In this proposal the eel is employed
because this species has unique features for research on the functions and
interactions of the three types of secretions of the adrenal medulla.
Experimental approaches include:(a) measurement of hormone release in vivo and
in vitro; (b) analysis of the possible physiological effects of enkephalins and
opiates on cardiac, respiratory, osmoregulatory, metabolic and endocrine
functions, and on agonistic behavior. These studies should (1) help to clarify
the functions of the chromaffin secretory cocktail, particularly during stress
responses; (2) help to understand pathologies related to the chromaffin cell;
and (3) provide basic insights for the understanding of the chromaffin cell
system of the human embryo/fetus, which is similar to that of Anguilla rostrata.