* 8823063
* US-Switzerland Cooperative Research:  Relationship between  the Processing of Ceramics and their Tribological           Performance
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1992
* Traugott Fischer, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1992
* USD 10,540.00

This award supports Professor Traugott Fischer of Stevens Institute of
Technology to collaborate in materials engineering research with Professor Alain
Mocellin of the Ceramics Laboratory of the Federal Institute of Technology in
Lausanne, Switzerland. The objective of their collaboration is to enhance
understanding of the properties of certain advanced ceramics and of the
processing techniques for achieving them. The Swiss group will prepare test
ceramics with well defined processing and properties, and provide these to the
U.S. group for further study. Tribological research at Stevens will then relate
friction and wear of the ceramics to the mechanical properties of the materials.
These properties depend on the size of the grains, the nature of the additives
and the processing. The collaborative arrangement efficiently links two
laboratories with complementary equipment to produce, characterize and test the
behavior of novel ceramic materials. There is presently intense activity in many
countries with the aim of developing and applying novel high performance
ceramics. Some notable successes have been achieved, mainly in the metal forming
and cutting industries, but the wider application of these materials, for
example in textile machinery and advanced engines, is still meeting with mixed
results. Success in the fabrication and application of these materials will
follow the further development of our understanding of their properties and of
the processing techniques for producing them.