* 8823076
* Dissertation Research: Systematics of An Old Polyploid      Complex in the Genus Gaudichaudia (Malpighiaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1989,05/31/1992
* William Anderson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 05/31/1992
* USD 12,000.00

With guidance from faculty adviser Dr. William Anderson, graduate student
Steven Jessup of the University of Michigan is studying plants of the genus
Gaudichaudia of the Malpighiaceae family, a group of flowering vines of the
American tropics. Species in this group exhibit several different levels of
chromosome doubling, called polyploidy, along with several apparent instances of
hybridization between morphologically separate lineages, leading to both sterile
and fertile intermediates. The ability of polyploids to produce fertile hybrids
between distantly related lineages, and for polyploid hybrids from different
progenitors to cross and then backcross to parental tetraploids, results in a
genetically complex array of forms where clear morphological boundaries between
species are blurred. By using DNA restriction fragment markers and protein
electrophoresis in combination with standard taxonomic methods, the researchers
will identify and characterize species, and analyze ecological races in terms of
geographic range and soil/climate distributions. Using computer-aided methods of
phylogenetic analysis, they will infer the origins and evolutionary history of
taxa in this genus, and test the hypothesis that the group exhibits a pattern of
polyploid cycles of speciation through hybridization. Polyploid cycles have
received little attention, especially in tropical woody plants, yet the
incidence of high chromosome numbers suggests extensive polyploid evolution in
tropical taxa. The new molecular methods in use promise a breakthrough in our
understanding of the prevalence and significance of polyploid evolution.