* 8823012
* Conference on Utility:  Theory, Measurement, and            Applications in Santa Cruz, California, June 89
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Ward Edwards, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Martin
* 05/31/1991
* USD 47,491.00

This proposal addresses an important emerging issue in decision making, the
growing divergence between technologies developed to assist in the analysis of
complex decisions and the appropriateness of the expected utility model as a
theoretical basis for decision analysis. The focus of this proposal is a
conference that will bring together leading practitioners and theorists to
reassess decision analysis in light of the theoretical insights from expected
utility theory and behavioral decision theory. In addition, the conference will
examine the implications of empirical findings for the development of new
decision theory. The DRMS panel felt that this emphasis represented an exciting
match of the theory.building and applied interests of the DRMS program and that
the conference represents an unusual opportunity to provide insights about the
nature of theory.building, and the relation between descriptive, normative, and
prescriptive insights, in the decision sciences. Furthermore, the principal
investigator is believed to be uniquely qualified to define the agenda and to
stimulate discussion among the invited participants. In light of the quality of
the participants and the timing of the conference, its results are considered
likely to be significant for theorists as well as practitioners of decision
making.