* 8846622
* RUI:  The Physiological Basis of Grazing Effects on the     Primary Productivity of Algal Turfs
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1988,02/28/1990
* Robert Carpenter, California State University-Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 02/28/1990
* USD 71,972.00

Coral reefs represent one of the world's most diverse ecosystem types in terms
of species and also one of the most highly productive. As the waters surrounding
most coral reefs are oligotrophic (i.e., extremely depauperate in nutrients),
planktonic assemblages of animals and photosynthesizers are very dilute and do
not provide much in the way of food for coral reef organisms. Most of the high
productivity of reefs is based ultimately on the photosynthesis of seaweeds and
algal-containing corals. Thus factors that affect seaweed primary production
contribute greatly to the entire organization and functioning of coral reef
exosystems. Dr. Carpenter and collaborator Dr. Susan Williams, of the University
of Washington, want to look at possible mechanisms by which this high reef
production is maintained in such nutrient poor environs. They hypothesize that
the high numbers of reef herbivores are able to rapidly recycle nutrients bach
to the seaweeds, and that nitgrogen fixation may be an important, in situ
nutrient-producing process. Both Drs. Carpenter and Williams are productive
young researchers very familiar with the ecology of coral reefs in the
Caribbean. Dr. Carpenter's background in reef herbivores and algal productivity
will balance nicley with Dr. William's considerable nutrients dynamics
experience. Support for this two-year investigation is recommended.