* 8850371
* North Louisiana Science Improvement Proposal:  A            Certification/Inservice Project
* EDU,DRL
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1990
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 04/30/1990
* USD 93,922.00

This one-year project will offer re-training opportunities for a number of
uncertified middle school/high school chemistry teachers. The project will
utilize the skills of Master Teachers, including one or more National Science
Foundation Presidential Awardees, selected from 15 school systems in Northern
Louisiana. During the academic year 1988-89, the Master Teachers, in conjunction
with faculty from the Departments of Chemistry, and Science Education, will
plan, develop, and field-test a resource handbook designed to aid all teachers
of chemistry. During the summer of 1989 chemistry course-work will be provided
for 20 chemistry teachers in the fifteen systems. The selected participants will
be teaching with temporary certificates or outside their area of certification.
The chemistry course will consist of two, four week sessions. Each four week
session will involve daily class-meetings in the morning and two afternoon
laboratory meetings each week. Participants will obtain a background in
chemistry while at the same time accumulating materials, ideas, and experience
that will enhance their skills as chemistry teachers. During the fall of 1989
the Master Teachers, with the assistance of chemists from Louisiana Tech
University, will serve as system level chemistry consultants. Using the handbook
as a base, three in-service programs will be offered in five sites in North
Louisiana. Each participant will earn a total credits of 6 hours for lecture and
2 hours for laboratory, adding up to a total of eight credit hours of
introductory chemistry for successful completion of the course. This project
offers the opportunity of studying the impact of a concentrated exposure to
chemistry instruction on uncertified teachers Louisiana Tech University has
contributed an amount equal to 41% of the National Science Foundation award.