* 8850618
* The Atlanta Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1994
* Melvin Webb, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Costello L. Brown
* 08/31/1994
* USD 3,697,090.00

This project involves a cooperative effort among the institutions of the Atlanta
University Center (Atlanta University, Clark College, Morehouse College, Morris
Brown College, and Spelman College), together with Georgia State, Georgia Tech
and the Atlanta Public Schools. It consists of a set of coordinated activities,
targeted initially throughout Metropolitan Atlanta, designed to significantly
increase the representation of minorities in careers in science, engineering and
technology. The broad-based approach taken to solve the underrepresentation
problem centers on the establishment of coalitions among colleges, public
schools and community organizations. The activities include formal education
during the precollege and undergraduate years and informal science education for
all ages from early childhood through the adult years. A set of coordinated
activities are being implemented, with responsibilities distributed among the
several institutions and organizations. For example, Saturday Science Academies
for elementary students will be established at several of the institutions
(patterned on the model developed at Clark College) and summer enrichment
institutes will be taught by teams of faculty from the Atlanta University
Center, Georgia State and Georgia Tech. At the undergraduate level, Georgia Tech
will play the lead role in a six-week summer enrichment program for minority
students in engineering following their freshman year, while Georgia State, with
a major role in teacher education, will be responsible for developing and
implementing the 5-year MAT and M.S. programs. The informal science education
component, developed cooperatively with other Atlanta groups, e.g. APPLE Corps
and Zoo Atlanta, involves a number of activities such as: "Science is for
Everybody" consisting of portable learning units based on permanent exhibits
from Atlanta's major science/technology centers; Science and Technology Programs
for Boys Clubs and Girls Clubs; and Community Forums on Effective Schools. A
central project focus is on instructional strategies which will nurture,
encourage and motivate students within the context of science experiences. This
project is an excellent example of a Comprehensive Regional Center for
Minorities. It is targeted at a minority population of substantial size
(600,000), and it is comprehensive in terms of attention to the various
educational levels and age groups, in disciplinary coverage, in coordination and
cooperation among school systems, colleges and universities and community
organizations, and in its focus on nurturing, encouraging and motivating
minority students. Significant additional financial support is being contributed
to the project by the participating organizations and groups.