* 8850429
* Helping Established Teachers Introduce New Biology
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1991
* Albert Ruesink, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 07/31/1991
* USD 193,218.00

In a joint effort, the School of Education and the Department of Biology at
Indiana University, Bloomington, will provide a six-week workshop on recent
developments in biology for 30 in-service high school biology teachers during
the summer of 1989. The workshop will be followed by several efforts to help the
teachers incorporate what they have learned into their teaching programs. Four
topics will be emphasized in the workshop: 1) human genetics, 2) molecular
biology and molecular genetics, 3) immunology, and 4) biochemical techniques.
Instructors will start at the level where most participants seem to be and by
the end of the session try to introduce considerable recently discovered
information. Lecture and discussion time will be devoted to each topic, but of
equal importance will be the laboratory component, which will consist of two
elements. One will be exercises used to demonstrate principles and examples that
are usual in a college-level lab setting. The second will be labs that should be
suitable for demonstrating some essential elements of the material in a high
school lab situation. This will provide the in-service teachers with ideas and
expertise that they can incorporate rather directly into their own teaching
programs. The in-service teachers will be asked to help with the development of
the latter exercises, thus helping generate a self-confidence that they can
adapt these exercises for their own situations. Several efforts will be made to
ensure that the workshop has an impact on teaching. The teachers will all come
from Indianapolis and the southern half of Indiana, making it possible for them
to communicate relatively easily with each other and with the workshop faculty
after the workshop. During the school year 89-90, teams of workshop faculty will
visit the schools of the participants, serve as resources regarding the content
and nature of modules being tried in the high schools, and encourage
administrators to be supportive of these teachers. This program is the first to
offer the High School Biology teachers of Indiana the opportunity of expanding
their knowledge base in several important topics. This broad approach will
better able the teachers to improve many areas of their curriculum. Indiana
University has contributed an amount equal to 13% of the National Science
Foundation award.