* 8850674
* Increasing Career Access Opportunities for American Indians in Science and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1992
* Benny Shendo, American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES)
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 01/31/1992
* USD 207,269.00

The strategy underlying this project is called "near peer" counseling and
mentoring. The American Indian Science and Engineering Society (AISES) is
establishing a networking model to improve the access of American Indian
students to careers in science and technology. The model, cooperatively
developed with Montana State University, Northern Arizona University, Clarkson
University, the University of New Mexico and New Mexico Institute of Mining and
Technology will be implemented over a two year period. AISES student chapters at
those institutions are the major vehicle in implementing the network and
conducting the activities. One of the major accomplishments of AISES has been in
sponsoring the establishment of undergraduate student chapters at some 40
colleges and universities around the country. These have played an important
role in improving the retention rate of American Indian undergraduate students
on those campuses. Project activities during the first year involve mentoring,
role modeling, motivating and encouraging American Indian high school students
through science and mathematics activities conducted by selected members of each
chapter. After appropriate preparation and training by faculty during the first
semester, these chapter members make regular second semester visits, initially
accompanied by their chapter faculty sponsor, to five predominantly American
Indian high schools in the region. They conduct special labs, lead field trips,
and hold counseling sessions for students as well as special sessions for
parents, teachers, extended family, tribal leaders and school board members. The
Indian high school students and their parents are also invited to visit the
AISES campus chapters to sit in on university classes and witness a typical day
in the life of an American Indian student majoring in science or engineering.
During the second year, following a similar schedule, new AISES chapter
counselors will be trained and will then repeat the previous year's activities
with a new group of high schools and students. At the same time, selected
members of the high school students impacted the first year will be trained as
counselors for similar activities in elementary and junior high schools serving
American Indian students. A computerized tracking system linking AISES, the
participating universities and AISES chapters, and the schools into a network
for monitoring and evaluation will be established.