* 8850521
* A Model Program for Retraining Elementary and Middle School Teachers to Use Computers Effectively in the Classroom
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1992
* Robert Aiken, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* David E. Jones
* 08/31/1992
* USD 366,917.00

The main goals of the project are to provide, over a three year period to fifty
elementary and middle school teachers, five graduate level computer courses to
establish a firm base of computer knowledge; and to apply the didactical
structures to enable the teachers to become computer specialists in their
respective schools and districts. A model has been developed by the principal
investigators to retrain teachers at the grade levels k-9. An aspect of this
proposal is to explore the efficacy of the model. The model includes, in
addition to the content and methodology courses, seminars for elementary and
middle school principals; seminars for the presidents of the home and school
associations; establishment of a teacher network for the exchange and
dissemination of ideas and materials; designing assessment criteria, evaluation
instruments, and questionnaires for acquiring formative data; and assessing the
extent to which aptitude, attitude, and previous experience are useful as
predictors of performance. The main programming languages integral to the
program are Logo and BASIC. The work is a cooperative effort by the departments
of computer science and educational Psychology at Temple University in close
collaboration with Philadelphia School District. Participants for this project
are teachers at the elementary and middle school levels selected from the School
District of Philadelphia. An announcement is sent to each of the schools in
Philadelphia with information on how to apply. Teachers are selected based upon
their motivation to work with computers, their professional plans when they
finish the program especially how they might apply the results of the program to
their schools as resource teachers. The courses offered fall into five
categories: Application programs and how to use them; Introduction to problem
solving with Logo; Problem solving with advanced Logo; Problem solving using
structured BASIC; and Software evaluation and effective uses of computers for
teaching. These courses are to be distributed over the 3 years of the project as
the model dictates. There is a considerable cost sharing provided by Temple
University. The University has committed $216,740 to the project. At a request
from National Science Foundation (NSF) of $357,042, the University's rate is
216,740/357,042 or over 60% of the amount requested from NSF.