* 8850465
* LABNET:  Technologically Enhanced Student Investigations in Project Labs
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1988,09/30/1992
* John King, TERC Inc
* Continuing grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 09/30/1992
* USD 2,572,577.00

The goal of the Labnet project is to establish student research projects as an
important and accepted part of science instruction throughout the United States
by enhancing science teachers' ability to involve students in science
investigations. To this end, the project will facilitate project laboratories
and the establishment of a telecommunications network. The labs can be offered
as either full courses or as components of existing high school science courses.
The three year project takes full advantage of microcomputer- based labs (MBL)
and telecommmunications technologies. TERC, Tufts University and Dickinson
College will join forces to offer workshops to 120 teachers of secondary school
science (in teams of four/school) and to 180 teacher-trainers who will function
as disseminators and outreach leaders for this project. The teachers will be
involved in four weeks of workshop activity including content and computer use,
three during the first summer and one in the second summer with intervening
meetings and staff observations during the school year. The "trainers" will be
working for a total of three weeks during one summer. Some of these "trainers"
by virtue of their own background and expertise may participate in a two- week
session. Each "trainer" will be charged with running workshops for at least 30
other teachers using the first group of teachers as role models and as an
additional resource for their peers. The project predicts that many teachers
across the country will be impacted by this project and thus a significant
fraction of all high school students will have access to project laboratory
experiences during their secondary education. The project is based on already
developed units (through a previously funded project) dealing with acid rain,
seismic activity, weather and radiation with the option of developing units
around other already existing MBL activities in chemistry, biology, physics and
earth science. This MBL approach to laboratory investigations has proven to be
effective to every population group from the gifted and talented to special
needs students. Once started on a national scale, the project will be able to
continue without future funding because it has strong private- sector support
and will create interest among research scientists and engineers as well as
educators through its long- term student data-collection and potential
environmental monitoring networks. Acknowledging that it could take a long time
to implement a nation-wide network of students and teachers engaged in research
issues, TERC has committed itself to long-term involvement with this project. An
amount equivalent to 20% of the NSF request for funding has been obtained from
outside sources, including TERC, IBM, McGraw- Hill, Tufts University and
Dickinson College as well as contributions from school districts.