* 8850390
* Genetics and Biotechnology Education Programs for           Elementary, Middle, and High School Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1991
* James Stewart, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1991
* USD 542,568.00

This project at the University of Wisconsin will help teachers improve their
background in genetics and to assist them in becoming familiar with the
resources available to help them keep abreast of new developments in genetics
and biotechnology. It will offer teachers the opportunity to explore and examine
the ethical and moral decision-making needs at both the societal and personal
levels. It will challenge teachers to reconsider their own genetics curriculum
and teaching strategies in a stimulating and supportive environment. It will
help teachers to identify and discuss content-specific issues and misconceptions
commonly held by students in genetics and will enable teachers to develop
instructional activities to address them. The proposed project will act as both
the catalyst and support teachers seek in their continuing efforts to revise and
improve their science teaching. The proposed project will consist of the
following two major components: The Summer Institute for Genetics Education -
This component will allow for the continuation and expansion of the Summer
Institute for Genetics Education. Existing teacher materials will be evaluated
and modified and new modules will be developed. Future modules will focus on
other topics such as the genetic basis of evolution and developmental biology,
ethical issues and decision-making models, and student learning and problem
solving in genetics and other curricular issues. In addition, future modules
will be planned to address the special needs of elementary and middle school
teachers and the teaching of the concepts of variation, continuity, and
development. Twenty-five teachers each year will attend five separate workshops,
each of one week duration. Genetics Education Institute Academic Year Activities
- During this component, the Summer Institute staff will develop and conduct
follow-up and promotional activities during the school year. These activities
would include, but not be limited to, 10 workshops, 10 in-services, 3 convention
presentations, seminar series, and assistance to teachers who wish to conduct
outreach activities in his or her own community. The Institute staff will review
and disseminate information to teachers on educational research, curricula,
audio-visual aids, and printed materials. The staff will provide or arrange for
guest lectures in classrooms, coordinate and conduct school field trips to
campus, act as a clearinghouse to provide students and teachers with materials
on specific requested topics, develop and field test classroom for instructional
activities, write and distribute ideas and information to teachers via the
GenoType newsletter and other professional journals such as The American Biology
Teacher and The Science Teacher. In addition, the staff will seek to acquire
long-term support for the project in the form of funding and equipment. An
amount equal to 34 percent of the National Science Foundation award has been
added to the project.