* 8850726
* Visual Geometry
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Eugene Klotz, Swarthmore College
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 09/30/1992
* USD 981,557.00

This project, Visual Geometry, is producing new, coordinated, multi-media
geometry materials: computer-animated videotapes of three-dimensional figures
for high quality visual images, associated workbooks for constructing and
investigating three- dimensional figures, and a microcomputer program for
interactive study of related two-dimensional geometry concepts. The Geometer's
Sketchpad will be a general purpose, two-dimensional drawing program designed
for constructing and manipulating geometric figures. It will be useful with both
standard geometry materials and with the units produced by this project. The
materials are being designed to fit into the standard high school curriculum,
and will be flexible enough to be used by an entire class, small groups of
students, or even for individual study. The materials are being done in a way to
be appealing to people who wish to improve their visual geometry skills, even if
they are not taking a geometry course. The entire program is being thoroughly
and broadly tested. Additional videotapes to familiarize teachers wit the uses
of the materials will also be made. There are plans for broad dissemination; the
project staff will also take advantage of the growing market in home-study
video. In a pilot project, the proposers have set up a microcomputer system to
produce professional quality video animation of three- dimensional geometry
concepts. In addition to the materials produced by the project, the staff will
be able to provide software and information to others who wish to work with the
media of animated videotapes and videodiscs.//