* 8850387
* Teacher Development in Science, Technology and Society      Issues
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* John Tonnis, University of Wisconsin-La Crosse
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 06/30/1991
* USD 252,108.00

This science teacher development project at the University of Wisconsin - La
Crosse will provide secondary teachers/leaders with training in using STS
(Science, Technology and Society) topics to teach scientific relevance, to
investigate technological problem solving and to address some of the major
issues in modern society. Thirty-six junior high and senior high teachers will
be enrolled in each of the 1989 and 1990 summer workshops. Teachers from the
upper midwest (WI, MN, IA, IL) will be invited to attend the program. The
intensive four-week workshops will review pertinent scientific concepts, study
the technological applications of this science and discuss at length the related
interaction with society. Major studies are planned in energy alternatives, the
use and misuse of chemicals, and the environmental crises. Participants will
review existing STS teaching materials and develop teaching techniques that have
immediate applicability in their science curriculum. The formal workshop
instruction will also emphasize laboratory activities which illustrate the STS
topics and can be used, with minimal modification, in the science classroom. The
instruction will be supplemented with seminars by established science/technology
professionals and tours that have proven educational value. Special efforts will
be made to integrate participant experiences into the project. During a nine
month follow-up project all participants will work under the direction of the
workshop staff to first implement the workshop materials in their existing
science course(s), but later to integrate STS topics into the total science
curriculum. A portion of the participants will also be encouraged to provide STS
inservice programs for their and/or nearby school districts. Participants will
make formal presentations of their implementation efforts at a two day follow-up
meeting of the Wisconsin Society of Science Teachers and will be encouraged to
become active in a regional STS network. This type of project is important to
the Teacher Enhancement Program since it tests the hypothesis that when
curricular materials addresses problems of immediate concern to the students
they are more likely to develop an interest and master the concepts presented.
The University, the School Districts and various industries will contribute an
amount equal to 22% of the NSF award.