* 8850490
* Mathematics Leadership Network
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1988,02/29/1992
* Deborah Schifter, Mount Holyoke College
* Continuing Grant
* David E. Jones
* 02/29/1992
* USD 466,870.00

The main goals of the project are to offer a comprehensive mathematics
inservice program to 125 teachers in southwestern New England over a period of
two years plus followup activities. The participants are to learn how to serve
as resource teachers in their respective school districts. The program builds on
a previously funded project whose primary focus was directed to elementary
school teachers. This project expands the previous efforts to offer experiences
to elementary and secondary teachers. Also, the model developed in the previous
project is to be expanded here, both in subject matter background and in
pedagogical considerations, especially with emphasis of the constructivist
approaches to mathematics instruction. There are four components to the present
project: a two week summer institute to provide concentrated and intense
activities; followup during the academic year by project staff to help the
participants implement the pedagogical structures; academic courses offered
during the school year; and finally, a supervised internship as resource
teachers. The project was designed with local support and guidance as an
outgrowth of the previously funded project and in response to needs expressed by
teachers and administrators who participated in the earlier project. The
participants are selected from among those recommended by the school districts
that have committed to the project. The cost sharing is $182,101 which amounts
to 182,101/445,030, or 41% of the funds requested from National Science
Foundation. The staff and consultants have excellent qualifications to conduct
this project.