* 8850448
* JASON Barge Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1992
* Bill Aldridge, National Science Teaching Association
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret B. Cozzens
* 01/31/1992
* USD 647,685.00

The National Science Teachers Association is working with Woods Oceanographic
Institute, selected museums, and the National Council of Social Studies (NCSS)
to develop instructional materials to prepare teachers and students for the
satellite downlinking of Robert Ballard's JASON Mediterranean Expedition.
Students (grades 4-12) will visit the museums during two weeks in April 1989 and
in each spring through the year 1993 to take part in the exploration of sunken
trading vessels in the Mediterranean via the "seeing eye" robot, JASON. Students
will share the first views of ancient relics with the Woods Hole scientists
assigned to the expedition and will be able to interact with these scientists
during the simultaneous live video broadcast. NSTA, Woods Hole, and NCSS have
identified curriculum developers, teachers, supervisors, and museum coordinators
who will design teaching units targeted to three levels, grades 4-6, 7-9, and
10-12. The units, containing a teachers' guide, lesson plan, and poster, will
focus on the science and social studies relevant to the broad topics of
underwater studies, seafaring, and trade. The materials development group will
also serve as teacher trainers to the teachers who will bring their students (an
estimated 24,000 in 1989) to the museums to take part in the Mediterranean
Expedition. Materials will be revised each year, and a newsletter update sent to
all participating teachers. This project combines scientific and professional
organizations in a concerted and unique effort to help students and teachers
realize the excitement potential in scientific research. The instructional
materials which are to be developed and the filming will allow future students
and teachers to benefit from the JASON undertaking, and help them appreciate the
multidisciplinary nature of oceanographic research and the technology which
makes the expeditions possible.