* 8850972
* Operation Toolbox:  A Program in Modern Biology for Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1989,06/30/1992
* Martin Hetherington, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1992
* USD 341,290.00

Operation Toolbox: A Program in Modern Biology for Science Teachers Michigan
State University will conduct a 5-week molecular-biology-based in environmental
biology workshop in the summer of 1989 through 1991 at its Kellogg Biological
Station (KBS). A total of 60 high-school teachers will participate over the
three years. They will receive instruction in recent developments in
environmental sustainability, agroecological practices and allelopathic control
methods. They will also be shown how to integrate economic, ethical and
political factors pertaining to environmental use into their curricula. Five
mornings per week will be devoted to discussion and classroom activities, and
the afternoons will be occupied with laboratory and fieldwork. The teachers will
be divided into groups and each group will be expected to modify one laboratory
exercise per week to make it applicable to their high school courses. A
leadership component will be included, in which teachers who have had a previous
molecular biology experience will be grouped with those who have not. The
workshop is part of a comprehensive program to help teachers keep abreast of the
developments in science, to provide them with a support system for course and
curriculum enhancement, and to further communication within and among the
various school constituencies. An amount equivalent to 34.7% of the NSF award is
being contributed by Michigan State University and other sources as cost
sharing.