* 8850499
* A Model Inservice Program for Implementing Elementary SchoolScience
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1993
* Deborah Powell, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 10/31/1993
* USD 690,083.00

This project will develop a model for implementation and evaluation of a
comprehensive staff development program to implement and sustain quality
elementary science curricula. It will increase the strengths of elementary
teachers who are better prepared to teach science and develop these individuals
as instructors, coaches and facilitators of change for those teachers who are
less prepared. Inquiry and discovery teaching methods will be employed. The
model will include (a) science content and concepts (b) new strategies for
interfacing science with mathematics, reading, and writing (c) collegial support
through demonstrations, discussions, peer coaching, and interactions with other
teachers in the project and (d) long-term support commitments from participating
districts. Three school districts in Colorado, an urban, mid-sized city and a
rural district will participate in the four-year project. Specially qualified
teachers in local schools will be the first level participants to become
"trainers", who, in turn, will train "tutors" to work with their peers. This
multiplicative system will enable all the elementary teachers in the districts
to benefit from the project. Administrators will participate in workshops which
will involve science content and strategies from teaching science in order to
facilitate the implmentation of change. A ratio of 60% of the NSF request is
being cost shared by the University and the participating school districts.