* 8850613
* The Southern California Access Center and Network
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Theodore Crovello, California State University-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 01/31/1990
* USD 104,733.00

This prototype project includes several activities to strengthen minority
education from the early grades through the baccalaureate degree. It was
developed under the leadership of California State University-Los Angeles, with
cooperation from other California State University institutions in the Los
Angeles Basin, the Los Angeles School System, and business and industry. During
the first year of operation, a set of activities, based on science and
mathematics experiences, and designed to nurture, encourage and motivate
minority students, are being implemented. These include a Minority Math/Science
Program, a retention activity focussed at the undergraduate level, which is
patterned after a successful, ongoing Minority Engineering Program established
earlier in the region. Critical elements of this program include academic
support, tutoring, personal counseling, a student study center, summer job
placement assistance, and participation in student organizations. At the
precollege level, a Saturday Science Project for elementary school students and
teachers is being offered. Science Skills Centers which offer enriched classroom
experiences for students and provide a setting for undertaking improvements in
junior high mathematics are being established. In addition, a Summer Science
Institute is being conducted in which curriculum development activities occur,
through joint efforts by university and precollege faculty.