* 8850688
* INSIGHT: "INvestigative Stimuli for Intuitive Growth using  High Technology"
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/1989,07/31/1992
* Charles Whitney, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 07/31/1992
* USD 492,576.00

Almost all introductory physics courses concentrate on concepts that were
developed more than a hundred years ago. Scant attention is paid to ideas that
involve complex behaviors. This emphasis on domains that are easily demonstrated
in the laboratory has led to the use of physical models that may actual cripple
students' ability to conceptualize non- Newtonian system. While we cannot
simplify complicated ideas, we can make them understandable. The aim is to make
quantum mechanics accessible to the intelligent, educated person. Interactive
and graphically oriented sets of simulations related to quantum mechanics will
be constructed exploiting the resources of the center for Astrophysics'
scientific staff and its computer center. High school students of physics will
be given powerful computer-tools to supplement real laboratory exercises. These
simulations will permit students to carry out and analyze simulated laboratory
experiments on topics that would be otherwise inaccessible to them. With the
guidance of their teachers, students will be able to act as scientists and gain
insight into science and its methods. Student misconceptions will be explored,
and new ways to present modern material to high school students will be opened.
Studies of student misconceptions will guide the development of further uses of
advanced technology.