* 8850963
* Brooklyn College Mathematics Teacher Enhancement Program
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Dorothy Geddes, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Henry S. Kepner, Jr.
* 05/31/1992
* USD 286,938.00

This 2.5-year project will develop a school-based model for improving
mathematics instruction in grades K-8. A total of 65 elementary and middle
school teachers in Brooklyn will participate in a program that combines
instruction in mathematics content and methodology, in-school support,
mathematics field trips, and citywide Math Forums. During the first year, forty
teachers from four schools will take an academic-year mathematics course that
will implicitly model sound pedagogical strategy and an education course that
explicitly examines such teaching techniques. During the summer, 20 of the
teachers (designated as "math enthusiasts") will take an additional three-week
course in mathematics content. During the second year, the mathematics and
education courses will be offered to 25 more teachers from two additional
schools, while the twenty "math enthusiasts" take a course in leadership skills.
The latter will serve as leaders in mathematics education in their schools and
districts. Project staff will visit each participating school once a week. In
addition, the project will sponsor "Math Forums" addressing various aspects of
mathematics instruction, publish a newsletter, and prepare resource packets for
two mathematics field trips. Evaluation will include assessment of the
participants' knowledge of and attitude towards mathematics and observations by
the project staff. Brooklyn College is contributing in cost-sharing an amount
equal to 110% of the NSF award.