* 8850449
* Technology as a Context for Personal Growth of Teachers:  A oach to the Appropriation of Science in     , of Science in Elementary School Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1988,04/30/1992
* Seymour Papert, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 04/30/1992
* USD 1,273,673.00

For the next three years, this group of scientists will work directly with 80
teachers to develop, test, and prepare for dissmination a teacher enhancement
plan for inservice development to improve science education in the elementary
school. They expect the ideas and materials produced to have an impact on the
way science and technology are presented in college courses for future teachers
as well as on in service staff development. The theoretical position and
practical experience of the staff, under the direction of Dr. Seymour Papert
indicates that the problem of preparing elementary teachers for science
education cannot be reduced to training teachers in facts and skills, nor even
to helping them to devlop the cognitive underpinnings of scientific knowledge.
More subjective and experiential aspects of the learner's relationship to
science requires much specific attention. The project has been attentive to
affective and social issues as well as the cognitive aspects of learning
science. The central objective is helping teachers appropriate science--which
means making it one's own, in one's own way...integrating into one's own
personal thinking. Most important, the success of the teachers in learning
science will encourge a conviction that children can, and should, experience
science in a similarly personal experiential way. In year one, teachers will
attend a three-week, intensive, hands-on summer workshop using information
technologies to enhance their understanding of science, to develope strategies
for the integration of new science content and technology into their own
teaching. This group of forty teachers will come from ten schools in the Boston
area. Mentor teachers will work with these teachers during the school year, at
the conclusion of which they will attend a one-week workshop-seminar to
consolidate what they have learned. During year two, a similar experience will
be available to teachers in the Hartford, CT area. Teachers will then be
encouraged and supported to work with their peers in their own schools. This
design is modeled after a successful experience in working with Costa Rican
teachers who had virtually no experience with computers. An amount equivalent to
52% of the NSF request is being cost-shared by MIT and the participating
schools.