* 8850501
* Science Process Enhancement for Middle and High School      Teachers of the Introductory Science Course
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Carolyn Wilson, Woodrow Wilson National Fellowship Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 05/31/1991
* USD 418,790.00

The Woodrow Wilson Fellowship Foundation is offering a 24 month program for the
enhancement of teachers responsible for 9th or 10th grade first year science
courses. These teachers will develop activities and material that can be
integrated into their own curricula which will provide students with an
understanding of the fundamental processes of science. The program will consist
of recruitment and selection of a group of specially talented teachers. Prior to
the summer workshop, these teachers will contact local practicing scientists,
industrial, academic and/or government, to discuss what scientific processes are
necessary to carry out science research and applications as well as to determine
what students need to know about science to be literate and informed citizens.
The teachers will bring this information to Princeton, where, during an
intensive four-week workshop, using the facilities of Princeton University, they
will (1) meet with a representative group of scientists to explore what is
common to all of the items that they discussed in their preparation, (2) talk
with other researchers about their hypotheses and research materials on topics
of interest to young teenagers, (3) develop modular units reflecting their
research that can be incorporated into such courses and (4) receive training in
the background and necessary science to implement such materials. The material
will be edited and published by the Foundation, after which it will be available
for use by all the participants as well as in outreach projects. Funds will be
available at the close of the workshop for these outreach projects initiated by
the teachers for sharing this material with other teachers and administrators
during the ensuing twelve months. One or two teams will be organized from the
participants that can travel throughout the country presenting one-week
institutes for teachers during the summer of 1990 at centers already established
by the Woodrow Wilson Foundation's Master Teacher program. Evaluation will be
conducted on the outreach beginning in June 1990, and repeated again four months
after the teachers who attend the institutes return to school, in December,
1990. Results will be tabulated and written up in January and February, 1991.
The amount of funding requested from the NSF represents less than 25% of the
total budget for this program. Other sources of funding are private
corporations, foundations and individuals, money from the United Federation of
Teachers New York City Teachers Centers Consortium, New York City Board of
Education, Ford Foundation, Flint Scientific, IBM, individual universities which
are sites of the outreach programs and local industries.