* 8850552
* Designing Robust Science Instruction:  A Model for          Thermodynamics
* None,MDR
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Marcia Linn, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 10/31/1992
* USD 649,600.00

This investigation will test and refine a model of "robust science instruction"
based on current research on learning and instruction and will also design and
refine promising activities and technological tools for instruction in
thermodynamics. A key feature of the proposed approach to science instruction is
the use of dynamic simulations and real-time data collection to help middle
school students (grades 7-8)to analyze naturally-occurring problems dealing with
heat and temperature. The approach has four main components. First, these
investigators proposed to identify and teach an appropriate, qualitative level
of explanation for thermodynamics based on expert explanations. Second, they
propose to create and refine dynamic simulations for the Macintosh and to engage
students in analyzing naturally-occurring problems. Third, they intend to help
middle school and college student in integrating information by such techniques
as creating a "community of scholars" in the classroom, engaging students in
predicting outcomes and helping teachers model complex problem-solving
techniques, and motivating students to seek a few explanatory principles for a
large class of events. Fourth, these researchers propose to tailor their
approach to the needs of diverse populations including women, Hispanics, Blacks,
and the learning disabled by in-depth longitudinal study of selected students.
Significant contributions to this project are being made by Apple Computer, Inc.
and the Foothill Middle School.