* 8850560
* Children's Construction of Arithmetical Algorithms in SocialContext
* None,MDR
* 11/01/1988,10/31/1992
* Grayson Wheatley, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 10/31/1992
* USD 828,432.00

As part of an on-going research program that extends a currently funded
project, we will study third graders' construction of arithmetical algorithms in
the context of classroom instruction compatible with constructivism. The
predominant teaching strategy will be small group problem solving followed by
whole class discussions of children's solutions. Both clinical interviews and a
one-year classroom teaching experiment will be conducted during the project.
Conceptual models that account for children's construction of conceptually-based
algorithms for adding and subtracting three-digit and for multiplying and
dividing two- digit by one-digit numbers will be developed. The sociological
aspect of the project will focus on the relationship between both whole class
and small group social interaction patterns and opportunities to construct
arithmetical knowledge. Key constructs include students' beliefs, obligations,
expectations, and emotional acts in the classroom. Third grade instructional
activities will be developed during the classroom teaching experiment. The third
grade instructional activities will be developed during the classroom
experiment. The revised materials will be used by a minimum of ten teachers in
the third year of the project. Our goal in coordinating cognitive and social
analyses is to contribute to the wider enterprise of developing a coherent
framework within which to understand both learning and teaching.