* 8850988
* Inservice Institutes for Middle/Junior High Science Teacherswith Presidential Awardees as Instructional Mentors
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1991
* Clifford Schrader, National Science Teaching Association
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/31/1991
* USD 639,962.00

Teams of four Presidential Awardees (PA) in Science teaching will work with a
university professor in 3-week summer institutes for middle school teachers. The
summer institutes will be offered at the University of Northern Iowa (UNI) and
Southeastern Massachusetts University in 1989 and 1990. A third site, to
demonstrate transportability will be added in 1990. Each institute will serve 30
teachers. Reflecting the breadth of science taught in middle schools the
institutes include content classes in physics, chemistry, biology and earth
science. The morning sessions using a hands-on approach to teaching science
content are complemented with methodology classes in the afternoons, and evening
lectures on leading-edge scientific topics. Teachers will receive three hours of
graduate credit. Each team of PA mentors will include a physics, chemistry,
biology, and middle school teacher. The principal of each participating teacher
will spend one day at the institute. Lead teachers within the group will be
identified and invited to return to a follow-up workshop in the succeeding year
and then be given assistance in planning and conducting in- service sessions in
their geographical region. The intent of the program is to provide a
middle/junior high school science education leadership cadre composed of PAs and
teacher participants. This cadre, with support from their administrators, will
replicate the peer coaching model with their colleagues on the local level. Dr.
Clifford Schrader, a Presidential Awardee, is the project Director. Ms. Marily
DeWall of the National Science Teachers Association (NSTA) and Dr. Roy Saigo of
UNI are Co-Directors. The NSTA will coordinate the summer institutes and follow-
up sessions at NSTA area conventions. It will also facilitate promotion of the
program, supervise dissemination of applications and help with all reports. UNI
will compile the proceedings of each institute with the help of the NSTA editor.
A Central Planning Committee will develop the final program agendas, provide
leadership training for PAs and select materials for the institutes. The
strength of this project is the cooperative partnership of NSTA, the
universities, and the PAs who are outstanding science educators. The model is
consistent with recommendations which have been formulated by recognized
educators of the Holmes Group. It uses master teachers in a discipline to help
with science instruction of their peers in a university setting. There is cost
sharing in an amount equal to 6% of the NSF award.