* 8850507
* Project Catalyst - Earth and Space Science Education Center
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/1988,11/30/1992
* Gaylen Carlson, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 11/30/1992
* USD 553,103.00

Project Catalyst at California State University, Fullerton (CSUF) will provide
extensive education for Earth and Physical Science teachers in Orange County,
California. Fifty-two participants, 24 in grades 7-8 and 28 in grades 9- 12,
will be selected. The participants will work together with scientists on
content, however, classroom applications will be done in separate sessions.
Twenty-six of these participants will be chosen as "adjunct teachers". They will
be selected by their educational experience in science, willingness to spend
extra time with their peers, recommendation of school site administrators, and
ability to productively communicate in a positive manner, the earth and space
science concepts. Project catalyst has the following main components: Academic
Years The program during academic year 1988-89 will consist of four day-long
general workshops held at CSUF and four additional workshops to be held at each
of three regional centers. Three weekend field trips will be held for all
participants. Academic years 1989-90 and 1990-01 will provide a continuation of
the summer institutes. All Participants will attend two workshops at CSUF, two
additional workshops at the regional centers, and each of the 26 adjunct
teachers will conduct four half-day workshops for their peers. Summer Institutes
The 1989 summer institute will emphasize geological science with an introduction
to atmospheric, hydrospheric, and space science. Five weeks of classroom,
laboratory, and Los Angeles Basin field instruction will be followed by a one
week field trip to Yosemite and Owen's Valley. The 1990 summer institute will
emphasize the space sciences with continued studies of atmospheric,
hydrospheric, and geological science. Five weeks of classroom, laboratory, and
Los Angeles Basin field instruction will be followed by a one week field trip to
local sites beyond the Los Angeles Basin. Special Events The workshops and
institutes will be supplemented by the following: 1) Science Symposia sponsored
by the partner agencies; 2) a "kit" for earth and space science teachers; 3) an
annotated catalog of contemporary earth and space science curriculum materials;
4) a Southern California Field Guide for earth science teachers; 5) a bimonthly
newsletter; and 6) a telephone and computer board network. This project offers
the opportunity of studying the impact of an intensive earth science course on
teaching practices of teachers grades 7-12. California State University,
Fullerton, the involved school districts and local industry have contributed an
amount equal to 59% of the National Science Foundation award.