* 8850909
* Institute for Research on Teaching/American Federation of   Teachers/Toledo "Support Teacher" Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1989
* Penelope Peterson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1989
* USD 16,841.00

This award will support a five-day workshop involving eight teachers who have
been selected and prepared to serve as "support teachers" in the Toledo public
schools. The eight teachers are divided into four two-person teams. Each team
consist of one science teacher and one mathematics teacher; four different
schools are served, each by one team. A support teacher is assigned a reduced
classroom load and therefore has time to work with other teachers who are less
well prepared. The workshop is a small but essential part of a larger venture
that was designed and conducted by the Institute for Research on Teaching (IRT)
at Michigan State University in collaboration with the American Federation of
Teachers and the Toledo Public Schools. During an already-completed phase of the
project, the eight teachers participated in 30 hours of professional development
seminars conducted by IRT personnel. This workshop, scheduled for August of
1988, will serve to solidify gains the teacher have made in knowledge and
skills. In the fall they will assume their new duties as support teachers in the
Toledo schools. This project will test a model for the preparation of support
teachers and will assess whether the use of support teachers is and efficient
mechanism for achieving improvements in the teaching of science and mathematics
in the schools.