* 8850505
* Professional Development Teams for Improving the Teaching ofMathematics in the Middle Grades
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1989,07/31/1991
* William Fitzgerald, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ivo Lindauer
* 07/31/1991
* USD 400,765.00

This two-year project will enable twenty professional development teams from
around the country to improve the teaching of middle school mathematics in their
home school districts. During the first summer, the teams will participate in a
three-week workshop in which they will familiarize themselves with outstanding
instructional materials, study the history of mathematics, and develop plans for
curriculum reform in their own schools. Materials to be examined for possible
inclusion in the curriculum include the Middle Grades Mathematics Project
(Michigan State University), the Mathematics Resource Project (University of
Oregon), the Quantitative Literacy Project (American Statistical Association and
NCTM), the Harvard Middle School Mathematics Project, Estimation in a Modern
Society (University of Missouri), Math and the Mind's Eye (Math Learning
Center), and Getting Ready for Algebra (Ohio State University). Academic-year
activities include visits to the participants' schools by the project staff and
written reports from the development teams. During the second summer, the teams
will return for a two-week follow-up workshop to discuss their experiences in
implementation and to share ideas. A book documenting the results of the project
will be produced. The school districts will contribute an amount equal to 42% of
the NSF award as cost-sharing.