* 8850983
* School Scienc and Natural History Leadership Institute
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Dean Bennett, Maine Audubon Society
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 08/31/1991
* USD 218,833.00

Twenty elementary teachers will gain leadership skills, strengthen their
science background, and become acquainted with the telecommunication technology
in a three-week summer 1989 leadership institute. The twenty teachers will be
selected, for the most part, from those who have implemented the School Science
and Natural History Enrichment Project (SSNHEP) in their own classrooms and have
an interest in working with their peers to expand the program. This previously
funded project enabled tachers to implement an environmentally based science
program in their schools in which they made excellent use of local resources,
expertise and unique natural phenomena. This institute will involve principals
for the first three days of the program in order to build administrative
understanding and support for an activity-based, outdoor science-oriented
program. Teachers and principals will make a team commitment to implement the
SSHHEP by planning and implementing local workshops. Adequate time for planning
and for follow-up support of peer teachers who will initiate the program in
their schools will be contributed by the schools. During the school year,
1989-1990, the twenty lead teachers will plan and implement at least two local
inservice workshops for at least 6 teachers each in order to introduce the
program in their classrooms. Through private funding, the institute will provide
an overview of telecommunication as a tool for education and involve
participating teachers in the development of an instructional program for
broadcast during the school year. Project staff will provide resources and
consultant assistance to these lead teachers during the school year. The group
will reconvene for one week in the summer of l990 to review and share the year's
activities and make plans for continuation. The long range goal of the institute
is to identify and motivate potential leaders in elementary science education in
the state of Maine. This collaboration of a professional society, a university
(College of the Atlantic), school districts, state education department and the
private sector make this a project worthy of possible replication. An amount
equal to 30% of the NSF request has been contributed by the above collaborators.