* 8850712
* Minority Recruitment Outreach Demonstration Project
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* John Lee, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 09/30/1991
* USD 70,774.00

Penn State's College of Earth and Mineral Sciences is involved in a major effort
aimed at increasing the participation of minorities, notably blacks, in the
earth-related mineral, materials and geoscientific fields. In particular, black
participation in fields such as geology, petroleum engineering, meteorology,
geophysics, ceramic engineering, metals engineering, and mining engineering has
been low historically and presently remains so. The College has developed a
close working relationship with two Pittsburgh schools serving substantial
numbers of minorities, George Westinghouse High School and Perry Traditional
Academy, and with the Westinghouse Corporation which has provided joint support
for previous activities involving research experiences for minority students on
the Penn State campus. This Model Project is designed to further the full
implementation of these cooperative efforts by expanding both the range of
opportunities available and the numbers of students impacted by the Penn State
initiatives directed at research and other motivational experiences for minority
students. Under the auspices of the College of Earth and Mineral Sciences (EMS),
fifty junior and senior high school minority students are involved in research
projects in geosciences and mineral engineering under the supervision of EMS
research scientists. The projects are conducted at on-campus sites and at the
Wallops Island, Virginia, Marine Science Consortium facility. Primary objectives
are: to create an atmosphere which will stimulate students to think creatively;
for students to develop an appreciation for the various approaches which can be
brought to bear on problems in science and engineering; to impress upon students
not only the interdisciplinary nature of many problems, but the need for
cooperation to solve them; for students to experience the thrill of discovery
and the satisfaction of formulating solutions. These objectives will be achieved
through two sequential activities for the students: a one-week orientation and
introduction to research, held on the Penn State Campus and supported by the
Westinghouse Corporation, followed by a two-week research experience either on
campus or at the facilities of the Marine Science Consortium at Wallops Island,
Virginia, of which Penn State is a full member. Research topics for the on-
campus activities include Petroleum Recovery: Technology of Drilling Oil/Gas
Wells and Producing Petroleum from the Earth, and Technological Approaches to
Environmental Issues Associated with Coal Production and Utilization. Field
research at Wallops Island will center around studies of the biological and
physical processes controlling the geochemistry of Chincoteague Bay. This is a
noteworthy project, especially in its focus on the earth and mineral sciences,
in which minorities are particularly underrepresented. Significant joint support
is being provided by the Westinghouse Corporation.