* 8850623
* Cognitive Foundations for a Multiplicative Structures       Curriculum
* None,MDR
* 11/01/1988,06/30/1990
* James Kaput, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 06/30/1990
* USD 266,839.00

The multiplicative structures curriculum in the middle grades, covering
multiplication, division, rates, ratios, and proportional reasoning, is widely
seen as the locus of serious curricular difficulty and underachievement. These
investigators will conduct an intensive set of year-long teaching experiments
involving 8 classes, 5 experimentals and 3 controls,intended to build a robust
database and a theoretical foundation for a new, more effective multiplicative
structures curriculum for the mid-upper elementary grades. Four experimental 6th
grade classes and 1 below average ability level 8th grade class whose students
have repeatedly failed to learn the topics will be taught using specially
designed software and materials. Controls will be taught using conventional text
materials. Whole-class written measures of conceptual change accumulated through
the year will be overlaid with a year-long clinical study of a representative
subsample of both experimentals and controls in each class. This research will
utilize an elaborated sequence of software environments comprising a "concrete-
to-abstract software ramp" developed at ETC. Lower levels of this ramp feature
concretely enactive multiplication, division and ratios in object-based
calculation environments, whereas upper levels include dynamically varying
algebraically represented proportions linked to tables of data and coordinate
graphs. Throughout, the software employs actively linked multiple
representations of mathematical concepts and procedures, exploiting the
representational power newly available in school affordable computers. The study
will also compare 3 mid ability level classes taught by the same teacher, one of
which uses it in the teacher-centered, one-computer mode only, and a third acts
as control. The intent is to determine if and how the representational power of
these types of learning environments can be used effectively in computer-scarce
contexts apart from its interactive power, which requires computer-dense, hence
more expensive, lab contexts. The Education Technology Center at Harvard and
Weston Middle School are sharing the costs of conducting this project.