* 8850175
* Chemistry Applied to Solving Problems in Modern Technol-    ogical Societies
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Donald Hicks, Georgia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 01/31/1991
* USD 85,800.00

Twenty high school students of high ability and limited chemistry education
background will work for 8 weeks during the summer of 1988 in the Chemistry
Department of Georgia State University. Women and students from minority groups
will be especially encouraged to apply. Participants will develop basic research
skills and knowledge of chemical science as they work with practicing scientists
in an intensive, hands-on, laboratory-oriented project. In general students will
evaluate the fundamental character of their assigned mixed ligand solvent
extraction reagents, and attempt to use the extraction reagents to find a
solvent extraction system for separating and recovering a vital metal from a
low-grade ore, scrap metal, industrial by-product, or waste effluent. The need
to solve the practical laboratory problem will provide the rationale for
lecture-recitation topics. Personal contact with the participants will be
maintained about once a month during the following academic year. About 25
percent of the lecture time in the summer and academic year will be devoted to
career development and science ethics topics. A 2nd summer continuation project
is planned wherein about 3/4 of the first summer's participants return to work
with their choice of a faculty research director.