* 8850730
* Project MATHEMATICS|
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Tom Apostol, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 08/31/1991
* USD 1,060,778.00

Mathematics| is a series of professional quality computer animated videotapes
containing modules on various topics in basic mathematics. This project will
produce six modules on high school geometry for use in classrooms and learning
centers. Each module tape will be about 20 minutes long and will be accompanied
by student workbooks and teacher manuals. The modules are intended to be easily
integrated into current curricula. The tapes are designed to encourage
interaction between the video tape, teacher, and students. This is done by
structuring each tape into small capsules, which are identified by number titles
keyed to the student workbooks, permitting the teacher to stop the tape at the
end of each capsule to allow discussion by the students. The tapes will be
produced by the same team that created the 52 half hour episodes of "The
Mechanical Universe" and the twenty minute pilot tape of "The Theorem of
Pythagoras." All materials will be distributed on a nonprofit basis through a
consortium of state departments of education, and through workshops and
assistance from the Mathematical Association of America (MAA) and the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM). Field testing, evaluation, and
teacher training is an essential part of the proposal. High school teachers will
be involved at every developmental stage, and ongoing teacher support will be
arranged through the consortium.