* 8850982
* Leadership Program in Life, Earth and Space Sciences for    K-6 Teachers and Principals
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1989,01/31/1993
* Stearns Rogers, McNeese State University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 01/31/1993
* USD 76,278.00

This project is designed to improve the quality and the quantity of science
taught in K-6 classrooms of Calcasieu Parish in Louisiana. The three major
components of the project are (1) two semester long workshops in the life
sciences, earth and space sciences, (2) the provision of the methodology and
motivation for these workshop participants to share their expertise with their
peers, and (3) the development of a model by which a local school system can
inservice their teachers. Both appropriately selected teachers and their
principals will be involved in this three-year long effort. Teacher teams and
teacher-principal teams are chosen from among the 36 schools in the parish. Each
workshop is heavily experiential, inquiry oriented and offers 6 hours of
graduate credit for the teachers. The objectives are to update and broaden the
knowledge of life, earth and space science for 32 K-6 teachers and their
principals and to provide the teachers with the methodology and motivation to
improve the science instruction in their classrooms. These same 32 teachers have
been involved with a previous project in which their knowledge base in the
physical sciences, physics and chemistry, has been enhanced. By sequencing this
grant with the previous one, these elementary teachers should be adequately
prepared to effectively teach all of the sciences to their students. They will
also have been involved over a period of several years which should give them an
appropriate background to become the lead teachers in their schools. By
including the principals in the content portion of the project as well as the
leadership component, strong and understanding administrative support for
enhancing science instruction should be forthcoming. Four full and five half-day
inservice days are built into the school year calendar to implement this peer
enhancement. Expert teachers as well as university staff will be involved in the
instruction. McNeese State University and the Calcasieu Parish Public Schools
have contributed an amount equivalent to 50% of the NSF request. This is a
strong commitment on the part of the schools and the university and bodes well
for continued implementation of science education improvement in the classrooms.