* 8850630
* A Model for Improving the Preservice and Inservice Science  Education of Elementary School Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1988,05/31/1992
* Fred Finley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* ryan smith
* 05/31/1992
* USD 489,949.00

The University of Minnesota will develop and evaluate a model for upgrading the
preparation of prospective elementary teachers in science and science teaching
in the State of Minnesota. Six pairs of faculty, one physical scientist, and one
science educator, from Minnesota colleges will cooperate in a nine week
workshop. They will examine theories of conceptual change, develop and teach a
three week workshop for lead elementary school teachers from public and private
schools near their home institutions, and develop plans for improving their own
physical science and science methods courses. The workshop will provide the
opportunity for faculty to change their own conceptions of teaching science as
they put new ideas into practice. It will also produce a set of practicing
elementary school teachers who espouse the same philosophy who will be able to
support preservice teachers during field experiences and student teaching.
During the following two years, the faculty pairs will assist their local lead
teachers in implementing changes in their own districts. Similarly, they will be
assisted by the project staff and each other as they plan and implement new
courses in science and science methods for preservice teachers. The efforts of
the faculty pairs will be studied during a comprehensive evaluation that will
reveal the strengths and weaknesses of the model. This project should improve
the teacher preparation programs of six colleges and at the University of
Minnesota. In addition, it will influence how science is taught in elementary
schools in the districts in which the colleges are located. The total cost
sharing for the project from school districts and from the University of
Minnesota is $228,590 or 31.5% of the total project cost.