* 8850937
* A Model Regional Leadership Consortium for Middle/Junior    High School Life Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1992
* Wyatt Anderson, National Association of Biology Teachers
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Stewart
* 08/31/1992
* USD 553,011.00

The National Association of Biology Teachers (NABT) and the University of
Georgia, Department of Science Education, will conduct a regional leadership
consortium for Middle School Life Science teachers in Alabama, Florida, Georgia,
Louisiana, Mississippi, and Tennessee, leading to the establishment of regional
resource teams. Their objectives are: (1) to update the teachers' knowledge in
Biology; (2) to help teachers design lessons illustrating the relationship
between biology, society and technology; (3) to help teachers select curriculum
materials and learning experiences to develop problem-solving skills for middle
school students; (4) to cultivate positive self-concept among the teachers, and
to (5) design outreach programs of resource teams. This will be two sequential,
five and six week summer institutes for 48 science teachers and 24
science/curriculum supervisors from two districts in each of the 6 states (a
total of 72 participants). After the second summer institute, the resource teams
will conduct five 3-day workshops in their local district or county. The
leadership consortium will include significant partnership with cooperating
school districts, the University of Georgia, and existing teacher centers. The
summer institutes will be conducted by a team of scientists, science educators,
and master teachers. This project should strengthen science education in the
Southeast by increasing the number of expert professionals available to school
districts and teacher centers for local teacher education activities. An amount
equivalent to 5.8% of the NSF award is being contributed by NABT as cost
sharing.