* 8850629
* A Regional Center to Improve Minority Access to Education   and Careers in Science, Engineering and Mathematics in the  Greater Philadelphia Region
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Fredrick Stein, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 01/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

This prototype project includes several activities to strengthen minority
education from junior high school through the baccalaureate degree. It was
developed as a cooperative effort among a number of colleges and universities,
school districts, educational support organizations, community groups, unions,
and corporations in the Philadelphia area. During the first year of operation, a
set of activities, based on science and mathematics experiences, and designed to
nurture, encourage and motivate minority students, are being implemented. These
include an intensive faculty mentoring program to encourage community college
minority students to continue on to the baccalaureate degree. These mentors
provide career information, plan and supervise field trips, arrange visits to
scientists and engineers in their work places, integrate students into support
services and tutoring, and advise students about their course of study.
Additional mentoring is provided by minority student support groups that will
provide volunteer minority tutors and organize talks by minority scientists.
Undergraduate research experience is provided through targeting selected
community college students in their sophomore year. Precollege student
activities from junior high through high school center around enrichment
programs including special workshops in mathematics, science, and communication.
To augment these activities each student's school is matched with an industry
and/or government agency to provide invaluable resources such as role models,
demonstrations, speakers, field trips, etc.