* 8850500
* Enhancing the Spatial Abilities of Handicapped Students:  A Program for Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Mark Cavaleri, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 05/31/1991
* USD 192,321.00

Recent evidence suggests that handicapped students are not as adept in spatial
and temporal skills as their mainstream counterparts. Difficulties in judging
distances, working with direction and orientation, and problems with scale
changes mark this special group of individuals. This project recognizes and
addresses the special needs of the teachers of these students. Efforts are
directed toward enhancing teachers' understandings of the key elements of
spatial understanding: scale, estimation of distance and size, direction and
orientation, data gathering (spatial), perception-conception, and interpretation
and symbolization. Macalester College and the Minneapolis Public Schools are
cooperating in a joint venture to enhance the spatial abilities of the teachers
of junior high school handicapped students. The project is to run for two
academic years: September, 1988 through July 1990. During the first year a
series of eight instructional sessions will be conducted. The target audience
for this series will be twenty teachers of handicapped students. During the
summer of 1989 a two-week workshop will be held. The primary out-come of the
first year will be formalized packages for teachers in the Minneapolis school
system. During the second year of the program, another series of academic year
sessions will be held for teachers from all school districts in the Twin Cities
area having a significant number of handicapped students. During the summer of
1990, a two-week workshop will be held for all the teachers who participated in
the two-year program. Through the funding of this project, the Teacher
Enhancement Program addresses the special needs of a particular contingent of
teachers, those working with handicapped students. Macalester College and the
Minneapolis School have contributed an amount equal to 3% of the National
Science Foundation award.