* 8850947
* Conference on Undergraduate Science, Engineering and        Mathematics, September 30 - October 1, l988
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1990
* Lida Barrett, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1990
* USD 24,658.00

A regional conference for mathematicians and engineers involved in undergraduate
education was held on September 30 and October 1, 1988, in Memphis, Tennessee.
The conference was jointly hosted by Memphis State University, Mississippi State
University, and Tennessee State University. More than 200 representatives of
colleges and universities in the Southeastern Region consisting roughly of East
Texas, Arkansas, Tennessee, Louisiana, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, Alabama,
Southern Illinois, and Missouri. The conference goals were three-fold: (1) to
provide a series of presentations on the ways in which undergraduate mathematics
programs are being changed to take advantage of computer symbolic manipulations
capabilities, (2) to explore the needs and strategies for engineering education
especially at the Historically Black Colleges and Universities in the region,
(3) to provide an overview of National Science Foundation support for curriculum
development in science, engineering, and mathematics at the undergraduate level.
From the conference presentations, a paper on the use of computer algebras will
be prepared and submitted for publication in the NOTICES of the American
Mathematical Society and in FOCUS, the newsletter of the Mathematical Society of
America. A second paper on the role of the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities in engineering education will be submitted for publication in the
newsletter of the American Society of Engineering Education.