* 8850447
* Short Course in Ecology and Environmental Science for       Teachers:  Grades 4-8
* EDU,DRL
* 11/15/1988,08/31/1992
* Larry DeBuhr, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 08/31/1992
* USD 140,733.00

The Missouri Botanical Garden will conduct for three years, a series of short
courses for teachers in grades 4-8 in the Metropolitan St. Louis area for
training and up-dating of education materials in ecology and environmental
sciences. Over a three year period, 90 teachers will be selected for this
project. These teachers will better serve their students with their enhanced
knowledge of ecology and environmental sciences, and by integrating this
knowledge into the newly mandated Missouri Core Competencies and Key Skills
required in all classrooms. The proposed short course will enable teachers to
learn ecology/environmental science concepts, to develop effective environmental
science curricula based on the "learning cycle" and to implement those curricula
successfully in the classroom by providing teachers with positive and successful
role models. Teachers will complete the objectives of the short course by
meeting seven times over 12 months. The long time-frame allows for development
and implementation of curricular material in the classroom The Short Course will
be offered in conjunction with the University of Missouri - St. Louis and each
participant will receive three graduate credits from the University. All
participants will develop an independent project to be tested in the classroom.
This project fits our program needs in that it has as its focus teachers in the
middle grades, in a metropolitan area with a high percentage of minority
students and provides updating in an area of importance to all students. The
Missouri Botanical Garden and the School Districts have contributed an amount
equal to 37% of the National Science Foundation award.