* 8850518
* Undersea Research Program for Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1992
* Howard Weiss, Project Oceanology
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 04/30/1992
* USD 93,050.00

Twenty secondary school science teachers selected from the area adjacent to
Groton, Connecticut will carry out an undersea research project using deep-
diving submersibles and other equipment provided by the National Undersea
Research Program (NURP) and will subsequently implement a student research
program in their own schools which will engage their students in scientific
inquiry. This three-year program will begin in September, 1988 and conclude in
May, 1991. During the academic year of year one, participants will; 1.) attend
thirteen 3 hour lectures and seminars by visiting marine scientists 2.)
identify, define and design research problems and hypotheses to be investigated
and chosen in consultation with the NURP Director and Chief Scientist. 3.)
Conduct a literature search; 4.) meet with scientists at NURP, and 5.) become
acquainted with the nature and philosophy of science. During the summer of 1989
the participants will be involved in a six week summer institute on Long Island
Sound. Seventeen days will involve on-the-water investigations including two
days utilizing a NURP submersible. The remaining thirteen days will be devoted
to laboratory experiments, sample analysis and computer entry of data. During
year two participants will complete their investigations, reduce and analyze
data, write a paper or prepare a poster session and plan for the transfer of
their research experience into the classroom. During year three participants
will implement a student research program in their own schools. In-school visits
will be conducted by the staff to observe the student research program. The
participants will report on and discuss their projects. Program participants
will receive six graduate credits from Eastern Connecticut State University.
This program allows the Teacher Enhancement Program the opportunity to observe
an approach which will increase the participants' understanding of the nature of
scientific inquiry and the ability of teachers to convey this understanding to
students. Project Oceanology ant the National Undersea Research Program will
contribute an amount equal to 66% of the National Science Foundation award.