* 8850394
* Advanced Mathematics from an Elementary Viewpoint: Chaos, Fractal Geometry, and Nonlinear Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,06/30/1992
* Paul Horwitz, BBN Systems & Technologies Corporation
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 06/30/1992
* USD 1,093,639.00

Most naturally occurring processes are inherently nonlinear and can give rise to
very complex behaviors. Even very simple mathematical models can exhibit
behavior gives rise to extremely convoluted (and often very beautiful) fractal
shapes. The discovery of this fundamentally new area of mathematics has been
crucially dependent on computationally intensive graphic methods and has given
birth to a radically new paradigm for mathematical research: experimental
mathematics. Though this material is at the frontier of current research, it is
accessible to high school students, and the graphic images that are generated
through its investigation are highly informative and often of uncommon visual
richness and beauty. Mathematical materials and associated computer software
aimed at motivating and empowering high school students of average mathematical
ability to perform experimental mathematical investigations will be designed,
developed, and evaluated. The mathematical content will comprise fractals,
nonlinear dynamics, and mathematical chaos. Fundamental mathematical concepts
will be applied to a wide variety of physical, biological and social processes
(e.g. population growth, problems in epidemiology, and the economics of the arms
race). The deep connection between geometry and nonlinear dynamics will be made
explicit by developing computer-based tools that will enable students to
generate fractal maps and pictures of compelling complexity and beauty. Finally,
through their work in experimental mathematics students will acquire a deeper
understanding of mathematical and scientific thinking.