* 8850516
* Enhancing Middle/Junior High Earth Science Teachers Through Field Experiments
* EDU,DRL
* 10/15/1988,12/31/1992
* Ronald West, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 12/31/1992
* USD 305,210.00

This project is designed to prepare 50 outstanding middle/junior high school
teachers (25 each year) in those field geology skills necessary to teach in the
field and in incorporating field data/samples in their classroom and indoor
laboratory teaching. These resource teachers will then serve as resource persons
for other teachers in their school districts as well as the surrounding areas.
The 28 month program will begin in October, 1988 and terminate in January, 1991.
The program will be comprised of the following four major components: Laboratory
Institutes I &amp; II. These institutes will be held in the spring term of each
year and will consist of three sessions lasting two days each. These sessions
will be centered around background information related to the summer activities.
Field Geology Institutes I &amp; II. These institutes will be held during the
summers of 1989 and 1990. Each institute will consist of four weeks centered
around field projects. Each week will be comprised of six days during which the
participants will engage in field activities in Kansas geology in the area
around the university. The participants will also develop, utilizing a database,
relevant activities for their own areas. Site Visitations I &amp; II. During the
fall and spring following each Summer Institute each participant will receive
two site visits. One visit is for the purpose of assessing the implementation of
their in-service activities and one visit will be for the purpose of
accompanying the teacher and class on a designed field activity. Master Science
Teacher Development. Five teachers will be selected during the fall semester of
1989. In addition to leadership training, these Master Teachers will participate
along with the project staff in planning activities for the second year. Six
hours of graduate credit will be made possible, but not required, for each
participant. Most teachers of earth science have had only limited, if any, field
experience in geology and rarely utilize the outdoors in teaching earth science.
This project allows the Teacher Enhancement Program the opportunity of providing
content and methodology and ascertaining if students are subsequently provided
with quality field experiences. Kansas State University and the school systems
have contributed an amount equal to at least 15% (and probably higher) of the
National Science Foundation award.