* 8850423
* Project PIEDMONT - Physics Incorporating Educational        Development:  Multiplying Output through Networks of        Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/1988,02/28/1994
* Gerald Meisner, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 02/28/1994
* USD 959,923.00

This project offers an opportunity to a substantial fraction of high school
physics teachers (70) in North Carolina to participate in a three-year workshop.
This will consist of three summer sessions of five weeks each, 18 Saturday
meetings during the intervening academic years and communication to each of the
teachers on at least a weekly basis via NEWTON, a VAX-based electronic mail abnd
database system being developed by the University's Academic Computing Center
and members of the regional high school advisory headed by this Project's staff.
Conceptual difficulties will be addressed at the beginning of each summer
session. The development of problem-solving skills will make extensive use of
the college version of The Mechanical Universe and Beyond as well as the field-
tested high school version of the same program. Problem-solving aspects of the
workshops and concepts components will engage the teachers in the kinds of
activities and physics background necessary to effectively teach secondary
physics. Limitations on time of interaction among workshop participants and on
numbers of minority teachers reached by the workshop will be addressed through
NEWTON. The staff and the participants will use NEWTON in order to discuss
classroom physics and assigned work, to continually evaluate the workshop as
well as to organize physics competition among schools, advertise local and
regional physics meetings, and other activities whose purpose is to invigorate
and establish a greater sense of commonality in the community of physics
educators. An amount equivalent to 30% of the NSF request has been cost- shared
by the University, the participating school districts and public and private
organizations.