* 8850406
* Mathematics Enhancement for Teachers of American Indians
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1991
* Ardel Boes, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 228,547.00

The main goals of the project are to improve the quality of mathematics and
engineering education available to American Indian youth. The project proposes a
model program consisting of a teacher workshop to be held concurrently with a
camp for students at the middle school level, grades 6 through 8. The camp for
students is to be funded from non National Science foundation funds, namely from
AISES (American Indian Science and Engineering Society.) It is planned that 25
mathematics teachers attend workshops during the summers 1989 and 1990 at the
Colorado School of Mines. The workshops emphasize mathematics and computer
applications and improvement of teaching skills. Arising out of the workshop
would be a tangible product in the form of a math kit which would be used in the
schools and aid in transfer of knowledge and skills. The kit is to include
culturally relevant, mathematically challenging lesson plans, manipulatives,
computer software techniques, and reviews. Teachers and students are to benefit
from constructive interaction and hands-on exercises during the training period.
Funding for a prototype project to be conducted during the summer 1988 has
already been funded by Cray Research, Incorporated. It is intended that the
participants would become master teachers, as a product of the workshop
experiences, who would be capable of helping other teachers in their districts.
Through this mechanism, potentially hundreds of teachers and thousands of
students should be impacted by the project. The process of participant selection
is based on cooperative work by the College and AISES. The latter will advertise
the workshop to American Indian schools using an existing mailing list to alert
the school and community populations. Criteria used by AISES to judge
applications includes evidence of need, commitment to teaching in an American
Indian school, administrative support to ensure application of workshop
training, and the teacher's willingness to adopt innovative approaches to the
teaching of mathematics. There is to be an education selection committee
comprised of educators and professionals in science and engineering which will
select the participants from among the applicants. The emphasis during the
workshop experiences for teachers is on teaching techniques, mathematics
content, and computer content. A discovery learning process is to be utilized to
invite teachers to more fully engage the academic subjects on which they may
have deficiencies. The mathematics emphasis is on the development of algebraic
and geometric thought utilizing spatial visualization and diagrammatic models.
The computer classes involve literacy as well as programming techniques using
the BASIC and Logo languages. The staff seems to have excellent knowledge of the
academic and didactical topics as well as experiences in working with the target
populations. An amount equivalent to 61% of the NSF request has been cost shared
by the university, public and private institutions.