* 8850926
* State-Based Network to Develop Science and Mathematics      Indicators
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1989,06/30/1991
* Rolf Blank, Council of Chief State School Officers
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 06/30/1991
* USD 614,510.00

Development of better indicators of precollege education in mathematics and
science can, and should, build on the responsibility and interest of states to
compile and use better information on education. This project undertakes the
development of indicators through working with state departments of education in
three stages. This proposal is to complete the Third State-implementation of
state reporting of priority science/math indicators. In the first year, an
inventory was conducted with the states to identify the information now
collected on the dimensions and quality of science and math education, using a
set of ideal indicators identified from recent studies and recommendations, and
applying a data collection shuttle process to describe how each state defines
and collects the information. In the second year, the information compiles
through the inventory was analyzed against the ideal indicators and a set of
"priority" indicators for states was selected by a project task force. The
project developed a common data reporting plan for the priority indicators and
worked with each state to define specifications for reporting state data. In the
third and fourth years, being proposed, the indicators reporting plan will be
implemented with the states. In year three, 30 states that have indicators data
ready will report to CCSSO and the other states will receive technical
assistance to develop their data capacity. In year four, a 50-state indicators
reporting plan will be fully implemented. In addition, the project will obtain
state representative data from national surveys on other priority science/math
indicators.