* 8850102
* Future Scientists Program
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Cass Parker, Jackson State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan W. Duby
* 01/31/1991
* USD 98,374.00

The School of Science and Technology of Jackson State University will sponsor a
Future Scientist Program for high potential secondary school students. The
purpose of the program is to motivate young men and women toward research and
teaching careers in science and mathematics. The program will include a
residential summer enrichment program of six weeks at Jackson State University
and follow-up activities involving the participants and their high school
science teachers in the development of science projects during the academic
year. The majority of participants will be Black students from the public high
schools of Mississippi. The summer program activities will include an
interdisciplinary study of the atmosphere and climate through classroom and
laboratory activities and field trips, focusing on the disciplines of chemistry,
biological science, atmospheric science, mathematics and computer science. The
ethical aspects of the problems involved in the interaction between man and the
atmosphere will be examined. There will also be career exploration activities
and close interaction with practicing scientists at Jackson State University and
at cooperating agencies, industries and research laboratories. The participants
will develop plans for projects, related to the focus of the summer program,
which can be carried out in their home schools during the academic year. Program
staff will work with the students and their local high school science teachers
in the implementation of the projects.