* 8850742
* Resource Teachers for Microcomputer-Based Laboratories in   Middle Level Science
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,06/30/1993
* Alan McCormack, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 06/30/1993
* USD 413,230.00

This 2 1/2 year project is designed to develop 40 highly trained resource
teachers in applications of microcomputers- based laboratories (MBL) for middle
level science. These resource teachers will then be available in the long term
to train other science teachers in the use of the technology. In addition, some
6000 middle level science students will benefit by having MBL experiences as
part of their science programs. Some unique features of this project are that
"1) Resource teachers will be trained both in formal university workshops and on
site in their schools through peer coaching; 2) A new set of MBL activities will
be developed to capitalize on existing commercial MBL software and hardware; 3)
A strong evaluation component will monitor both the degree of implementation of
MBL and its effectiveness; 4) A new MBL- focused course will be created for a
permanent offering at SDSU; 5) the project will serve a population the majority
of which consists of students from historically underrepresented groups; and, 6)
A permanent MBL clearinghouse will be maintained as a regional and national
repository of MBL science learning activities, to provide a directory of trained
MBL workshop presenters, to run an electronic bulletin board for networking
interested teachers, and to generally promote the use of computer applications
in regional schools. An amount equivalent to 22.3% of the NSF award is being
contributed by San Diego State University as cost-sharing.