* 8850531
* A College-Local School Model of Summer Research for Science Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1988,03/31/1991
* Laszlo Baksay, Union College
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 03/31/1991
* USD 119,588.00

In order to help counteract the reported decline in secondary science education
a cadre of high school science teachers will be afford the opportunity for
direct encounters with new developments in their fields. During the next two
years, teachers will actively participate in research projects conducted by
faculty at Union College, Schenectady, New York. During the summer, teachers
will be involved in such areas as high energy physics, photochemistry, ecology,
geological field mapping and astrophysics. Participating secondary teachers and
college faculty will meet periodically during the eight months preceding the
summer research experience to facilitate familiarization with the computer
systems, library, and laboratories. Participants will be able to discuss
readings and background of the research with their mentors. An important feature
of this "hands-on" program is a teacher to faculty ratio of one to one. Some
sharing of responsibilities will be expected and the teacher will have the
opportunity to become a "junior" collaborator. Although there will not be a
traditional classroom setting, scheduled daily discussions will help to
disseminate and share information between the teachers and the faculty. Teachers
will be selected on the basis of their commitment to this program and their
ability to contribute to and benefit from the research experience. To encourage
school districts to be more supportive of science education, superintendents of
participants will agree to five days of release time for participants for
planning and implementation activities related to the summer research
experience. In addition, school districts must allocate $200 to $500 for each of
two years for science equipment and supplies to incorporate some aspect of the
research experience into the classroom. Through the program teachers will obtain
the competence to serve as resource persons for their schools and the area. The
ties established between college faculty and the teachers, as well as several
follow-up activities will ensure further college-local school interactions.
Examples are lectures given by Union faculty at the home schools of the
participants, borrowing of equipment for classroom demonstrations, and research
participation for gifted high school students. Since many teachers have not been
involved in research activities, this type of program should produce committed,
research experienced and more competent and self- assured science teachers.
Union College and the school systems involved have contributed an amount equal
to approximately 9% of the NSF award.