* 8850984
* Improvement of Earth Science Education in the San Antonio   Area
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1989,03/31/1991
* Stuart Birnbaum, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 03/31/1991
* USD 130,247.00

This program is designed around the central theme "the history and development
of the earth." During the Summer Institutes and other activities which make up
the program the links between the various aspects of earth science will be
emphasized. Peer teaching, a balance of activities, and a good multiplier effect
characterize these Summer Institutes. The earth science content areas to be
studied are astronomy, geology, oceanography, and meteorology. Following morning
lectures with practical demonstrations and hands-on activities where
appropriate, the afternoon laboratory projects designed by the faculty, will aid
participants in understanding the course material and provide models which can
be used by the teachers in their own classes. This laboratory time also provides
an opportunity for "sharing" of activities between participants and for small
group interaction with faculty. Field experiences (25% of the program) to
provide hands-on experience will be scheduled after studying the relevant
subject matter component. The balance is good being approximately (40% lectures,
35% laboratory, 25% field trips). Thirty "original participants" will attend a
four-week Institute at the University of Texas - San Antonio (UTSA). Then each
of these will co-present, with four other participants and a lead teacher, a
workshop based on the materials developed during the Summer Institute. Each of
these workshops will enroll 30 - teachers at "cluster centers" around the San
Antonio area. They will be conducted in the following academic year. This is
peer teaching with a 6 to 1 multiplier effect. Also, follow-up meetings will be
held during the following academic year. At these meetings the 30 original
participants each accompanied by another teacher who attended a cluster
workshop, will report on the pedagogical application of the ideas gained during
the course. Workshop participants will come from public and private middle
schools of Region 20 - Education Service Center around San Antonio. With this
mix of participants and activities, participating teachers will assume
significant ownership of the materials developed which will be key to their
continued use and improvement of earth science education in the San Antonio
area. I recommend a standard award for 12 months of $130,247. The University of
Texas - San Antonio is cost sharing an amount of $18,200 or approximately 14%.
TPE-8850984 2 If child care is allowed the recommendation is for a standard
award of $143,747 for 12 months. The cost sharing of $18,200 represents 13%.//