* 8850097
* Long Island Mathematics Enrichment Institute for High       Ability or High Potential Young Women
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Jong Lee, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Continuing Grant
* Susan W. Duby
* 01/31/1991
* USD 83,506.00

The State University of New York/College at Old Westbury will implement a two-
year project to create the Long Island Mathematics Enrichment Institute for High
Ability or High Potential Young Women. The proposed effort will be established
in collaboration with the Nassau County Mathematics Association, the Suffolk
County Mathematics Association, and the Nassau County Mathematics Supervision
Association. For each of two fifteen-Saturday morning cycles Old Westbury will
work with twenty- five high ability or high potential 10th or 11th grade young
women per semester in the region. During the academic year, young women will
participate in career awareness sessions, consciousness-raising efforts, role
model lectures, motivational workshops and specialized mathematics instruction.
Attendees will undergo sixty hours of academic year project activities, and 12
hours of Summer follow-up exposure. Participants will share Institute training
and motivation with classmates in school districts. Videotaping of
workshops/seminars will afford teachers the opportunity of viewing presentations
with nonparticipating students. A "how to" replication manual after Year II will
be available for national replicability. Four hands-on research- oriented field
visits/demonstrations during high school intersession breaks will complement
academic-year efforts. Parental involvement in workshops, a mentoring component
and career planning sessions add a necessary dimension to Institute design.