* 8850418
* Elementary Science Teacher Improvement Project
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Lois Fruen, Minnesota Science Teachers Association
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 10/31/1992
* USD 76,719.00

A science curriculum package (K-3) written by an Elementary Specialists
committee and expert instructors from the university as well as the school
levels will serve as the guide for a comprehensive academic year ten-session
workshop for 60 elementary teachers in the Minneapolis area. This will give them
a basic knowledge of science content and show them how to integrate materials
into their existing curriculum. The curriculum materials based primarily on
existing good packages, such as ESS, SCIS, units developed by some of the
Minnesota school districts as well as from England and New Zealand will be
reviewed by four Presidential Awardees for Excellence in Science Teaching who
will oversee the project and serve as subject specialists. The participating
teachers will use the material in their own classrooms and share their results
with colleagues. This sharing is formally built into the workshop in two ways,
(1) at the beginning of each session, the teachers will report back to their
fellow participants and (2) two follow-up workshops/year for three years will be
held during the fall and spring meetings of the Minnesota Science Teachers. A
similar format is being set up for the teachers of grades 4-6 to be held during
year two of his project. Elementary teachers will meet to assess the impact of
the workshop and to finalize the curriculum package. It will then be distributed
to elementary teachers by means of further inservice workshops held by the
elementary and subject specialists and workshop participants. An amount
equivalent to 50% of the requested funding is being cost-shared by the
University of Minnesota, St. Cloud University, local school districts and each
of the individual instructors involved in the project.