* 8850512
* Science for Citizenship:  A Program for North Mississippi   Middle and Junior High School Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1990
* Jean Shaw, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 08/31/1990
* USD 94,528.00

This project will provide the science content and process information necessary
to update the knowledge base of forty middle and junior high school science
teachers in earth, physical and consumer science. Participants will then apply
this information as they implement state- mandated changes in the science
curriculum. Through interaction and experiences, these teachers will build
confidence and interest in providing current information and quality laboratory
experiences for these students. The format for meeting these objectives consists
of a four-week summer program and two seminars during the ensuing academic year.
Sessions will be held on the campus of The University of Mississippi. The summer
program will be devoted to lecture-discussion-demonstrations conducted by
University scientists. Participants will also perform laboratory science
experiments, both individually and in small groups to gain experience in
implementing hands-on science in their schools. As follow-up to the summer work,
teachers will share expertise gained din this program in staff development
sessions with colleagues in their schools and neighboring schools. A project
newsletter will allow participants to gain additional knowledge as they
implement project activities. The project staff will visit school and the two
school year meetings will help ensure implementation of educationally sound
teaching of the students affected by the participating teachers. An amount
equivalent to 25% of the grant has been cost-shared by the University and the
participating school districts, with the latter using some of its Title II
monies to support the released time for the teachers as they pursue the
professional development components of the grant.