* 8850546
* An Exploratory Study of Japanese and American Students'     Problem-solving Behaviors
* None,MDR
* 09/01/1989,08/31/1992
* Jerry Becker, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 08/31/1992
* USD 95,000.00

This collaborative effort is a direct result of discussions initiated at the
U.S.-Japan Seminar on Mathematical Problem Solving in July 1986. At that
conference, several directions for future collaborative research were identified
and discussed, and there was unanimous enthusiasm and support for undertaking
cross-cultural collaborative research related to the modeling of mathematical
situations and the solution of nonroutine mathematical problems. The project
represents a collaborative effort by five researchers from United States, and at
least five researchers from Japan to study the teaching and learning of
nonroutine problems solving by Japanese and American students. The specific
focus of the work in this initial phase of the collaboration will be nonroutine,
"open-ended" mathematics problems. The proposed work would relate directly to
the "open approach" teaching methodology studied and used by Prof. Nobuhiko
Nohda and his colleagues in Japan. This teaching methodology (Nohda, 1983, 1986,
1987) focuses on engaging students in mathematical inquiry through the use of an
open-ended mathematics problem. Though their individual work on the problem and
through class discussion of various approaches and solutions, often during an
entire class period or longer, students develop an appreciation for the depth
and complexity of the mathematics involved as well as an appreciation of the
various strategies available for its analysis and solution. This approach has
been used experimentally in some schools in Japan.