* 8850467
* Research in Life Science:  Ethology for Middle Grades
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1988,06/30/1992
* Joseph Steffen, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Emma L. Walton
* 06/30/1992
* USD 97,269.00

Central to this teacher enhancement project is the trainng of teachers in the
scientific method of research in a zoo setting. Classroom teachers that have
been working with the principal investigator have expressed high interest and a
need for upgrading of knowledge in course discussions and course evaluations
during l987. Input from these teacher educators, science educators, scientists,
and zoo personnel was used to construct an inservice plan. The three-phase plan
involves 20 elementary and middle school teachers (grades 4-7) in spring, summer
and fall workshops and seminars with follow-up evaluation by the project
directors. Ethology, the application of scientific methods to the study of
behavior and basic life science concepts in animal adaptation, animanl
endangerment, and animal diversity of lifestyle will comprise the science
content used to develop curriculum projects in animal behavioral research. State
in more general terms the outcomes of this project will be in the improvement of
instruction and knowledge about life sciences and the use of the scientific
method of research. This project has the potential to impact on the staff
development program of the schools in the area as well as on the teacher
preparation program at the University of Louisville. An amount equivalent to 62%
of the NSF request has been contributed to the total cost of the project by the
University of Louisville, the Louisville Zoo and the Jefferson County Public
Schools.