* 8850435
* Enhancing Junior High Science Teachers Background Through   the Development and Utilization of Relevant Laboratory      Activities in Chemistry
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1988,09/30/1990
* Lee Summerlin, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 09/30/1990
* USD 129,689.00

Twenty-five Junior High School science teachers from the Central Alabama area
will be selected to participate in a project designed to give them practical
laboratory experience and update their chemistry background. The chemical
activities will be patterned after those in Chemical Activities, a recent
publication from the American Chemical Society. This program consists of over
100 chemical and physical science activities suitable for junior high students.
It has also been approved by a safety committee of the ACS for student use. The
primary objective is to give this group of teachers suitable background in the
appropriate chemical topics in order to implement these activities in their
classrooms and laboratories. Application of chemistry to social and
environmental issues will be stressed and activities that relate chemistry to
everyday life will be emphasized. An instructional format of monthly two-day
sessions followed by a week-long summer session will be used. Extensive follow-
up activities are planned with visits to participants' schools by project staff
and at least two regional day-long conferences in which participants will share
their experiences. The University of Alabama and the participating school
districts are contributing the equivalent of 10% of the NSF grant.