* 8850572
* NCTM Research Interpretation Project
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1989,07/31/1993
* Sigrid Wagner, National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 07/31/1993
* USD 239,195.00

The proposed project is a major effort in analyzing, synthesizing, and
interpreting results of research in mathematics education for practitioners.
Outstanding interpretive research specialists will work with classroom teachers
to write chapters for three volumes of implications of research in mathematics
education, one volume at each of three levels -- early childhood/primary,
intermediate/middle school, and high school/post secondary. Areas of mathematics
education research to be reviewed include content topics, process topics,
teaching strategies, and student variables. A team of three editors will work
closely with the chapter co-authors to insure comprehensive coverage of topics
and uniform clarity of writing style. An advisory board of practitioners and
researchers will oversee the project and assist in structuring the three
volumes. Research specialists and teacher consultants will review each chapter
of the written materials for accuracy, completeness, readability, and
practicality. The project advisory board will review the total, revised
manuscripts for comprehensiveness and coordination of topic coverage. A team of
outside evaluators will review the final manuscripts prior to publication. It is
expected that the three volumes will be available for dissemination by the
summer of 1991. The proposed set of books will constitute a comprehensive
interpretation of current mathematics education research for practitioners and
an up-to-date research reference for anyone interested in mathematics education.
Joint support of this project is being provided by the Division of Teacher
Preparation and Enhancement and the Division of Materials Development, Research
and Informal Science Education.