* 8850959
* Science Education:  A Process Approach to Studying Toxic    Substances and Their Effects on Human Health
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1992
* Vincent Hoagland, Sonoma State University
* Standard Grant
* David Schindel
* 09/30/1992
* USD 266,882.00

Science Education: A Process Approach to Studying Toxic Substances and Their
Effects on Human Health is a cross- discipline teacher enhancement project which
integrates basic science concepts, related technology, risk assessment, and
science processes methodology. In each of three summerrs,a different group of
thirty high school teachers from California and contiguous states will
participate in a two- week program structured on the chemistry and biology of
toxic substances, proper management of hazardous materials, and related concerns
of human health. Content lectures and varied discussion sessions will be
complemented by individual and group laboratory exercises as well as planned
field trips to a dump site, a sewage treatment plant, a hazartdous waste
facility (Lawrence Livermore), and research laboratories analyzing and
investigating management methods of toxic substances. Participants will be
expected to incorporate the concepts of and activties into their classroom
curriculum with special emphasis on the process approach emphasized in the
program. Follow-up sessions during the school year will not only facilitate an
exchange of information and experiences among the teachers, but will also
provide an opportunity for the project staff to evaluate the effectivenesss of
the program in introducing the timely subject of toxic substances and human
health into high school science courses.