* 8851421
* Undergraduate Laboratory Equipment for an Environmental     Monitoring Technology Program
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Rameen Aryana, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 48,750.00

The project's aim is the development of a new technical curriculum in
environmental monitoring using state-of-the-art methods and technologies.
Included in the equipment provided through this award are a gas
chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS), a separate GC, a high performance
liquid chromatograph (HPLC), an atomic absorption spectrometer (AA), and a
modern, computer-linked weather station. With the help of this equipment,
students learn the procedures and principles involved in analyzing indoor and
outdoor air, water, soil, and animal and human tissue for the presence of
environmental contaminants resulting from agricultural and forestry pesticides,
hazardous wastes, and industrial emissions. The resulting new curriculum, backed
by the institution's excellent computer facilities, gives a technical focus to
the existing B.S. in Environmental Studies Program and makes possible the
institution of a new A.A. degree program in Environmental Monitoring Technology.
The project addresses the nation's growing need for competent pollution and
hazardous substances control technicians, provides skilled manpower for Northern
Maine's environmental laboratories, and affords opportunities for upward
mobility to the economically depressed predominantly French-American (Acadian)
people of the St. John Valley in Northern Maine which the institution serves.
The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained
from non-Federal sources.