* 8851064
* The Use of Science and Technology Research Centers as       Magnets to Improve Precollege Science and Technology        Education
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1988,09/30/1993
* Lynn Elfner, Ohio Academy of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 09/30/1993
* USD 297,241.00

This project will use Ohio's Thomas Edison science & technology centers as
natural magnets to improve science & technology education in grades 7-12. It
will (1) stimulate development of student research projects in biotechnology,
polymers, and manufacturing sciences; (2) provide opportunities for in-service
education of science and mathematics teachers in areas of leading edge
technologies; (3) promote participation of teachers and students in educational
opportunities provided by science and technology research centers; (4) engage
scientists and engineers working in areas of leading edge technologies as role
models and subject matter specialists in science and mathematics classrooms; and
(5) engage teachers in summer internships in areas of leading edge technologies.
Matched in part by university and industrial support, Ohio's Thomas Edison
Partnership Program has committed millions of state dollars to the development
of nine centers in Ohio. These centers are focused on research in biotechnology,
polymers, welding engineering, manufacturing sciences, materials science, and
information technologies. This program will enable students and educators in
grades 7-12 to take advantage of existing and developing technology research
centers and to consult and share knowledge more closely with practicing
engineers and scientists in the private sector. Five specific activities are
planned: (1) to publish three science project workbooks, (2) to conduct six in-
service workshops; (3) to publish five calendars of events; (4) to develop a
visiting scholars program affecting 140,000 students; and (5) to establish
fourteen teacher internships. The partnership consists of five kinds of members:
(1) more than 100 local schools in Ohio; (2) public and private school board
associations; (3) trade and professional association such as the Ohio Chemical
Council; (4) Edison Technology Centers; and (5) corporations and institutions
such as Battelle Memorial Institute, Monsanto Company, Ohio Edison, Liebert
Company, The College of Wooster, and the University of Cincinnati.