* 8851067
* Southern California Science and Mathematics Education       Collaborative
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Mary Poplin, Claremont Graduate University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Phillips, Natl. Biosystems, Inc.
* 01/31/1991
* USD 161,492.00

The Claremont Science and Mathematics Collaborative, a partnership of the
Claremont Graduate School, local industrial leaders, expert pre- college science
and mathematics teachers, and area school districts, will develop and operate a
program to facilitate mid-career moves into teaching by industry scientists and
engineers. With the cooperation of their managements, experienced technical
graduates in industry who are interested in entering science and mathematics
teaching will be recruited into a special program of the Claremont Teacher
Education Internship Program. Here they will initially spend one summer in on-
campus courses and orientation at Claremont, then one year in a school teaching
full time with the support and guidance of a master-teacher mentor, and then one
more summer on campus. They can then be certified for teaching in California,
and with an additional eight credits they can receive a Master of Arts in
Teaching degree. Transition financial support for the participants will be
provided by their industrial employers, the Claremont Graduate School, and the
National Science Foundation. Industry support will be developed and coordinated
by the Technology Exchange Center, an existing organization of local industry,
education, and government leaders. Cost sharing by the partners will total 60%
of the NSF funding.