* 8851000
* Alaska Science Consortium Project
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Nancy Murphy, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* clayton howard
* 10/31/1993
* USD 382,276.00

This project, designed by the Center for Cross Cultural Studies, College of
Rural Alaska, University of Alaska, describes an opportunity for 72 urban and
rural middle and elementary school teachers to spend four weeks engaged in
science content, field and laboratory work in addition to enhancing their
teaching strategies. It directly responds to identified needs for locally
relevant, hands-on science education appropriate for the diverse multigraded and
multicultural teaching situations in Alaska. The principle goal of this project
is to train three groups of 24 K-8 teachers over a period of three years in the
application of activities-based teaching strategies while simultaneously
increasing teachers' content knowledge. A team of master-teachers, University
education and science faculty conducting four-week basic summer institutes and
one-week advanced institutes followed by audioconferences and networking
activities to accomplish program goals. Further, a district/ University
supported Consortium be developed to assure maintenance of training after three
years of NSF funding. Excellent support letters from the participating school
districts have indicated financial support for the implementation of the project
and the formation of the Consortium. This project builds on previous University
of Alaska Title II EESA program efforts. With the additional NSF funding, more
schools can be reached with an intense science-rich program leading toward a
long-term commitment for the schools involved. Excellent cost-sharing has been
garnered for this project with the University of Alaska, the participating
schools and the Alaska Department of Education contributing an amount equivalent
to 73% of the NSF request.