* 8851605
* Equipment for an Investigation-Centered Undergraduate       Cellular Biology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Tracy Simpson, University of Hartford
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 56,564.00

Sophomore and upper level biology majors, while grounded in the facts of
biology, routinely are grossly lacking in an understanding and appreciation of
the overall significance of experimental laboratory results. This project
addresses this deficiency by establishing a new cell biology laboratory using
microscopic techniques exclusively for the elucidation of (1) cell and tissue
structure, (2) localization and structure of tubulin and microtubules, and (3)
the localization and structure of mitochondria and succinic dehydrogenase. These
are being accomplished using histological procedures, bright field microscopy,
semithin sectioning, transmission electron microscopy, indirect
immunofluorescence microscopy, phase contrast microscopy, and cytochemistry of
frozen sections at the light microscope level. The following major equipment is
being purchased in order to establish this laboratory: ultramicrotome,
fluorescent microscopes, cryostat and student microscopes. The investigations
are being carried out and then used by students as a basis for elucidating the
limitations of biological techniques and the incomplete nature of experimental
results. Equally significant, this new laboratory provides first-hand, detailed
learning of a variety of modern, up-to- date, microscopical techniques. This
cell biology course is populated by pre-health professionals, by health
professionals who are continuing their education and training, by prospective
high school biology teachers, and by a sizeable group of majors. The grantee
institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.