* 8851073
* The Study of Informal Mathematics Learning:  A Case Study   Using Square One TV
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1989
* Valerie Crane, Research Communications Ltd
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 04/30/1989
* USD 223,880.00

The study of informal mathematics learning: A case study using Square One TV A
goal of this study on informal mathematics learning is to increase understanding
of how perceptions of and attitudes toward mathematics can be mediated with
television programming -- Square One TV -- designed for this purpose. This study
will be conducted to determine characteristics of the learner and informal
mathematics learning experiences; examine the viewing experience over a four- to
six-week period to understand the context in which informal mathematics learning
occurs; determine program characteristics which facilitate positive thinking
about mathematics; and reveal affective and cognitive outcomes from viewing
including participation in activities while viewing, follow-up activities which
result from viewing, and change in perceptions about and attitudes toward
mathematics. One-on-one in-home interviews will be conducted on a pre- and post-
test basis over a four- to six-week period with 600 child-parent pairs. Children
from age 4 to 12 and one of their parents will be interviewed. Intermediary
telephone interviews will permit careful tracking of actual viewing time and of
what happens during viewing. Three conditions for informal learning will exist
between the pre- and post-test. Two hundred child viewers will have no
encouragement to view, another 200 will be encouraged to view a designated
amount of television in the time slot when Square One TV airs, and a final 200
will be encouraged to view Square One TV on a regular basis. Outcomes of the
study will be increased understanding of informal mathematics learning,
refinement of a model for informal learning, and directions for research in this
area.