* 8851093
* Grow Lab:  Stimulating Science Inquiry in K-8 Classrooms
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1988,01/31/1994
* J. Parsons, National Gardening Association
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret B. Cozzens
* 01/31/1994
* USD 1,263,217.00

The National Gardening Association will provide teachers with a familiar
teaching medium, an indoor garden laboratory, to excite children about science
inquiry. Through the special design of the Grow Lab, students will be able to
quickly grow vegetables and flowers through full life cycles, from seed to seed,
in the classroom. This curriculum encourages the integration of science with
other subjects in each classroom day. The purpose of Grow Lab is: 1) to
establish and reinforce early in life that problem solving and scientific
inquiry are fun, and not just for scientists; and 2) to teach a variety of
science skills and concepts, not limited to plant science, using plants as the
tool with which young children learn to make sense of their world. The National
Gardening Association will develop, evaluation and disseminate three Grow Lab
science activity guides for elementary and middle school. Activity kits, a
teacher newsletter, a series of wall charts, a teacher training videotape, an
extensive Grow Lab certified instructor program and a national marketing plan in
conjunction with Hubbard Scientific will also be completed. The National
Gardening Association has an excellent reputation in the quality and impact of
their materials. The staff for this project are both experienced and highly
qualified to conduct these activities. This project affords a unique and
extremely promising program to stimulate and provide an enjoyable applied
context to learn science using the familiar environment of gardening. The
project's goals are consistent with those of the Instructional Materials
program.