* 8851127
* A Project Honoring Outstanding Teachers of Science in       Illinois
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1988,03/31/1992
* Thomas Fitch, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 03/31/1992
* USD 644,971.00

Forty OUTSTANDING Elementary/Middle School teachers of science will be selected
to participate in an honors program conducted over a three-year period on the
campus of Illinois State University. This project will develop scientific
leadership for the local, state, and national level. The participants will be:
1) honored for excellence in science teaching, 2) provided with renewal and
updating in the latest scientific advances, 3) involved in analyzing science
education, and 4) conducting in- service teacher workshops in science for less
well-prepared peers throughout the State of Illinois. The project will include
strands of computer application, teaching methodology, instructional materials
development, involvement with industrial scientists, and leadership development
in science. The focus of the program will be the scientific disciplines of
biology, physics, chemistry, and earth science. There will be workshops devoted
to the preparation of written computer, demonstration, laboratory, and
instructional materials designed by participants to aid other less well-prepared
teachers in improving their science courses; these will be disseminated
throughout the school districts of Illinois and beyond. This project will
develop a strong network of leadership in science within the State of Illinois.
This is a collaborative venture involving the National Science Foundation, the
Illinois Science Teacher Association, Illinois State University, and School
Districts within the State of Illinois.