* 8851261
* Scanning Electron Microscopy for Undergraduate Student      Research and Instruction in Biology.
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Lenore Durkee, Grinnell College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1990
* USD 49,844.00

This project provides a scanning electron microscope (SEM) to supplement the
school's existing microscope facilities. The unique imaging capabilities of such
an instrument provide information which cannot be supplied by either light
microscopy or by a transmission election microscope. With this new instrument,
the department can (1) modify the existing electron microscopy course to include
all phases of specimen preparation and operation of the SEM so that students may
use these techniques where appropriate in independent study and research, (2)
help students become discriminating judges of the increasing amount of SEM
evidence now presented in the literature of various disciplines, (3) utilize SEM
in such courses as Principles of Biology, Cell Biology, Microbiology, and
Systematics, in which scanning images serve as particularly useful instructional
devices, and (4) make available and encourage the use of the instrument by
students in other departments who require the kind of information that it can
provide. In the curriculum, this new machine is being used to demonstrate
relationships between structure and function at a number of biological levels.
Basic biological concepts (not just techniques) are being taught. The grantee
institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.