* 8851031
* The Hartford Alliance to Improve Mathematics and Science Education
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Robert Rosenbaum, CBIA Education Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Erica Uhlmann, Nat. Biosysems, Inc.
* 05/31/1991
* USD 444,458.00

Under the leadership of the Connecticut Business & Industry Association (CBIA),
the Hartford Alliance has been established to strengthen K-12 science,
mathematics, and technology education in the Hartford Public Schools. The
Alliance is a unique private-public sector partnership seeking to enhance
teachers' knowledge and skills in science, mathematics, and computer literacy
and provide enrichment for urban minority youth. The Hartford Alliance currently
includes CBIA, the Travelers Companies, IBM, Aetna Life and Casualty, the
Hartford Public Schools, Wesleyan University, Central Connecticut State
University, the University of Hartford, St. Joseph College, the Science Museum
of Connecticut, and Choate-Rosemary Hall. Collaborative programs to improve
teaching will be conducted and coordinated through the Alliance. Building on
successful statewide models, professional development activities will be
provided for at least 180 Hartford teachers. Roughly 35 percent of all 3-6th
grade teachers, 50 percent of middle-school science and math teachers, and 25
percent of high-school science and math teachers will be served. Additionally,
approximately 750-1000 students will directly participate in enrichment programs
collaborating with the Alliance. By 1989, the Alliance will bring together all
private sector math/science partnerships currently operating in Hartford.
Because there has been no organizational framework in place for coordinating
these efforts, neither the school administration nor the companies involved know
the full range of programs offered, who they serve or miss, just how effective
they are, or how they interrelate. To address this problem, CBIA and the
Hartford Alliance Executive Committee will be responsible for: 1) gathering and
disseminating information about all existing math/science partnership programs
in Hartford; 2) coordinating these efforts with the Hartford Public Schools; 3)
identifying overlapping services, potential areas for collaboration among
programs, and unmet needs; 4) encouraging the development of new partnerships to
respond to those needs; 5) evaluating the short- and long-term impact and
effectiveness of these partnerships; and 6) disseminating information about the
Alliance process and its programs locally, statewide, and nationally. Cost
sharing by the partners will total 111% of the NSF funding.