* 8851458
* Equipment for Isolating Plasmid DNA and Cytochrome p450 in  Undergraduate Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Robert Leamnson, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 20,812.00

This department is introducing into undergraduate physiology, biotechnology and
molecular biology laboratories a set of new experiments that involve the
isolation of the microsome component of cell lysates and closed-circular, non-
chromosomal DNA from bacteria. The new ultracentrifuge procured through this
project is used to isolate the microsome fraction from cells of marine animals
that have been exposed to xenobiotics (artificially exposed in the laboratory or
exposed via polluted waters). Students study the effect of xenobiotics on the
quantity and functions of the mixed function oxidase system, a cytochrome p450.
In other experiments, students use ultracentrifugation to isolate and
characterize either large endogenous plasmids from Thiobacillus versutus or
closed-circular DNA vectors carrying a variety of inserts. (Such isolations
nornally involve overnight centrifugation in cesium chloride/ethidium bromide,
with or without prior high salt/SDS treatment.) An additional longer-term goal
is for students in under- graduate research projects to isolate from sucrose
gradients E. coli minicells containing the T. versutus plasmid. In all cases the
expertise and support materials had been available to do these projects, but a
reliable ultracentrifuge was not. The new equipment, therefore, is facilitating
useful and important curricular changes. The grantee institution is matching the
NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.