* 8851174
* An Atomic Absorption Spectrophotometer/Graphite Furnace for an Undergraduate Interdisciplinary Environmental Science    Program
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Beth Proctor, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 29,865.00

This department stresses a program of quantitative training to help
undergraduates develop skills necessary for biologists and environmental
scientists in the next decade. A Perkin-Elmer 5100 Atomic Absorption
Spectrophotometer-Graphite furnace (AA-GF) system with Zeeman background
correction is facilitating instruction in Biology Department programs, including
Environmental Sciences, Toxicology, Microbiology, and Botany, and is encouraging
development of more interdisciplinary undergraduate courses and projects. The AA
and GF are essential tools for the quantification of metals in a variety of
matrices. Projects have been designed in five courses to instruct students in
the theory, advantages, limitations, and proper uses of AA and GF.
Instrumentation maintenance and quality control/quality assurance procedures are
an integral part of all courses and projects. Student projects involve use of
the AA and, where appropriate, the FA as detectors of metal contaminants in
water, soil/sediments, biological fluids, tissues, and air. They also are used
to measure bioaccumulation of metals in terrestrial/greenhouse studies and to
monitor the levels of toxic metals added to tissue cultures for chronic and
acutetoxicity testing. Research and development of new methods for use of the GF
and AA should give complete instruction of uses, advantages, and limitations of
these tools. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum
obtained from non-Federal sources.