* 8851800
* Acquisition of a High-field Fourier Transform NMR Spectro-  meter to Enhance Undergraduate Education in Chemical        Spectroscopy
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Jerrold Lokensgard, LAWRENCE UNIVERSITY OF WISCONSIN
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 12/31/1990
* USD 95,250.00

A 250 MHz Fourier transform nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer is
replacing a 14-year-old 60 MHz NMR spectrometer. The new instrument's ease of
routine use, much higher sensitivity, and greater spectral dispersion is
enhancing use of NMR in organic, inorganic, and advanced chemistry courses. In
addition the laboratory experiences of intermediate and advanced chemistry
students, both chemistry majors and others, is being enriched by important new
NMR capabilities. Carbon NMR is taking its place alongside proton NMR as a key
ingredient of the organic chemistry laboratory. Students in instrumental
analysis and advanced laboratory courses are exploring molecular structure using
two-dimensional NMR analysis, obtaining meaningful kinetic data more easily, and
better understanding fundamental principles upon which NMR experiments rest. The
new instrument is enhancing research training of senior undergraduates by
greatly extending the range of accessible projects for student independent
study. The department's curriculum is being enlivened by the addition of these
new capabilities, and its students are being better prepared for postgraduate
study or employment in the sciences. The grantee is matching the award from non-
Federal sources.