* 8851017
* Department of Energy National Teacher Enhancement Project
* EDU,DRL
* 01/15/1990,09/30/1993
* Chester Richmond, Oak Ridge National Laboratory
* Interagency Agreement
* Joseph Stewart
* 09/30/1993
* USD 1,834,871.00

This project is a three year collaborative effort by five Department of Energy
(DOE) national laboratories to improve the general level of K-8 science
instruction by creating a cadre of lead teachers who will serve as role models
and mentors for their colleagues. The activities at each of the labs will link
the specific frontier science of the laboratory with existing
science/mathematics/technology curriculum, using teacher- developed enhancement
activities. The enhancement program for these lead teachers will provide in-
service training in academic year workshops and summer institutes. Follow-up
activities to support participants in their efforts to integrate the new
activities into their curriculum will optimize their impact on science and
mathematics education by building a collective effort through successful science
education activities and providing regional teachers access to resources through
a DOE national network. The networking component will link many DOE facilities
not directly involved in this teacher enhancement project. Over 600 teachers
from regions around the labs will receive direct training at the laboratories
and each of them will conduct in-service programs for other teachers. The five
cooperative labs are Lawrence Livermore National Laboratories (LLNL), CA, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), TN, Argonne National Laboratory (ANL), IL,
Fermilab (FNL), IL and Pacific Northwest Laboratory (PNNL), WA&gt; Central
administration as well as the evaluation responsibilities of the project will
remain in Oak Ridge with support from a Laboratory Project Council representing
all the participating laboratories. o Argonne will bring in 40 junior and middle
school teachers for a three week-week summer workshop with the main focus on
superconductivity and material science. o Fermilab will also work with
middle/junior high school teachers. Forty-five teachers will participate for
three weeks on a variety of science topics ranging from Fermilab research and
technology in particle and astrophysics research, but also that research
associated with prairie restoration and ecological research. o The program at
LLNL is based on a series of one week Summer Technology Institutes for the
technical enrichment of the classroom. Forty-five elementary teachers in groups
of 10- 15/institutes will participate in three different experiences each
summer. LLNL, through its previously funded program (HOPE) has had extensive
experience with elementary science activities and teachers. o Oak Ridge National
Lab will work 40 K-6 teachers for three weeks summer experience, with hands-on
activities related to content discussion. Electricity and magnetism will lead
eventually to superconductivity. o Environmental sciences will be the focus of
the three- week summer program at the Pacific Northwest Laboratory for 32
elementary teachers each year. All of the programs have a strong academic year
follow-up, a networking component which will allow all the teachers to remain in
contact with each other and project staff, a credible and appropriate evaluative
process and will have, as a prime objective, the institutionalization of the
relationships established between the schools and the DOE labs. Many of these
labs have high minority populations in the contiguous regions, and have made a
firm commitment to provide specific service for these populations in these
programs. The cost-sharing, which is primarily from the DOE Labs but which also
included the local school districts, is equivalent to 52% of the NSF request.