* 8851011
* Using a Watershed to Teach Science to Detroit Metro Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1991
* Orin Gelderloos, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Charles R. Puglia
* 05/31/1991
* USD 163,907.00

This program, offered by the University of Michigan-Dearborn, will provide a
four-week summer program and academic year follow-up activities for 30 secondary
school natural science and social science teachers from the Detroit Metropolitan
area. The program will integrate the areas of biology, chemistry, earth science,
social science, and environmental science. The Rouge River Watershed is the
subject of intense scrutiny by the Michigan Department of Natural Resources and
the media. The pollution levels of the river are extreme and a Remedial Action
Plan, which cites the importance of education, has been developed. This
interdisciplinary science program which relates the scientific, technological,
and social dimensions of the problem and solutions will lead teachers and
students to a greater understanding of science and its role in social problems.
Preference will be given to teachers who apply as a pair representing the
natural sciences and the social sciences from a school so that team work and
reinforcement can take place. The summer program will use a systematic approach
to the analysis of the watershed. Beginning with the geological history of the
area and the formation of the watershed, the program will observe the numerous
facets of the watershed and the quality of the environment by making visits to
locations, such as point sources of pollution on the river as well as non-point
sources away from the river. Subsequently the teachers will work in small groups
as they analyze the component parts of the watershed, specifically the chemical,
biological, and social components. In the chemical analysis they will learn
techniques for reliable and accurate water quality tests, the determination of
dissolved oxygen, pH, biological oxygen demand, total phosphorus, nitrate,
turbidity, and total solids. In the biological analysis the teachers will learn
sampling techniques, identification of aquatic organisms, significance of
indicator organisms such as coliform bacteria, and flood plain ecology. In the
social analysis they will learn the laws relating to water quality and flood
plain usage, implementation of community water management programs, and the role
of the citizen in their community. Throughout the program the workshop sessions
will mold and incorporate the Rouge River Watershed information into the
individual teachers' classroom materials. The academic year follow-up program
will include update sessions on the status of the Watershed and workshops on
successful techniques of implementation of the material into the classroom. This
project focuses on the needs of minority and inner-city students. The use of the
environment where the teachers teach and the students live and conduct their
everyday lives makes this project particularly suited to the Detroit
Metropolitan area.