* 8851530
* Ultraviolet-Visible Spectrophotometers for Undergraduate    Biochemistry Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Sergio Aragon, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1990
* USD 39,327.00

The goal of this project is to improve the undergraduate laboratory curriculum
by incorporating student work utilizing microprocessor- controlled ultraviolet-
visible spectrophotometers. These are used primarily in three upper division
laboratory courses; Biochemistry Laboratory and the two-semester Integrated
Laboratory. All undergraduates take one or more of these courses, and so receive
training in the theory and practice of this instrumentation. These new
spectrophotometers introduce important new learning capabilities: flexibility
for conducting new experiments as well as updating present experiments, the
introduction of derivative spectroscopy in qualitative and quantitative
analysis, efficient and rapid data acquisition coupled with powerful data
processing capability, training in the practice of computer-interfaced
instrumentation for data storage and retrieval, post acquisition processing and
computer remote control, and the production of graphical results and spectral
manipulations such as least squares fitting, peak integration and spectral
subtraction. A solid set of scientific and pedagogical goals is being pursued in
this project. Eight specific experiments requiring modern spectrometers are
being adopted. While the previous classroom curriculum covered the theoretical
aspects of modern spectroscopy, laboratories were burdened by a lack of modern
instrumentation. Since the department strongly stresses the "hands-on"
experience required for careers in modern chemistry, biochemistry and
biotechnology, the lack of proper spectrophotometers was particularly acute. The
courses being improved serve as an important training ground for employment in
high- technology industries in the Bay Area, as well as for the approximately
30-40% of this department's graduates who matriculate to post- baccalaureate
studies. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum
obtained from non-Federal sources.