* 8851387
* A Multi-Functional Laser Laboratory for Undergraduate       Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Gerald Van Hecke, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 12/31/1990
* USD 53,217.00

A central multi-functional laser laboratory is being created. The laboratory is
allowing the unique capabilities of laser light sources and computer-assisted
data acquisition and analysis to be realized by undergraduate students. The
facility is providing the means to augment the teaching of classical
thermodynamics, integrating the teaching of molecular spectroscopy across three
years of study and providing an opportunity for experimentation in kinetic
studies. Specifically the laboratory consists of two laser light sources (an
argon laser and a nitrogen-pumped dye laser), associated optics, a
monochromator, sample holders, a detection system, and a microcomputer for
experiment control and data analysis. The equipment is mounted on a common
optical table to allow for the modular design of experiments which share a
common source or detecter, providing an economy of scale. The system allows
novel measurements of physical and chemical properties in ways which more
clearly elucidate these properties as well as illustrate the power of modern
optical techniques. In addition, students' experience with computer control and
interfacing is being significantly enhanced. It is planned to describe the
successful projects in the literature to provide impact beyond the local
facility. The grantee is matching the award from non-Federal sources.