* 8851166
* A Scanning Electron Microscope to Improve the Undergraduate Biology Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Foster Billheimer, PENNSYLVANIA WESTERN UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 41,444.00

The aim of this project is to improve the undergraduate curriculum of the
Biological and Environmental Sciences Department through the acquisition of a
scanning electron microscope (SEM). The SEM makes it possible to obtain valuable
information about the external and internal surface features of specimens and to
provide students with increased understanding of structure-function
relationships at the cellular level. Since there is such a rapidly expanding
body of knowledge in the areas of cell biology and physiology, the Department
faced a growing need to update undergraduate courses to provide a sound
understanding of physiological processes at the cellular and subcellular levels.
The SEM is being used in the following courses: Techniques of Electron
Microscopy, Cell Ultrastructure, Cell Biology, Human Physiology, Microbiology,
and Biological Research Investigations. The instrument has been attached to a
VCR and TV monitor which extends its instructional capabilities and makes it a
uniquely flexible teaching tool. Biological specimens can be examined and
videotaped, bringing the actual "search and discover" process beyond the lab
into the classroom. Ancillary equipment for the preparation of specimens (a
sputter coater and a critical point dryer) are included in the project. The
grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from
non-Federal sources.