* 8852123
* Learning Chemistry as a Process:  Chemical Kinetics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Ellen O'Hara-Mays, Lock Haven University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 11/30/1990
* USD 11,389.00

An integrated approach by which the student is repeatedly presented with the
concept of chemical kinetics in various courses. Each exposure to the concept is
presented in increasing complexity. It is the goal of the department to evaluate
different methods of presenting this difficult concept. The faculty in each
discipline have designed an experiments which improves the laboratory curricula.
In the Introductory and General chemistry courses, a qualitative demonstration
in lecture and semiquantitative laboratory is being used. In Organic Chemistry,
which is generally the second year of a chemistry program, a thorough
examination of the mechanism and other chemical parameters (eg. steric
hindrance) of a chemical reaction is being examined. The third year of the
chemistry program includes Physical Chemistry where a more detailed calculus
based description of the chemical kinetics is introduced to describe the
mechanism and possible description of reaction intermediates using mathematical
models. The fourth year of the chemistry program includes Biochemistry,. The
student is being introduced to enzyme kinetics where the mathematical
descriptions emphasized in Physical Chemistry are being applied to biological
catalysts and extrapolated to the processes occurring in living systems. Other
courses in the chemistry program are also teaching these principles, but the
contributing courses fall into a chronological sequence and utilize chemical
kinetics in their curricula. The students who are benefitting from these
programs are the chemistry majors, the students who are taking general education
courses, and those students with majors in science education, health science and
biology. The grantee is matching the award from non-Federal sources.