* 8852776
* Introduction of Molecular Genetics Techniques into the      Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Lise Wilson, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 19,518.00

The goal of this project is to introduce current techniques in molecular
genetics into the undergraduate biology curriculum. The equipment it provides is
making it possible to offer a new laboratory course in Molecular Biology, as
well as to improve the present Cell Biology, Microbiology, and General Biology
course laboratories. Approximately 170 students per year, at all undergraduate
levels, will be affected by these changes. The new equipment includes a
bacteriologic incubator and water bath shaker to culture bacteria for the
isolation of plasmids; a CO2 incubator and laminar-flow clean benches for
student work with tissue culture; microcentrifuges for DNA/RNA purification and
concentration; horizontal agarose gel units and a DNA-detection camera system to
separate and analyse the products of restriction enzyme digestions; a
polyacrylamide slab gel unit to analyze the products of in vitro transcription
reactions; fluorescence illuminators to detect the cell- surface expression of
the product of a transferred gene; and an ultraflow freezer for the long-term
preservation of the bacterial strains and cell lines used in the experiments
described. By acquainting students with the methodology involved in molecular
cloning and gene expression, this project is enhancing their academic
experience, increasing their awareness of the scientific process, and preparing
them more fully for scientific careers. The grantee institution is matching the
NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.