* 8852522
* "Instructional Equipment to Support Undergraduate Field     Studies in Aquatic Microbiology"
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* James Burnett, Illinois Eastern Cmty College Olney Central College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 8,070.00

This department's aquatic microbiology project provides two-year college
students with the opportunity, instruction, and equipment necessary to conduct
quality field work. One of the great resources of Southern Illinois (and all of
the Midwest) is the abundance of water. This project targets these resources by
focusing student experiences on the microorganisms of aquatic ecosystems.
Initial work on this project began during the summer of 1987 with the addition
of two new courses: Field Biology, and Research in Biological Science. This
curriculum addition, combined with new equipment purchases, represents the
faculty's determination and commitment to link the classroom with the world of
living organisms. To support this project the NSF award has financed the
purchase of a quality microscope with phase contrast, epifluorescence and
photomicrographic accessories, as well as a small utility boat with equipment
for sampling lake and reservoir sediments. With these equipment additions, the
aquatic microbiology students are being given an opportunity to combine the
excitement and motivation of field work with experience in conducting sound
scientific inquiry. Students enrolled in these courses are largely those in the
college's four-year transfer program who look forward to completing the
baccalaureate in a science-related field. Through reports by these students
often presented to local high school classes and to community adult groups, the
project also contributes to better public understanding of science and to
increased pre-college student interest in science careers. The grantee
institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.