* 8852332
* Polymer Reaction Kinetics:  Process and Simulation for the  Undergraduate Laboratory
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/15/1988,10/31/1991
* Andrew Klein, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 10/31/1991
* USD 77,961.00

Polymer properties, such as molecular weight and copolymer composition, are
highly dependent on the process conditions under which they are made. The
enhancement in understanding of the underlying concepts by undergraduate
chemists and chemical engineers in the interdisciplinary field of polymer
science is needed. This is to be accomplished by the coupling of reaction
simulators with experimental design, reactor operation and process measurement.
The equipment is specific for this purpose: 1) microcomputers for simulator
development and studies; 2) computer controlled laboratory reactor for metering
reactants and controlling, monitoring and recording reaction conditions; and 3)
monomer/polymer monitoring equipment for determining conversion. Traditional
polymer lab courses barely touch on the decision making processes behind the
synthesis of various polymers and then only in a qualitative manner. In
addition, the importance of monitoring and controlling the process is typically
overshadowed by the need to measure the polymer properties. These are highly
interdependent and of equal importance. An undergraduate's experience in both
areas is necessary particularly with the increasing importance placed on
communication between the bench chemist and the plant engineer.