* 8852257
* Hawaii Climate Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1989,12/31/1990
* Thomas Giambelluca, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 12/31/1990
* USD 18,552.00

This award provides funds to the department of Geography at the University of
Manoa to purchase equipment to upgrade the physical geography component of the
undergraduate curriculum. The existing curriculum in physical, climatology, and
water resources at the University is focussed on processes in the tropical
environment. Because of the relief, geology, vegetation, and the agricultural
and urban land uses, Hawaii is a microcosm of climatic diversity. It is an ideal
place to study climate. However, full advantage is not being take of this rich
teaching opportunity. The key element missing in the curriculum is direct field
observation (measurement). To exploit the natural laboratory that is Hawaii's
environment, the department needs to acquire the instruments with which students
can monitor and analyze the important processes. This award will help enhance
undergraduate education in geography by providing sets of climate sensors
(measuring wind speed and direction, temperature, humidity, rainfall, net
radiation, solar radiation, and soil heat flux), data recording devices,
computers, and accessory equipment for use by instructors and students. The
purpose of the project is to provide students with a sequence of increasingly
advanced learning experiences through the measurement and interpretation of
environmental data. The grantee institution is matching this NSF award with
funds from non-Federal sources.