* 8852526
* A Versatile Optical Bench for Undergraduate Astronomical    Observations
* MPS,AST
* 02/01/1989,01/31/1991
* Richard Kron, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Pol C. Delosreyes
* 01/31/1991
* USD 41,600.00

An already-successful laboratory program is astronomical observation is to be
expanded so that students will plan their own observing project. They will
construct an instrument by arranging components on an optical bench. This
instrument will be tested in the lab and then taken to the telescope. Possible
configurations include a direct imaging camera; interferometer; polarimeter;
speckle camera; coronagraph; and spectrograph. The detector will be an
intensified CCD (charge-coupled device) camera that can be operated either at
video rate or with accumulation. The former mode allows fast events like
occultations to be observed; the accumulation mode allows observation of faint
objects. An integration can be stored as a disk file for subsequent analysis.
Data can also be stored on video tape, and displayed for larger groups with a
wide-screen television. This capability will provide a concrete model of the
scientific techniques, and will moreover provide excellent opportunities for
undergraduate research. This program is enabled by a new computer-controlled
telescope at The University of Chicago that provides for a horizontal beam and a
fixed focus, thus allowing instrumentation to be easily configured at the
telescope. Matching funds are requested from NSF for the optical bench set-ups,
the intensified CCD camera (including an acquisition/guide camera), and the
video equipment, namely a high-quality recorder and a wide-screen projector. An
upgrade for the current computer is required, especially including greatly
expanded disk space.