* 8852191
* Fluorescence Microscopy for Undergraduate Teaching and      Student Research.
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1988,11/30/1990
* Paul Greenwood, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1990
* USD 33,475.00

The fluorescence microscope has become an essential tool in many areas of
research in the biological sciences. The localization of a variety of cellular
structures using specific fluorescent markers or immunofluorescence is essential
to much of our current understanding of such basic concepts as the cytoskeleton,
cellular motility, and cellular transport phenomena. The aim of this project is
to integrate fluorescence microscopy the into biological curriculum. A state-of-
the-art microscope with capabilities for automatic photomicrography and for
phase-contrast, differential interference-contrast, and incident- light
fluorescence microscopy (in concert with video monitors and cameras and with
additional microscopes with appropriate capabilities) is being used in the
laboratories of several courses. The major application is in a new course in
Cellular Dynamics where fluorescence microscopy enables undergraduates to
investigate the regulation of a variety of cytoskeleton-mediated events and
receptor- mediated endocytosis. Additional applications are in the teaching
laboratories associated with courses in Animal Cells, Tissues, and Organs, in
Microbiology, Topics in Molecular Biology, and Genetics. These applications make
it possible for the faculty to stress the integration of biological principles
over a broad spectrum of courses. Thus the project provides students with the
unique opportunity to learn many of the applications of fluorescence microscopy
through experimentation in a variety of laboratories. The grantee institution is
matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.