* 8852608
* Equipment for Teaching and Student Research in Plant Ecologyand Evolutionary Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Mark Schlessman, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1990
* USD 48,900.00

The equipment purchased through this project is to improve laboratory
instruction and enhance opportunities for undergraduate student research in
plant ecology and evolutionary biology. Several functionally related items being
installed include plant growth chambers, balances, a portable photosynthesis
system, a portable leaf area meter, a datalogger, and equipment for extracting
biochemical compounds from plant tissues. This new equipment responds to
increased student interest in ecology and evolutionary biology by assisting the
faculty to (1) introduce new courses in Aquatic Biology and Population Biology,
(2) add a new laboratory component to the existing Evolutionary Biology course,
(3) improve laboratory instruction in five other existing courses, and (4)
increase the kinds of projects that students may conduct as independent
research. In the instructional laboratories, the new equipment is being used in
a variety of exercises that include investigations of the effects of
environmental parameters on plant growth, development, and metabolism in both
natural environments and under controlled conditions; experimental studies of
plant competition under controlled environmental conditions; and studies of the
inheritance of traits affected by many genes (quantitative traits). The grantee
institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.