* 8852452
* RULE:  Revitalized Undergraduate Laboratory Environment
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* Albert Starling, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 08/31/1991
* USD 28,691.00

This project is called RULE: Revitalized Undergraduate Laboratory Environment.
It is the first phase of the development of resources envisioned to eventually
embrace the whole curriculum with an integrated environment that brings all
computing resources to undergraduate students through the same man-machine
interface. This interface will evolve in an upwardly compatible way from the one
developed by Xerox PARC and popularized by Apple Macintosh. They will begin the
first phase by building a networked Macintosh SE laboratory to support
programming I and II, files processing, data structures and algorithm analysis
and the computer organization and computer networks courses. The project will be
an innovative one coupling Karel the Robot programming teaching environment with
Modula-2 as the programming language in programming I. These courses will be
joined by the remainder of the core courses and many electives in the second
phase of development. That phase will include IBM 370 assembler programming on
the Macintosh once they complete the cross-assembler, and the University reaches
their building with the evolving campus computing network. This second phase
will support most of the upper-division courses on more powerful, workstation
class Mac II machines. Although they have a different architecture, the human
interface is the same. That is why the Macintosh SE was chosen for the first
phase that comprises this project; it is part of an evolving, comprehensive
environment for computing.