* 8852615
* Instrumenting a New Integrated Cellular/Molecular Biology   Laboratory for Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Marian Kaehler, Luther College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 13,514.00

Molecular and Cellular Biology are viewed by this department as the primary
instrumentation courses offered to majors. These courses are being integrated
into a two-semester sequence, and have an extensive laboratory component located
in a new molecular biology laboratory. Instruments with three experimental
capabilities are being added or upgraded in order to maximize the effectiveness
of students' experience: (a) polarographic equipment, (b) an ELISA plate reader
and (c) equipment for quantitative assessment of gel electrophoresis runs
utilizing photography, densitometry and autoradiography. A quality laboratory
experience should provide students with opportunities to do quantitative work as
opposed to mere exercises for illustrating the principle or mechanism of a
specific technique. This equipment permits a sophisticated level of hands-on
experimentation, introducing students to the current concepts, terminology and
techniques of the field. In addition to strengthening the Molecular and Cellular
Biology courses, the instrumentation is enhancing laboratory work in Immunology,
Endocrinology and Genetics, and significantly broadening the scope of Directed
Student Research offered as part of the Biology curriculum. The grantee
institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.