* 8852739
* A Core Facility for Teaching Undergraduate Cellular and     Molecular Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Peter Russell, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 93,560.00

The recent impacts of molecular and cellular biology on the theoretical
framework of every biological subdiscipline are causing large numbers of
undergraduates in this department of enroll in cellular and molecular biology
courses. Sophisticated aspects of molecular and cellular theory presented in
lecture require students to reference the current literature frequently, and to
engage in appropriate laboratory exercises. These pressures made previously
available instructional instrumentation grossly inadequate, forcing the use of
obsolete experimental designs. This project is alleviating these difficulties by
providing two refrigerated centrifuges, an ultracentrifuge and rotors, an
inverted fluorescence photomicroscope, eight horizontal electrophoresis
stations, a DNA sequencing system, apparatus for the separation of chromosome-
sized DNA fragments, deep freeze, incubator/shaker, five UV/VIS recording
spectrophotometers, vacuum oven, photographic recording system for agarose gels,
and a water purification system. The result is to provide sufficient numbers of
modern centrifuges and spectrophotometers to execute smoothly laboratory
experiments on subcellular fractionation, enzyme reaction kinetics, and
molecular cloning; to permit curricular change in the form of advanced
laboratory exercises such as macromolecular localization and DNA sequencing; and
to make available state-of-the-art instrumentation for student research projects
in all fields of biology. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with
an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.