* 8852993
* A Modern Technology Telescope for Undergraduate Student     Projects and Research
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Daniel Caton, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 100,000.00

A modern telescope that incorporates many advanced technology features will be
acquired for use by undergraduate physics/astronomy majors. These students will
use the telescope to learn research techniques in observational astronomy, in
addition to acquiring valuable original scientific data. Students will make
their own observations, analyze the data, and prepare the results for
publication. In addition, they will learn first-hand the operation of modern
astronomical instrumentation. The telescope will be installed at Appalachian
State University's Dark Sky Observatory, located in the mountains of western
North Carolina. The telescope will be equipped with a variety of auxillary
instruments, which exist presently or which will be acquired with university
funds. These include a photometer to measure the brightness of variable stars
and a CCD video camera to acquire images of stars, galaxies, quasars, and
comets. A spectrograph will be used to obtain stellar spectra of sufficient
quality to determine a star's spectral type (temperature and size). Observations
and instrument control will be done remotely from a warm-room, in much the same
style as modern research observatories. Students will also explore the
possibility of remote control of the observatory from campus, via
telecommunications. Thus, the newer and larger telescope will not only replace
the function of the obsolete telescopes currently at the site, but it will also
take a great step forward into the next generation of telescope instrumentation.
The grantee institution is matching he NSF award with an equal sum obtained from
non-Federal sources.