* 8852285
* Plastics Processing Laboratory for Undergraduate            Instruction
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1990
* Kamal Sinha, Rowan College of South Jersey -- Cumberland Campus
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 12/31/1990
* USD 97,095.00

Cumberland County has traditionally been the center for glass manufacturing in
New Jersey. Almost 60 percent of the local economy was directly and indirectly
related to the glass industry. In recent years a variety of factors, including
high energy costs, foreign competition, consumer acceptance of plastic, have
contributed to a sharp decline in this sector of the county's economy. Plant
closings and large scale layoffs raised the local unemployment rate in 1984-85
to 18 percent. Cumberland County is consistently ranked as one of the top 10
unemployment areas in the country. Plastics manufacturing has begun to become an
important aspect of the regional manufacturing base. Since a 1983 report on the
industry was prepared by the New Jersey Department of Commerce and Economic
Development, the number of plastic manufacturers in Cumberland County has
doubled and the work force has increased by 53 percent. As the number of
plastics manufacturers increase, the need for a skilled work force also
increases. To meet this need the college has established a laboratory facility
to support the offering of a new course, Processing of Plastics. This course is
a core requirement in a new program for a Plastics Processing Technician
Certificate Program which is serving both undergraduate students who will
transfer and those who are working in the local area. The laboratory facility is
giving the students hands-on experience in understanding the principles of
processing plastics on machinery and test apparatus; in the melt flow
characteristics of typical resins in extrusion, injection molding, and
compression molding; and in the testing of melt flow and physical properties of
plastics in accord with commercial methods of characterization and assurance for
the use in production. The grantee is matching the award from non-Federal
sources.