* 8852897
* Instrumentation to Improve Undergraduate Laboratory and     Field Studies in Organismic Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Bernard Possidente, Skidmore College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 7,704.00

In the area of organismic biology, this department offers courses ranging from
physiology to genetics to ecology. If students are to fully appreciate the scope
of these topics, they must become actively engaged in laboratory and field
studies using current techniques. The goal of this project is to incorporate an
EGC controlled-environment chamber, a HACH spectrophotometer, a Sartorius top
loading balance with computer interface capability (all for laboratory use), a
HACH portable testing "laboratory" and a LICOR data logging system (for field
use) into the department's instructional program. These instruments are
significantly improving laboratory and field instruction in organismic biology,
particularly in physiology and ecology, by allowing students to experience
first-hand such concepts as the effects of temperature on physiological
processes and on population growth rates, and the nature of nutrient dynamics in
aquatic and terrestrial ecosystems. Students also benefit from seeing how up-to-
date equipment and research techniques are applied to examining modern
biological hypotheses. Courses at the introductory, intermediate and advanced
levels are affected, as is the senior thesis research program. The grantee
institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.