* 8852421
* Biomaterials Testing Laboratory
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1991
* David Reynolds, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1991
* USD 36,472.00

This project describes biomaterials testing as a laboratory experience. This
laboratory would be taught in conjunction with a course in biomaterials science
and engineering which is currently given as a lecture with no associated lab.
Experiments using the proposed materials testing equipment include static
tension and compression tests, tests of viscoelastic properties including stress
relaxation and dynamic (oscillatory) tests, and fatigue testing. Biomaterials
tested will be biological as well as man-made implant materials. Thus materials
tested will range from tendon and bone specimens to implantable polymers,
ceramics, metals and composites. The equipment specified is adequate and
necessary to perform the above testing. Theory of the above tests and models for
mechanical behavior of materials are discussed in the lecture portion of course,
thus student will get practical experience as well as see application of theory
in performing the laboratory experiments. Formal lab reports will be written by
students and typed, preferably on department-supplied work processing software
and PC's. PC-based data acquisition and real-time monitor display of signals
from the equipment are supplied. Readily available floppy disk data storage and
subsequent retrieval and data analysis/graphics software will also be provided.