* 8852671
* Instructional Equipment to Improve Undergraduate Molecular  and Cellular Biology Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Harry Wistrand, Agnes Scott College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 32,545.00

To provide students with experimental knowledge of key aspects of cellular
structure and function, this department is adding laboratory exercises to its
cellular and molecular biology programs. Laboratory work is being provided for
the first time in conjunction with Molecular Genetics; a project in molecular
genetics is being added to Micro- biology; improved experiments in cellular
biochemistry, respiration, and photosynthesis are being introduced into the
Cellular Physiology and Biochemistry laboratories. These laboratory improvements
required the new equipment that is being provided through this project. The
equipment includes: gel electrophoresis and blotting equipment, a sequencing gel
reader, two centrifuges, a refrigerator, a -70*C freezer, water baths, a gel
photographic unit, an analytical balance, a table-top autoclave, an orbital
platform shaker for gel staining procedures, a microprocessor- controlled UV-
visible spectrophotometer, a tissue homogenizer, and oxygen-monitoring systems.
With this equipment, students can do investigations in areas previously studied
only through lectures and reading. The combination of theoretical and
experimental understanding of cellular biology made possible by the new
laboratory activities provides preparation essential to their pursuit of
advanced degrees and careers in the life sciences. The grantee institution is
matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.