* 8852366
* Computer Based Data Acquisition for Projects in Mechanical  Engineering
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/15/1988,04/30/1991
* Gale Buzzard, Duke University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 04/30/1991
* USD 31,158.00

The mechanical design and laboratory curriculum in the fields of fluid and
thermal science and system controls will be enhanced with the acquisition of
five Personal System 2 workstations. These workstations will be equipped with
Keithley data acquisition systems and transducers capable of performing
engineering measurements, such as temperature of a solid or fluid, flow rate of
a fluid, pressure, displacement or force. These measurements will be used to
implement control algorithms or optimize designs for different student projects.
This is significant in that it gives undergraduate engineers a state- of-the-art
data acquisition and control environment in which to develop individual projects
in fluid and thermal science and design. The equipment is easy to use; students
need only understand BASIC programming to do projects. Once theory and
analytical materials are covered in the classroom, algorithms for measurement
and control can be derived and implemented very quickly, and complicated
measurements can be performed to confirm analytical predictions and test design
prototypes. These systems permit early creativity for students because assembly
language programming and advanced circuit design do not need to be mastered to
build "smart" projects. They can move directly to actual design and construction
of mechanical engineering systems.