* 8852969
* Biology Laboratory Equipment to Support Undergraduates'     Studies of the Health Problems in Black Americans
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1991
* Dorene Petrosky, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1991
* USD 21,360.00

Laboratory exercises for various courses are being developed to illustrate
underlying biological principles related to major health problems in Black
Americans. These activities include electrophoresis of normal and sickle cell
hemoglobin, fluorescent antibody demonstration of proteins associated with
Graves disease and sickle cell patients, cardiovascular system activities
related to hypertension in Black Americans, and biochemical tests to illustrate
diabetes, lactose intolerance, and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
deficiency. Four student stations for electrophoresis experiments, biochemical
studies and microscopic work are being set up. In addition, two analytical
balances, two pH meters, two variable speed centrifuges, one inverted phase
microscope, one fluorescent phase video microscope for class demonstration, and
one transfer hood are being installed. Capabilities for the hypertension studies
already are available. The project motivates all students, especially
minorities, to maintain their efforts in pursuing a biomedically-related career.
In addition, the laboratory activities developed will be made available as a
laboratory manual for other institutions. The grantee institution is matching
the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.