* 8852667
* Enhancement of the Teaching of Instrumental Methods through Fluorescence Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1988,05/31/1991
* Dennis Rushforth, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 05/31/1991
* USD 21,110.00

One goal of experimental instrumentation courses should be to teach students of
chemistry how to use high resolution, high sensitivity equipment. Students
should have the opportunity of making measurements near the limit of
detectability of this type of instrument and be required to do it well. Most
students that continue in chemistry will find that an important part of their
time is spent either in making such measurements or in interpreting them. Sadly,
students are often taught to make such measurements on older equipment or on
teaching equipment. Often the instrument itself is the biggest source of error
in the experiment and students learn how to blame the instrument rather than use
it. To challenge students to do their best and to strengthen the instrumentation
courses, a high sensitivity, high resolution spectrofluorometer is being used in
instrumental analysis and in physical chemistry. The technique is easy to learn
and the instrument is modestly priced. The technique is more sensitive than
absorption spectroscopy and is providing a myriad of applications for teaching
principles through experimentation rather than just teaching how to turn on a
machine. The equipment is also offering an opportunity for interesting and
challenging undergraduate research projects. The grantee is matching the award
from non-Federal funds.