* 8852416
* Microcomputer-Controlled Instrumentation for an Undergraduate Physiology Laboratory
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Edmund Tong, Wheaton College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 17,370.00

Although the implementation of computer use in undergraduate education had
successfully permeated every facet of this department's curriculum, the
microcomputer application to data acquisition and analysis had not yet been
initiated systematically. Outdated physiological instruments had started to
become a hindrance to the full development of the instructional program. With
equipment proved through this project, the faculty is revising and upgrading the
student work stations with microcomputer-interfaced instrumentation.
Modernization of the Introductory Physiology lab benefits many related upper-
level courses. Students are able to engage in hands-on experimentation with
improved quality and quantity. They also gain easier access to computer
simulations and computer-aided lessons. Furthermore, they have a chance to learn
and master state-of-the-art techniques in data acquisition and analysis.
Finally, the new instrumentation permits new experiments and research projects
to be developed for independent research and senior honors work, an important
part of the institution's ongoing efforts to provide its women a strong basic
science foundation for graduate studies and subsequent careers in science. The
grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from
non-Federal sources.