* 8852385
* Undergraduate Equipment for Applying Qualitative and        Quantitative Analysis to Environmental Monitoring
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Susan Libes, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 20,767.00

This Marine Science Department recently developed an area of emphasis in Marine
Analytical Technology (MAT), the aim of which is to produce environmental
technicians. Particular emphasis has been given to acquisition of organizational
and analytical skills needed to monitor environmental quality and to assess the
impacts of pollutants. This grant provides funds to purchase equipment needed to
measure a variety of federally-recognized Priority One Pollutants using methods
approved by the Environmental Protection Agency. The equipment required is a gas
chromatograph for pesticide, PCB and PAH analysis, a graphite furnace for heavy
metal analysis, and a silica cell for petroleum-hydrocarbon fingerprinting. The
latter two pieces of equipment are accessories to equipment already on hand,
i.e. an atomic absorption spectrophotometer and an infrared spectrophotometer,
respectively. The machines will be used in laboratory courses required in the
MAT program, as well as in elective courses and in undergraduate independent
research projects. The increasing amounts of environmental management being
conducted in this country and worldwide assure a large ongoing demand for well
trained environmental technicians. Thus this project is significant in that it
supports a program expressly designed to teach students highly marketable
science/technology-based skills that can be acquired during the undergraduate
years. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with a slightly greater
sum obtained from non-Federal sources.