* 8852393
* Computer-Mediated Undergraduate Laboratories for Animal     Physiology and Neurobiology
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1988,11/30/1990
* Richard Manalis, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 11/30/1990
* USD 28,701.00

Physiology work stations which consist of modern data-taking equipment and
Macintosh computers (which are well-known for their user-friendliness) are
significantly improving the teaching of undergraduate students in this
department. Microcomputers used as scientific instruments in undergraduate
teaching laboratories are perceived as being user-unfriendly by most students.
This problem has been greatly reduced by the recent introduction of MACLAB by
World Precision Instruments. MACLAB converts a Macintosh computer into a digital
oscilloscope or chart recorder. One of the work stations in this project has a
Macintosh II computer which functions not only as a digital recorder but also as
a file server to the other computers in the network. This allows physiology
teachers to be innovative. For example, they are able to display previously
recorded experiments in class. Students can take physiology laboratory
examinations ("lab practicals") using MACLAB. The high gain preamplifier (model
6132) manufactured by Palmer Bioscience is a versatile instrument which
functions as an interface between a physiological transducer or a membrane
potential measuring circuit and the MACLAB. The work stations are used by
students enrolled in introductory biology, animal physiology, neurobiology, and
undergraduate research. All major pieces of equipment are commercially
available, thereby facilitating the incorporation of similar work stations into
biology departments at other institutions. The grantee institution is matching
the NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.