* 8852645
* Modernization of Experiments and Expansion of Undergraduate Instrument Techniques with an FT-IR Spectrometer
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Charles James, University of North Carolina at Asheville
* Standard Grant
* Majorie A. Enneking
* 01/31/1991
* USD 29,576.00

A Fourier Transform infrared spectrometer (FT-IR) is giving the students hands-
on experience with modern infrared instrumentation and current infrared sampling
techniques. With the spectrometer's integral computer the students are being
exposed to computer controlled instrumentation and computer analysis of data
earlier in their course work. The principles introduced by exposure of students
to the FT-IR are forming the basis of explanation of other instruments using
transform methods or which are interfaced to computers. The spectrometer with
its accessories is allowing the students to expand their analysis experience
with mixtures, opaque solids, powders, and surfaces using reflectance
techniques. The aqueous liquid cell is making possible the routine vibrational
analysis of aqueous solutions. Current experiments in the department are being
modified and new experiments are being produced for undergraduate students which
are taking into account the capabilities of an FT-IR spectrometer, computer
analysis of spectra and reflectance techniques for analysis. The range,
sensitivity, and resolution of the instrument is also being used by students
doing undergraduate research in organometallic synthesis and molecular
structure. The grantee is matching the award from non-Federal sources.