* 8853192
* Improvement of the Undergraduate Comparative Histology      Laboratory Experience
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Allan Wolfe, Lebanon Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 21,462.00

Most of the students who enroll in the Histology course and its associated
laboratory are biology majors with plans to pursue graduate degrees or to attend
professional schools. Historically, the laboratory part of this course included
the study of prepared slides of various tissue types and organ systems, as well
as the routine procedures for the histological and histochemical staining of
paraffin- embedded tissues. The laboratory experience then culminated in a
project which utilized some of the techniques learned in the course and was
presented in a poster format. Redesigning this course to improve laboratory
study at the cellular biology level -- fluorescence microscopy, ultrastructural
studies, immunohistochemistry, and plastic embedding -- provides biology majors
as well as biochemistry majors with a strong morphological background at the
cell level for their advanced molecular and biochemical courses. This improved
course retains the study of basic tissue types, organ system histology, and the
completion of a project. To make room for these proposed newer cell
biology/histology techniques, a careful culling of prepared slides was required.
Previously, the histology course provided a large number of students with the
impetus to pursue independent study projects. By expanding the exposure of more
students to a wider variety of techniques, this program stimulates even greater
interest in pursuing cell biology- or histology-related projects. The grantee
institution is matching the NSF awarded with an equal sum obtained from non-
Federal sources.