* 8853115
* Hardware/Software Interface Lab for Computer Science
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1989,08/31/1991
* John Werth, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 08/31/1991
* USD 33,945.00

The aim of this project is the development of a standardized course on
hardware/software interfaces appropriate for students in a computer science
curriculum. This would be an upper division class requiring courses in digital
logic, machine organization and computer architecture and affecting 500 students
over the next five years at the University of Texas. With the aid of the
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, the Department of Computer
Sciences has identified an appropriate curriculum, a set of laboratory exercises
and laboratory equipment for the class. The basic unit in such a laboratory is a
large, hard disk based microcomputer built around a modern chip and bus
structure and having an open system architecture.. Ten Macintosh IIs will be
used for this purpose. Other items are an oscilloscope and multimeter for each
station, appropriate software, a logic analyses, prom burner, and printing
capabilities. This project is significant because it represents a cooperative
effort between Electrical Engineering and Computer Science. The practical goal
is to structure a course which can be supported by faculty and technical staff
of a typical computer science department. The pedagogical goal is to teach
concepts and uses of mixed hardware/software systems while maintaining a
computer science perspective on software development and systems organization. A
joint committee from electrical engineering and computer science will evaluate
and guide the development of the class. This process should guarantee that the
course will be valuable as a model to other computer science departments.