* 8853268
* Instrumentation to Support Interdisciplinary Undergraduate  Studies in Neurobiology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Gilbert Fairbanks, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 41,255.00

With help from the instruments obtained through this project, the Biology and
Psychology Departments are increasing their interdisciplinary approach to
neurobiological studies. The two departments already share labs and animal room
facilities and cross- fertilize one another's laboratory exercises in
Physiological Psychology and Histology. In the latter case, lesioned rat brains
are microscopically examined in the Histology lab. The present project is
fostering the further development of this type of cooperation. With a new
Biology faculty member who is acquainted with fluorescent microscopy, studies of
brain neurotransmitters are being incorporated into several course. With new
computer-interfaced instrumentation, the Psychology Department is able to
improve undergraduates' laboratory work in electrophysiology. Through the
sharing of this equipment, techniques perfected in the Psychology Department
have become available to students in Physiology courses. Additional instruments
enable the Psychology Department to include in its laboratory program some EEG
and biofeedback studies, while enabling the Biology Department to update the
performance level and reliability of its physiological monitoring equipment. The
requested equipment also enhances undergraduate research projects already
boosted by a highly effective DANA Foundation program which financially supports
undergraduates doing summer research. The grantee institution is matching the
NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.