* 8853032
* Fluorescence Microscope with Computer Linkage to Support    Undergraduate Studies in Physiology, Genetics &amp; Anatomy
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* David Quinn, Muskingum College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 14,421.00

The goal of this project is to provide students an opportunity to conduct
experiments with biological phenomena at the cellular and molecular levels. The
major new equipment includes a Nikon fluorescence microscope-camera system, a
cryostat, and computer equipment linked to the fluorescence microscope through a
closed- circuit video system for image analysis. Fluorescence markers are used
to study , e.g., human, animal and plant chromosomes, cellular development and
brain pathways. Some current student research projects involve the activation of
genes in the hippocampus, tracing neural pathways in the brain, verification of
success of transplantation of adrenal medulla tissue to the brain, sexual
differentiation in the spinal cord, and analysis of muscle cell changes
following the administration of anabolic steroids and exercise. The computer
equipment is being linked to the fluorescence microscope and image analysis
programs written to support the various experimental protocols. Students can
explore the molecular basis of life in the laboratory, becoming proficient with
equipment that is linked to computer systems while experiencing the increased
experimental design and analysis capabilities available through such systems.
This new equipment is enhancing biological laboratory work in Physiology,
Genetics and Evolution, Introduction to Biology, and undergraduate student
research. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum
obtained from non-Federal sources.