* 8853306
* Supersonic Windtunnel Digital Measurement and Imaging       Laboratory
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/15/1988,11/30/1992
* Tim Turner, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 11/30/1992
* USD 26,800.00

Equipment to improve an undergraduate laboratory in the thermal and fluid
sciences will be provided. In light of our nation's renewed interest is
supersonic and hypersonic flight, the teaching of compressible fluid mechanics
is of paramount importance. In addition, the rapid pace of technology has given
the science and engineering community new tools with which the student must be
familiar. The Supersonic Windtunnel Digital Measurement and Imaging Laboratory
satisfies these two needs in a unique way. The heart of the project is a high
Reynolds number, supersonic windtunnel, exhausting to atmospheric pressure and
capable of attaining Mach 2.5 and Reynolds numbers exceeding one million. It is
a blowdown facility that relies on modern, fast-response, computer-controlled
instrumentation. Since the typical run time is only a few seconds, only
instruments capable of quickly making and storing measurements are useful. The
main instruments required are a multiple-channel pressure scanner, a digital
computer for control, data acquisition, and analysis, and the equipment making
up the unique digital imaging unit. The purpose of this last unit is to take
snapshots of the flow in one of several useful optical modes (e.g., Schlieren to
observe the shock structure, and shadowgraphy for single gas turbulence or
multiple gas mixing). A pulse YAG laser illuminates the flow periodically, then
the image is captured by a CCD camera, digitized, and stored in the controlling
computer which allows subsequent image processing of the data.