* 8853233
* Undergraduate Investigative Laboratories for Understanding  Physiological Systems.
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1990
* Mary Connell, Appalachian State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/1990
* USD 20,724.00

The areas of cellular/molecular biology and physiology are becoming
increasingly difficult to teach because of the rapid advance of knowledge and
the technical methodologies they employ. Compounding the already difficult task
of instruction is the students' lack of understanding of how to investigate
physiological systems. These facts lead to the two main objectives addressed in
the present effort to improve instruction in the affected laboratories: (1) To
give students experience with suitable equipment in order to develop their
understanding the behavior of physiological systems (using an instrument not
only develops a student's lab skills; it encourages the development of a
sophisticated understanding of the concept or system which can't happen in any
other way). (2) To provide the student with a laboratory experience that is
investigative in nature. In order to accomplish these objectives, the
cellular/molecular and physiology labs are being restructured by developing
three different types of labs; Concepts-Skills, Inquiry, and Investigative labs.
These facilitate the exploration of topics in the lab which previously could be
pursued only in lecture. The above changes are intended to: 1) increase the
student' understanding of the conceptual framework upon which a physiological/
cellular/molecular investigation is based; 2) increase the students' ability to
work with the type and quality of data gathered in cellular/ molecular and
physiological investigations; 3) develop in the students a sense of inquiry,
understanding and appreciation of the functional aspects of cellular/molecular
biology and physiology; and 4) increase the students' own investigative
abilities. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum
obtained from non-Federal sources.