* 8853195
* Computer Integrated Instruction in Civil Engineering at WPI:Workstation Network
* ENG,EFMA
* 11/15/1988,07/31/1991
* Paramasivam Jayachandran, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
*   name not available
* 07/31/1991
* USD 90,415.00

Resources will be used to establish an undergraduate teaching classroom. This
classroom will center around the UNIX based scientific workstations for the
purpose of enhancing engineering analysis and design. The specific objectives
center around the conversion of existing programs for use on the UNIX systems,
incorporation of new programs which will soon be released for the UNIX system,
and thirdly the development of new programs. It is planned to evaluate an
integrated analysis and design project which runs throughout the student's
sophomore, junior, and senior year and is interdisciplinary in nature. An
example engineering project includes a bridge or water treatment plant and how
the material taught in each of the specific engineering courses would relate to
the ultimate planning analysis, design and construction of this project. In
order to establish this plan, a computer classroom with the computational
capabilities of networked scientific work stations, file servers, and
peripherals is needed. Starting in the sophomore year simple analysis
applications covered in the basic courses will be translated to specific project
topics. In sequential courses such as soil mechanics, foundation design, steel
design, concrete design, hydraulics, hydrology, transportation, etc. the
concepts covered will be translated to the specific project. This project will
be a coherent computer-based analysis and design experience for the students
running through several courses.