* 8853346
* Computer-Interfaced Physiological Equipment for Under-      graduate Instruction
* EHR,DUE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Donn Martin, Texas Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 28,220.00

The objectives of this project are to give students experience with state-of-
the-art analytical equipment, and to increase their familiarity with
quantitative biology. To address these issues, this department is equipping its
physiology laboratory with four computer- interfaced data acquisition systems
with physiological monitors for the measurement of bioelectrical and
biomechanical activities. These data acquisition systems, supported by the
appropriate software, are capable of data storage, analysis, manipulation, and
retrieval. The simulation capabilities of the computer may be exploited also for
the visualization of equations used for modeling various physiological
processes. Students then may compare the theoretical and actual outputs of each
physiological system studied. Processes to be studied using this equipment
include muscle, skin, and nerve activity, cardiovascular physiology,
respiration, and glandular secretion. Mastery of this equipment provides the
undergraduate with a background for understanding the operation principles of
other types of equipment using the sensor/transducer/ amplifier/ recorder
component series. The simulation experience helps students to bridge the
conceptual gap between real physiological processes and their mathematical
models. The grantee institution is matching the NSF award with an equal sum
obtained from non-Federal sources.