* 8853156
* Integrated Senior Projects Laboratory for Parallel          Computing, Computer Graphics, and Software Engineering
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1989,08/31/1991
* Woodrow Robbins, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald L. Engel
* 08/31/1991
* USD 70,400.00

The complexity of technical fields like Computer Science has grown so rapidly
that traditional undergraduate labs no longer present adequate representations
of contemporary work. This gap is often filled by work-study programs which
supply realism but generally do not identify and reinforce fundamental
principles. Weakness in undergraduate labs is due in part to inadequate
equipment, but more generally, complexity often exceeds that which any one
student can be expected to master in a structured project environment. A
solution to this dilemma being developed by the NCSU CSC Dept. is a
collaborative senior projects lab which emulates the scope and complexity of an
R&D organization yet is carefully supervised by teaching faculty. A small but
powerful parallel computer and high performance color graphics system will be
acquired and integrated with existing, conventional computing support. Advanced
applications of this system will require students specializing in computer
graphics, software engineering and parallel computing to join forces to solve
problems none could have attempted in isolation on equipment that would be
difficult to justify for any single, specialized lab. the interplay of theory
and practice from three typically distinct subjects will enrich the lab
experience for each student and provide realistic complexity without losing
sight of basic principles.