* 8853142
* Undergraduate Biology and Chemistry Instrumentation for Freshman and Sophomore Laboratories
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1988,01/31/1991
* Don Plantz, Mohave Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 11,165.00

The goal of this project is to modernize and improve freshman and sophomore
biology and chemistry laboratories on the three campuses of a remote two-year
college that enrolls large numbers of Native Americans, many of whom are female.
The new equipment being incorporated into the teaching program includes plant
growth chambers, marine aquaria and computer-interfaced physiology
instrumentation. The environmental chambers enhance the school's ability to
conduct General Biology laboratory experiments involving plant competition and
animal metabolism. The salt-water aquaria are used to expose General Biology
students (most of whom are completely unfamiliar with the ocean) to marine
invertebrates. The computer-interfaced physiology instrumenta- tion vastly
improves second-year students' opportunities to collect data that quantify the
adaptive responses of animals to varying stimuli. The importance of this
instrumentation is that its use in undergraduate laboratory instruction provides
more effective teaching of scientific methods for understanding the environment.
A practical grasp of how scientific methods are used by investigators is
important for both science and non-science majors, and environmental topics hold
a special interest for this audience. The grantee institution is matching the
NSF award with an equal sum obtained from non-Federal sources.