* 8853169
* Computer Interfacing to Bioinstrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/1988,11/30/1991
* Edward Pivorun, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne G. Rodewald
* 11/30/1991
* USD 32,277.00

The funds from this award will provide the biological sciences at Clemson
University with the instrumentation necessary to instruct students in 1) the
techniques utilized for interfacing instruments with microcomputer and 2)
systems for the monitoring for biological data. The grant will supply funds for
the purchase of 10 computers, 10 A/D interfacing boards with software, 10
amplifiers and the various transducers needed to transport biological
information to the amplifier and computer. Funds will also be used for
procurement of electronics and transducer components for configuration of
student stations that will allow for the direct "hands on" experience in the
understanding of the basic electronics associated with transducer interfacing to
biological systems. An extensive "hands on" approach to the use of
bioinstrumentation will be available to the students with theory behind the
instruments and their limitations stressed in the lectures and the laboratory of
a bioinstrumentation course. The students will be exposed to the basis
electronics and limitations of transducers, amplifiers and input circuits to the
microcomputer. In addition to providing the students with the circuits,
amplifiers and transducers needed for the configuration of computerized
physiology monitoring systems in this course, students will have these
monitoring stations available in the various physiology courses. Portions of the
lab exercises from the bioinstrumentation course will also be utilized in the
physiology labs to provide the student with a working knowledge of the basics of
transducers, amplifiers nd computer interfacing hardware. The grantee
institution is matching this NSF award with funds from non-Federal sources.