* 8853215
* An Introductory Computer Science Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1988,10/31/1990
* Richard Molnar, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Bonnee Groover
* 10/31/1990
* USD 39,186.00

In addition to revising the course content of introductory computer science,
this project revises the computer science laboratory experience so that it is
highly structured. Unlike the laboratory component of physical and natural
science courses, computing labs tend to be informal. Students are given
programming assignments which they complete on their own time. Frequently,
laboratory sessions are not scheduled. This project introduces a highly
structured lab into the introductory course where a large screen projection
system is used to give demonstrations and preplanned lab activities are designed
to clarify a concept, demonstrate and idea or teach a skill. The laboratory
hardware consists of Macintosh II computers that are networked, the software is
the UNIX operating system and Turbo Pascal. This project also substantially
revises the introductory computer science course content in the courses for both
non-majors and majors. The course for non-majors, rather than being the typical
"appreciation" course, is an integrated survey of the fundamental and central
principles of computer science. For example, students are exposed to a Turing
Machine simulator where they can observe and experiment with this model. The
course for majors is revised from being only a programming course to one where
students are exposed to a vast collection of software development resources such
as: syntax-directed editors, hierarchical file systems, windowing systems, code
profilers, optimizers, assertion checkers, on-line documentation and help
packages, and network mail. This award is being matched by an equal sum from the
grantee.