* 8854199
* Workshop on Modeling Methods in Biological Resource         Conservation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1990
* Robert McKelvey, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 04/30/1990
* USD 97,917.00

This is a workshop on the use of mathematical and computer models in biological
resource conservation. It is designed to bring together an interdisciplinary
group of college teachers, in ecology and population biology, biological
resource management, and applied mathematics. The purpose of the workshop is to
involve the participants in the techniques of biological modeling, to enhance
their effectiveness in presenting modeling methods in the classroom, and to
encourage the use of interdisciplinary modeling approaches to broad scientific
questions. About 25 college and university faculty will participate in two
sessions. The main four-week session will be held in August, 1988, with a one
week follow-up session the following June. During the intervening academic year
each participant will undertake an individual project at his or her home
institution, and these will be reported on and discussed in the follow-up. In
the main four-week session, participants will be introduced to some of the
principal issues of conservation biology, and to modeling techniques for their
analysis. The session will culminate in a group modeling project, analyzing the
conservation biology of the Black-Footed Ferret. In addition to the NSF funds,
participants' institutions will contribute about 15% in travel costs to the
operation of the project.