* 8854155
* Geographic Information Systems Workshop for Undergraduate   Faculty Enhancement
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1988,01/31/1991
* Ann Maclean, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1991
* USD 68,986.00

Michigan Technological University will operate a series of workshops in the area
of geographic information systems (GIS). The workshops are critical to fill a
need in keeping undergraduate faculty members abreast of new ideas and
techniques utilizing geographic information systems. This will result in the
updating of GIS courses. Hence undergraduates will have the appropriate
knowledge and training for employment as a GIS specialist. Two two-week
workshops will be held at the School of Forestry and Wood Products, Michigan
Technological University, Houghton, Michigan. The workshops will provide the
participants with an opportunity to meet, receive state-of the art information,
gain hands-on experience, exchange ideas, and develop appropriate lectures and
laboratory exercises for undergraduate GIS courses. In addition, attendees will
meet with several GIS managers to see how a GIS operates on a day-to-day basis,
and determine what employees deem important for undergraduate GIS students to
know. Success of the project will be determined by a questionnaire assessing
both the quality of the workshop and the utility of the lecture and lab manual
developed as part of the workshop. In addition to the NSF funds, participants
institutions will provide about 15% in travel costs toward the operation of the
project.