* 8854143
* Undergraduate Faculty Seminar:  Hazardous Waste Incineration
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,01/31/1990
* Louis Theodore, Manhattan College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1990
* USD 62,575.00

Few practicing engineers and scientists, faculty, or students have a working
understanding of the fundamentals and state-or-the-art knowledge of hazardous
waste incineration. The objective of this seminar is to present a course and
develop a problem workbook on hazardous waste incineration to address this need
and resolve this technology gap. The course material will be drawn primarily
from Theodore and Reynolds' 1987 Wiley- Interscience book "Introduction to
Hazardous Waste Incineration." Problems and solutions in the workbook will be
generated by an interdisciplinary team of engineering and applied science
faculty. Topics include: regulatory considerations, stoichiometric and
thermochemical calculations, incinerator design, ancillary equipment, dispersion
calculations, computer software applications, and facilities design. The first
draft of the problem workbook will be prepared during a two week summer seminar
session in 1988. The 1988-89 academic year will provide an opportunity to
classroom-test the effectiveness of the problems in the workbook. A three-day
follow-up summer session in late June of 1989 is also scheduled to provide an
opportunity to revise, update, and edit, the workbook, and finalize production
and distribution plans for implementation in undergraduate engineering and
applied science curricula. In addition to the NSF funds, participants'
institutions will contribute about 10% in travel costs to the operation of the
project. The grantee institution will provide another 20% toward the operation
of the project.