* 8854268
* Workshops on Integrated Engineering Workstations for Scienceand Engineering Faculty
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1990
* Maurice Aburdene, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Nina P. Roscher
* 02/28/1990
* USD 54,097.00

An important aspect of the current crisis in engineering education is the need
to improve the state of undergraduate engineering and science laboratories.
Recent advances in computer and instrumentation technology have increased
computational power and versatility while dramatically reducing cost. Thus the
individual scientist and engineer now has the potential for conducting
experiments with a precision and sophistication not achievable previously.
Industries are already using automated computer-assisted measurement and control
systems to increase productivity and universities are starting to realize the
value of workstations. However, educated faculty are needed to transmit the
capabilities of the workstation to students. Bucknell began the implementation
of engineering workstations across the undergraduate curricula three years ago,
and currently it is using them in most of its engineering laboratories. Bucknell
will conduct two five-day workshops for a total of 40 engineering and science
faculty on the use of integrated engineering workstations in undergraduate
laboratories. The participants will develop an experiment and class material for
implementation at their institution. Bucknell faculty will sustain the
development of the experiments by providing continued interaction through
BITNET. Participants will be educated in current laboratory technologies by
interacting with workstations to perform science and engineering experiments.
The project will emphasize the philosophy and techniques required to develop
modern computer-controlled experiments for students developing a creative
problem-solving ability.