* 8854147
* Advanced Design Methodologies for Large-Scale Electronic    Circuits
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1988,01/31/1990
* Anthony Rigas, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1990
* USD 62,506.00

The fundamental approach to designing, testing, and manufacturing electronic
circuits has changed dramatically in the past decade. This undergraduate faculty
enhancement project is intended to update university science and engineering
faculty on the critical advances that have taken place recently in the area of
electronic circuit design with the intent that participants will take this
material back and immediately build it into their curricula. Phase one of this
project will be held at Michigan State University (M.S.U.), where participants
will receive intensive classroom briefings and gain laboratory experience with
circuit design and circuit test equipment in the newly completed Electronic
Research and Development Laboratory (ERDL). During phase two, participants will
complete designs and prepare a report back at their own schools. During phase
three, M.S.U. will serve as a center of expertise and assist the participants as
they incorporate this new material into their curricula. Included will be at
least one site visit to each participating university /college and a one-day
workshop at M.S.U. Participants will be encouraged to keep in touch with each
other and with the faculty at M.S.U. via electronic mail and other appropriate
means to ensure that experiences gained can be shared. Seeking advice and
sharing information will be encouraged even after the formal project has ended.
In addition to the NSF funds, participants' institutions will contribute about
10% in travel funds toward the cost of the project.