* 8854202
* Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in Chemistry: A Series of Regional Workshops
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1991
* Dabney Dixon, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 10/31/1991
* USD 466,504.00

Georgia State University (GSU) and the Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT)
will operate an Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement project in chemistry for
Georgia and surrounding Southeastern U.S. states. The project will improve the
ability of faculty at two- and four-year, public and private, institutions to
teach a modern program in chemistry. The major activities of the project are 15
one-week workshops and six 2-day mini-symposia. Workshop topics are: (1)
molecular modeling; (2) mass spectrometry; (3) microcomputer-instrument
interfacing; (4) FT NMR; (5) chromatography; (6) application of molecular
orbital theory to organic and inorganic chemistry. Mini-symposia are mini-
courses in: (1) organometallic chemistry and homogeneous catalysis; (2) solid
state chemistry and superconductivity; (3) DNA chemistry and its application to
biotechnology. The workshops and mini-symposia will be taught by GSU and GIT
faculty. Additionally, prominent specialists from other institutions will serve
as keynote speakers. Annual reunions of all participants during the preceding 12
months will also be held to exchange experiences in implementing new methods in
the curriculum. Over a 3 year period 1710 participant days are scheduled. A
compilation of all innovations in the coursework at undergraduate colleges
resulting from the project will be sent to all project participants. In addition
to NSF grant, participants' institutions will contribute about 5% in travel
funds toward the operation of the project.