* 8854161
* A Workshop in Interfacing Microcomputers to Chemical        Instrumentation in the Undergraduate Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Michael Schuyler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1989
* USD 63,823.00

This project will introduce faculty in the physical and life sciences who teach
at four-year colleges to the use of computers in experimental work. The emphasis
will be on learning how computers can be interfaced to instruments and
experimental apparatus for the purposes of experimental control and data
acquisition. The activity will involve both lecture and laboratory work over a
four week period. After an introduction to fundamentals of digital electronics,
signal conditioning, personal computer architecture, and programming,
participants will produce a digital oscilloscope and interface personal
computers to spectrometers and titration apparatus. Topics will include serial
and parallel data transfer, analog sampling principles, and integrated circuit
timers. After the instructional phase of the course, participants will select
among a number of specific applications for further study. Included among these
are examples of interfaces to spectrometers, a liquid chromatography application
featuring computer- controlled valve manipulation, a Fourier transform infrared
spectrometer, an X-ray diffraction spectrometer, and two undergraduate chemistry
experiments which use computers to improve the quality of the data being
collected. The program is intended for faculty who wish to incorporate computer
interfacing into their own teaching of experimental science. In addition to the
NSF funds, participants' institutions will contribute about 5% in travel costs
to the operation of the project.