* 8854197
* Faculty Enhancement for Undergraduate Programs in Manufact- uring Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,06/30/1992
* William Spurgeon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1992
* USD 136,318.00

The program will enhance the knowledge and instructional skills of forty-eight
faculty members in the field of manufacturing engineering. These members will
come from colleges and universities primarily in the midwest. Institutions are
striving to establish undergraduate programs in manufacturing engineering but
are severely handicapped by the shortage of qualified instructors. The shortage
can be alleviated by upgrading existing faculty. The program comprises four
sessions, with intervals of days to weeks to allow for preparatory work. Topic
outlines for the sessions are as follows: Session I: Clinic and Instruction in
Manufacturing Engineering. Program overview. Identification and analysis of
instructional problems. Frameworks for organizing instruction in manufacturing
engineering. Manufacturing operations. Kinds of manufacturing engineers. Five
intensive short courses in the areas of time management, creativity and
innovation, and personal networking. Session II: Productivity- Related Projects.
Simultaneous engineering. Part design for performance and producibility. Part
fabrication. Applications of computers. Preparation of a process specification
manual. Cost reductions. Research frontiers for the process selected. Human
factors. Three laboratory/plant tours. Session III: Product Quality-Related
Factors. Ascertaining what customers want. Design of products for quality.
Quantitative Ishakawa diagrams. Taguchi methods. Preparation of a product
quality manual. Modern nondestructive test methods. Pilot run. Two plant tours.
Session IV: Design and Fabrication of Instructional Aids. Workplace engineering.
Replacement theory. Pros and cons of computers in manufacturing. Manufacturing
management. Visit to the headquarters of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers.
Provision will be made for networking the participants by computer and by
follow-on seminars held annually for three years. In addition to the NSF funds,
participants' institutions will contribute about 5% in travel costs to the
operation of the project.