* 8854223
* Short Course for Undergraduate College Teachers on          Mathematical Modeling
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Gary Grefsrud, Fort Lewis College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1989
* USD 24,681.00

In order to encourage a greater percentage of talented students to pursue
careers in mathematics, the physical sciences, and engineering, college teachers
must be knowledgeable in the applications of mathematics and recent developments
which should be incorporated into the undergraduate curriculum. Instruction to
college teachers of mathematics through summer short courses and workshops has
proven to be one mechanism to accomplish these goals. A week-long short course
will be conducted for undergraduate college teachers of mathematics on the topic
of mathematical modeling. The objectives of the short course are to provide
college teachers in the mathematical sciences with the knowledge necessary to
supplement existing courses with mathematical models, develop mathematical
modeling courses at their home institutions, and educate colleagues through
seminars and workshops. There will be twelve hours of in-class instruction on
models suitable for undergraduate students together with the associate pedagogy.
There will be an additional six hours of in- class discussion in which specific
mathematical models will be developed and participant assignments will be
discussed. Computers and associated software will be used by the instructors and
students in the development and solution of models. In addition to NSF support,
participants will contribute about 15% in travel costs, and staff will
contribute another 15% of their time.