* 8854204
* An Undergraduate Faculty Program in the Social Sciences to  Enhance Quantitative Instruction on American Society
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,04/30/1992
* James Davis, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Haver
* 04/30/1992
* USD 272,256.00

This project will make available recent developments in quantitative research on
American society to undergraduate teachers. These developments are based in the
creation of large data sets on American society, in the application of powerful
statistical techniques to contingency table analysis, and in programming these
techniques for micro-computers. In addition, instructional materials have been
developed in the last few years which facilitate the undergraduate teachers'
task of conveying this knowledge to undergraduates. The convergence of these
developments will be the focus of an interdisciplinary program for enhancing
undergraduate faculty skills. In each of three years, twenty faculty who teach
primarily undergraduates in sociology, political science and American history
will participate in an intensive, seven-day introductory workshop at Harvard
University. The Workshop will be led by James A. Davis, who created the General
Society Survey, contributed to the Development of contingency table analysis and
development of contingency table analysis and developed the micro-computer
programs which make these data and statistical techniques accessible to
undergraduates. Participating faculty will cover the major substantive findings
from the GSS and the National Election Study (NES), statistical techniques and
computer programs which make these findings accessible at the undergraduate
level, and also work with student exercises and data sets created by the staff
of the workshop; that explore these recent developments on microcomputers.
Following the initial Workshop, faculty participants will prepare their own
instructional materials adapting these new developments to their individual
teaching situations. Workshop participants will return within a year for a
shorter Demonstration Workshop in which they discuss the instructional
innovations they have made with other graduates of their workshop and up-date
their knowledge about data and appropriate computer programs. Over the three
years, it is expected that the Programs will have a significant impact on
undergraduate teaching about American Society at the institutions represented.
In addition to the NSF funds, participants' institutions will contribute about
10% in travel costs to the operation of the project.