* 8854218
* ASEE Continuing Education for Engineering Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1988,10/31/1989
* Larry Monteith, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 10/31/1989
* USD 235,617.00

The American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) program, Continuing
Education for Engineering Faculty, consists of 8 short courses directed at
improving the undergraduate engineering faculty's knowledge of new and
developing technical subjects. These concentrated courses will be offered in a
series of 10-day sessions during the summer of 1988 at host university and
industrial sites in the United States, including MIT, Polytechnic University in
New York, Georgia Tech., RPI, University of Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, AT&amp;T
Bell Labs., IBM, Rice University, State University of New York at Binghamton,
and the University of Michigan. Courses will be taught by top faculty members or
industrial instructors, based on well-developed undergraduate courses. Course
offerings will provide engineering faculty with technical and pedagogical
information in fields related to their own specialties. Through lectures, hands-
on laboratory activity, and interaction with instructors, they will learn to
incorporate new material and teaching techniques in revising existing courses
and developing new ones. Evaluation of learning achieved and faculty attitudes
toward the program will be assessed and used for refining the program. Although
current courses are concentrated in electrical engineering and computer science,
future courses will be expanded to include other fields of engineering. In
addition to the NSF funds, participants will contribute about 60% in travel and
subsistence toward the cost of the program. Also, industrial support for 3 of
the courses will provide another 60%. Finally, ASEE and MIT will contribute
about 15% in staff time.