* 8855588
* Field Skills, Activities and Geologic Materials Development for Earth Science Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1995
* Margaret Guccione, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/31/1995
* USD 559,913.00

This project brings together a major content area (geology) taught in earth
science (ES) and its most effective method of study, activities in the field.
Content is emphasized in intensive sessions prior to arrival at the field sites
near Lander, Wyoming and in evenings at the sites. The "hearing about" and
"studying of" classic geology features near Lander will be complemented by doing
geology. Teachers will be doing geology while photographing geological features,
recording field observations and measurements, and collecting specimens for use
in their classes. In addition to the personal journal, slide sets, and
collections; the project will result in a Geology of the State book, a Field
Guide to the Geology of the State, and associated computer software. Following
the 3-week summer field experience the study of local geology will begin and
continue into the fall. Participants will practice their new understanding of
geology while examining the geology of a local site and developing activities to
do with students at the site. They will share their experiences and work at the
local site by presenting at least one in-service program for area teachers.
Field activities begin in the summer of 1989 for 20 Arkansas ES teachers. During
the 65 months of this project, this format is repeated for 20 teachers from
Tennessee, Oklahoma, and Texas. Instruction is by staff from the home university
facilitated by the PI and field camp director for the field experience. Each
state has modified slightly the Arkansas program to meet its needs. Participants
will be middle or high school teachers who have completed at least one 3-
semester course in geology, will be teaching earth science/geology the next
year, have support to conduct a local field trip for students and are given
released time to teach the in-service programs. The synergistic effect of first
hand experiences and teacher ownership of the geology learning tools will
generate enthusiasm for both the teacher and students. The materials customized
for each state provide continuing support for participants and their peers.
Taken as a group they give the project a regional impact. The model of an
intensive field experience coupled with two customized books, focusing on the
state's geology, and an associated computer program maybe a useful geology/earth
science in-service model. There is cost sharing in the amount of $139,462 which
is equal to 25% of the NSF award.