* 8855548
* Elementary Science Education II:  Content/Leadership
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1989,09/30/1991
* Norman Anderson, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 09/30/1991
* USD 259,950.00

The University of Puget Sound proposes a two year project combining content and
leadership training for 64 elementary teachers of grades 3-6 in the Tacoma
Public Schools. A team of two persons/school, a teacher and the principal will
participate in this program which consists of an intensive four-week summer
science content and "hands-on" science teaching for the teachers followed by a
one-week leadership program for teachers and their principals. The four week
program each summer will include several teaching sessions in which the teachers
will teach this "hands-on" science to Science Camp students. These Grade 3-6
students will be given the opportunity to attend this Camp, which will be held
at UPS, at no charge. This provides a unique environment for the teachers to put
the theory into practice, i.e. they will test out their enhanced abilities in
content and teaching strategies under the guidance of the project staff. The
principal/teacher teams will participate in special leadership workshops to
ensure the implementation of the improved science instruction at their schools.
During the school year, eight half-day "networking-follow up" meetings will be
held for the purpose of exchanging information on their science teaching
activities. In October, each team will present their plans for improving science
teaching/learning in their building. In May, they will report on the results of
their efforts. Project staff will be involved in these meetings as well as in
observing each participating teacher at least twice during the school year. An
amount equivalent to 37% of the NSF request has been cost- shared by the
University of Puget Sound and the participating schools.