* 8855542
* Physics and Physical Science Teaching:  A Model for         Excellence
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Dale Long, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/31/1992
* USD 280,664.00

The proposed project is designed to improve the quality of instruction of
physics and physical science in Virginia and neighboring parts of West Virginia
and Tennessee. Program components include: (1) Summer course-work sessions
during the summers of 1989 and 1990. Summer 1989 courses will include physics
fundamentals and techniques for teaching physics concepts. Summer 1990 courses
will be topically oriented and build on the foundation from 1989. Courses will
include Computers in Physics Education, The Physics Around You, Electromagnetic
Devices, and a seminar in current research topics. (2) Academic year 1989-90
activities will include four 8-hour Saturday seminars on campus for sharing
experiences with new techniques, presentations by active researchers, and
workshops on teaching topics to be selected by participants. Academic year
1990-91 will include two more such seminars. (3) Each participant will conduct
or assist in conducting two workshops for other teachers in his/her own
geographical area. A total of 14 such workshops will be held. (4) A Physics
Telephone Hotline will be available on which any teacher may call the Virginia
Tech Physics Department for assistance with a teaching concern. (5) An
electronic bulletin board will be maintained for communication between
participants, staff, and other teachers for sharing ideas, data, and techniques.
Twenty one participants will be recruited -- 1/3 experienced and 2/3
inexperienced. Special attention will be given to teachers from the rural
schools. Visitation of each participant's school by faculty provided the primary
evaluation of the program. Cost-sharing is approximately 28% of the National
Science Foundation request.