* 8855618
* MicroObservatory
* EDU,DRL
* 05/15/1989,04/30/1992
* Owen Gingerich, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 04/30/1992
* USD 656,117.00

Astronomical telescope and image processing system will be developed for
educational use. This "MicroObservatory" will be designed to be used for
classroom instruction by teachers as well as for original scientific research
projects by students. It could also be used by the public in planetariums and
science museums. By adding the recently developed powerful technologies of CCD
optical detectors and of microcomputers to a small optical telescope, it will be
possible to produce a self- contained, integrated and user-friendly astronomical
telescope and image processing system. These are the technologies in the
forefront of research in optical astronomy, yet costs have decreased enough to
allow these technologies to reach into the schools in the next few years.
Probably in no other area of frontier science would it be possible for a broad
spectrum of high school students (not just the gifted) to have access to state-
of-the-art technologies which would allow them to do original research. We see
several important additions to the American scientific educational enterprise by
the development and broad dissemination of the MicroObservatory: (1) For the
large number of earth science, physical science, physics and astronomy courses
taught in the schools, this would be a system which would allow for astronomical
observations in the daytime when students are in school, making astronomy a
laboratory science like others in the schools. (2) Students themselves could
undertake a wide range of research projects which would allow them to learn by
doing rather than just by reading, listening to lectures or performing standard
laboratory exercises. (3) Students would develop a variety of skills, from
computer programming, to image processing, to data analysis, to planning and
designing of their own original projects. The proposed program includes
construction of prototype systems from off-the-shelf components for use in area
schools; development of teaching and research activities; design of the
production MicroObservatory; and evaluation and testing throughout the two year
project.