* 8855660
* Conceptual Understanding in Physics:  Coordination of       Knowledge About Simple Harmonic Motion
* None,MDR
* 06/01/1989,11/30/1990
* Seth Chaiklin, Teachers College, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 11/30/1990
* USD 83,678.00

Delineating the nature of conceptual understanding and its development is a
fundamental problem for science education research. Toward this end, the project
will conduct a one-year empirical investigation of the knowledge that
individuals have about a central topic in physics: simple harmonic motion (shm).
The research will include four groups of subjects, ranging from high school
students to physics professors, so that relevant cross-sectional comparisons at
different levels of knowledge about shm can be made. The research design will
use structured interviews with a systematically formulated set of questions that
explore the major relations of shm and its application to particular physical
systems. The Principal Investigator will attempt to characterize the
psychological organization of knowledge that underlies a person's conceptual
understanding about shm. This underlying knowledge includes the ability to
reason about a variety of physical systems involving (or appearing to involve)
shm, using a range of techniques and representations. The relevant components of
this knowledge have already been identified from a rational analysis of the
kinds of skills needed for competent performance. The cross-sectional
description of individuals' different levels of knowledge concerning shm will
form the basis of inferences about the processes involved in developing the
ability to reason about shm.