* 8855557
* Science Teachers Research Involvement for Vital Education   (STRIVE):  Regional Replication
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1989,10/30/1992
* Wayne Stevenson, Oak Ridge Associated Universities
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 10/30/1992
* USD 524,056.00

This project builds on the success of the STRIVE pilot program of Oak Ridge
Associated Universities and replicates it at eight U.S. Department of Energy
(DOE) laboratories. During each summer of 1989, 1990, and 1991, 50 middle and
senior high school science and mathematics teachers will engage in full-time
research on projects of national importance. They will also participate in
workshops designed to explore innovative ways to more effectively communicate
the nature of scientific research to students. The workshop sessions will also
provide an opportunity to develop resource materials for use in their
classrooms. Six hours of academic credit in education will be granted through
the University of Tennessee. Participants will earn additional credits in the
research discipline. A complementary set of academic year activities encourage
past and present participants to interact with each other and with laboratory
scientists. They are: Newsletter. A twice a year newsletter will facilitate
ongoing contact between all participants and lab scientists. Visiting Scientist
Program. Lab scientists who worked with the teachers will visit schools of the
teachers. During the visit they will give classroom
presentations/demonstrations, help with student projects, and work with students
or teachers. Presentations. In-service sessions and other presentations to
teachers, administrators, and parents will be made by the teachers based on
their research experience. Database Access. ORAU will explore ways to provide
STRIVE teachers with continuing access to information about laboratory research
activities. Dr. Wayne Stevenson of Oak Ridge Associated Universities is the
Project Director. He served as Co-Director for the pilot project. There is cost
sharing in an amount equal to 112% of the NSF award.