* 8855571
* Support Program for Instructional Competency in Astronomy   (Project SPICA)
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1989,11/30/1992
* Irwin Shapiro, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 11/30/1992
* USD 570,541.00

The Support Program for Instructional Competence in Astronomy (SPICA) project
proposes a unified, national support program for teachers interested in teaching
astronomy by developing a cadre of 32 expert high school teachers each year for
three years through intensive summer institutes each of four-week duration. The
institutes will provide the participants with a variety of experiences necessary
for the participants to give short workshops to less well-prepared elementary,
junior high and high school teachers. This project follows the model established
by American Association of Physics Teachers as the Physics Teacher Resource
Agent program. At the summer institutes, the participants will hear
presentations from those scientists who are involved with current optical, radio
and x-ray research, building the next generation of observational instruments,
and developing the theoretical models which will direct the course of future
astrophysical research. Teachers will be able to talk with these scientists
informally as well. Participants will work with optical and radio telescopes.
Teachers will be trained in the latest science education methods and will have
hands- on experience with a wide range of astronomy education materials
previously developed under Project STAR, the Lawrence Hall of Science, and the
Education Development Center. They will learn how to most effectively work with
those who teach at grade levels other than their own. These expert teachers will
return to their home schools as "agents-of-change." They will conduct local,
area and regional astronomy education workshops in their home areas during the
three years following their workshop participation. The project will evaluate
not only the institute participants' experiences, but the effectiveness of their
workshops and the resultant impact on student learning and attitudes. The
institution will cost-share the project in an amount which represents about 34%
of the National Science Foundation request.