* 8855644
* Measuring and Modeling:  Towards a Conceptual Understanding of Science and Mathematics
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* Ricardo Nemirovsky, TERC Inc
* Continuing grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 08/31/1993
* USD 348,750.00

This project will examine the learning of both science and mathematics concepts
by 9th and 10th grade students. The investigators intend to conduct a series of
teaching experiments designed to study how measuring and modeling activities
with real science situations influence student learning of basic notions of
calculus (rates of change, level of accumulation-formally called derivative and
integral). The students will conduct experiments with sample dynamic systems
involving the variation of physical variables over time (falling objects,
flowing water, heating substances, etc.); the experimental apparatus will
include Microcomputer-based Laboratory probes to measure and represent the
relevant physical quantities. The symbol system will be implemented using a
computer program with the software environment that will be provided, students
will be able to construct models and represent whatever is predicated by a
particular model. RESEARCH QUESTIONS The central research question is, "What is
the effect of measuring and modeling activities upon students' understanding of
science experiments and the underlying calculus concepts of rate of change and
integration?" Two additional, related research questions are: (1) How do
students use different representations (graphs, numerical data, iconic networks,
etc.), as they work to understand an experiment and a model? (2) Which symbol
systems are most effective for student learning, and to what extent may the
optimal symbol system vary with the domain? OUTCOMES A product of the research
will be an analysis of the cognitive models that are stimulated in students by
measuring and modeling activities. This analysis will be used to formulate: (1)
Guidelines for educational applications: Instructional strategies that enrich
students' understanding of science situations combining activities of measuring
and modeling. (2) Guidelines for software designers: Criteria for the design of
symbol systems and user interfaces that will facilitate the construction of
models by the students.