* 8855523
* A Teacher Training Program:  The Science, Techniques and    Ethics of Molecular Biology
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1992
* David Stronck, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 10/31/1992
* USD 967,165.00

A teacher training program: The Science, Techniques and Ethics of Molecular
Biology This program is designed to provide enhancement training for 288
inservice high school biology teachers from California in the principles and
techniques of recent discoveries in molecular biology and biotechnology, as well
as the ethical and societal implications of the use of the technology. The
three-year program will provide training at three (first year), four (second
year) and five (third) Enrichment Centers throughout California at campuses of
both the California State University and the University of California. Each
summer, each of the Enrichment Centers will offer a two week laboratory based
workshop in the theory and methods of molecular biology including DNA isolation,
gel electrophoresis, restriction endonucleases, and bacterial cell
transformation. After completion of the laboratory workshops, all participants
will come together for a three-day symposium in which ethical and social issues
of the new biology will be addressed. In addition, curriculum guides will be
developed to facilitate the participants in the integration of this material
into the curriculum in their schools. An amount equivalent to 129% of the NSF
award is being contributed by San Francisco State University and other sources
as cost-sharing.