* 8855538
* Physics, Chemistry, and the Environment:  A Hands-On        Workshop for Elementary School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Robert Howard, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Ethel Schultz
* 10/31/1992
* USD 433,864.00

The University of Tulsa proposes a five-week summer workshop, Physics,
Chemistry, and Environment: A Hands-On Workshop for Elementary School Teachers,
for 25 elementary teachers from rural and gifted/talented classrooms to be
repeated each summer for three years. The workshop will select teachers who are
not necessarily well-prepared in science although, because they are teaching
either gifted and talented children or in a rural classroom, they are skillful
teachers accustomed to individualizing the curriculum through working with
students of varying abilities and grade levels. The Workshop will strengthen
teachers' knowledge of basic physics and chemistry by presenting concepts as
they are manifested in the Geosphere/Biosphere. It will also promote teachers'
ability to do hands-on experiments with children, and enhance their enjoyment of
science and confidence in teaching it. The workshop has several components,
namely, (1) activity/discussion sessions on basic physics and chemistry
principles, (2) a practicum involving hands-on experiments done with children
under the supervision of a master teacher, (3) guest presenters and field trips,
(4) discussion of classroom implementation problems and (5) preparation of an
implmentation plan and initial teaching units. To maximize the opportunities for
classroom impact, the workshop will incorporate participation by administrators,
provide equipment for each teacher to take back to his or her home classroom,
funded by the local schools, and a vigorous follow-up program of communication,
consultation and support. Cost-sharing by the University of Tulsa as well as the
cooperating school districts is equal to 26% of the NSF request.