* 8855014
* Florida State University Summer Science and Mathematics     Camp
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Paul Elliott, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 121,782.00

For the past six years, Florida State University has offered an academically
intensive, 6-week residential summer program in science, mathematics, and
computer science for fifty-four gifted and high- achieving high school students.
The program is designed to offer college-level experience in high technology
areas to outstanding public and private high school students of Florida. The
program includes a mix of formal instruction, field trips, and research
participation in mathematics, computer science, and in the biological, physical,
and behavioral sciences. The curriculum includes college-level course work in
discrete mathematics and in computer science for all participants, with elective
laboratory course offerings in molecular biology, modern physics, and other
basic science areas. These courses are designed for and limited to the students
of this program. The emphasis throughout is on problem solving and the
integration of contemporary theory with application. Each student is also
expected to complete original work in a research laboratory setting on the
Florida State campus or in one of its associated research field stations.
Assignments with specific faculty incorporate the interest and background of the
participants to the extent possible. Student progress in the subject matter
areas is evaluated by written examinations with grades and class ranking
established for each course. This information does not appear on the student's
high school transcript, but is part of an individual evaluation letter developed
for each student. The students are also evaluated on their written and oral
presentations covering their individual research project.