* 8855139
* Engineering Summer Program
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Sally Steadman, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 47,171.00

The University of Wyoming is proposing to conduct an Engineering Summer Program
(ESP). ESP is designed to stimulate students' interests in mathematics,
chemistry, physics, atmospheric science, and engineering fields in students who
will be entering their senior year of high school. These students are targeted
because they are in the process of making commitments to their careers. The
atmosphere of the program will foster positive interaction between the
participants and the staff. Nearly all of the sessions will be conducted as
hands-on laboratory experiments, with an emphasis on open-ended design problems.
The students will be guided by experienced and exciting faculty to develop their
research methods and problem solving skills. The sessions will introduce the
students to developing technologies like robotics, composite materials, and
fiver optics as well as more established areas like digital circuits, materials
engineering, and mining operations research and the basic sciences of
mathematics, physics, and chemistry. The students will also be introduced to
professional responsibilities and ethics by grappling with current problems
involving ethical issues. ESP is a residential summer program for twenty-four
students. However, the geography of Wyoming precludes regular follow-up
activities on campus during the academic year. The participants will, however,
be expected to share two laboratory sessions with their classmates at their home
high schoolusing either the equipment they employed during the summer session or
videotaped material.