* 8855017
* Career Orientation and Training in the Field of Statistics  for Secondary School Students in Puerto Rico
* EHR,DRL
* 02/15/1989,12/31/1991
* Bodapati Gandhi, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1991
* USD 189,262.00

The principal objective of this project is to identify talented secondary
school students in mathematics from Puerto Rico and orient them about a career
in statistics. The project covers a period of twelve months and two months of
persummer activity and consists of three phases. First phase is a presummer
program to identify and recruit thirty talented students from various secondary
schools in the western region of Puerto Rico where the Mayaguez Campus of the
University of Puerto Rico is centrally located. The activities in this phase
include visits to schools and regional offices of the educational department and
conferences with students and teachers. The target population is mostly hispanic
with low family incomes. Phases two of the project consists of an intensive
summer program of six weeks with activities designed to orient the students in
the field of statistics and its career opportunities. The activities include
four weeks of formal classes and laboratory work specially designed to interest
high statistics from academia and industry give conferences on the utilization
of statistics in various fields; and visits to research laboratories and
industries. The experts will also serve as mentors to students in the follow up
activities during the academic year. During the last week of the summer session
students will select special projects involving the use of statistics in
consultation with their mentors. In the third phase, the students will continue
to work on their projects during the academic year. Arrangements will be made
for periodic consultations with the mentors and the project staff. The students
will be encourage to present their research projects at a Science Fair held
annually in the western region of Puerto Rico. During the final month of the
project, a Statistics Day will be held at the participant's schools and a
Statistics Fair will be held at the Mayaguez Campus where the students will
present their projects.