* 8855598
* Mission to Mars:  Travelling Exhibition for Science         Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1989,03/31/1993
* Charles O'Connor, Franklin County Historical Society
* Standard Grant
* Roger D. Mitchell
* 03/31/1993
* USD 722,337.00

Ohio's Center of Science and Industry (COSI) in Columbus, Ohio, in association
with the Pacific Science Center in Seattle, WA. and the Battelle Memorial
Institute will create and circulate a 4,000 square foot traveling exhibition,
"Mission to Mars." Interactive exhibit units will be organized into a spacecraft
mission simulator. Visitors in teams will run a scientific mission to the planet
Mars. Exhibits and simulation activities will cover basic and applied science
and mathematics topics appropriate for middle to high school students and family
audiences. Educational materials for school use will accompany the exhibition.
COSI has a strong reputation for interactive science exhibitions. Their widely
acclaimed "Science of Sports" exhibition will be seen in more than 15 cities.
The Pacific Science Center has a similar reputation for educational exhibitions
and related materials development. Their educational materials on dinosaurs have
been widely used by other museums. The Battelle Memorial Institute is a world-
renowned research and applied science organization. "Mission to Mars" is
supported by commitments from thirteen of America's leading science museums and
a major award from Apple Computer Company. The project team will deliver a
timely exhibition that will be both engaging and challenging, rich with
scientific detail while still appealing to family audiences. "Mission to Mars"
will travel to 13 cities on a three year tour, reaching an estimated three to
five million people. NSF's 43% of the project cost will be leveraged by more
than $878,000 in contributions from the originating institutions, from the
displaying museums and from Apple.