* 8855627
* Long Term Effects of Conceptually-Based Instruction in      Mathematics
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1990,08/31/1993
* James Hiebert, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 08/31/1993
* USD 353,558.00

This project will document the effects ofconceptually-based instruction in
elementary school mathematics over a three year period. A primary aim is to
uncover the long term effects of early conceptual understandings. Instruction
will be designed to support students' efforts to acquire numeration and place
value concepts by engaging them in application and problem situations. A goal of
the special instruction is to help students become competent with the base-10
written notation by using mathematical symbols as tools--tools for recording and
sharing mathematical ideas and tools for thinking about mathematics. The initial
sample of first graders will include experimental classes that receive the
conceptually -enriched instruction and control classes that receive only
conventional instruction. All students will be followed through third grade.
Each year about half the students will receive the special instruction while
they are studying the target concepts. All students will receive specially
designed written test three times each year and a subsample will be individually
interviewed immediately after each written test. Analyses will focus on four
issues: (1) changes over time in students' thought processes and performance as
a result of conceptually-based instruction; (2) differences in these changes
between students with differing levels of conceptual acquisitions; (3)
differences in these changes between students who receive conceptually-based
instruction earlier rather than later; and (4) relationships between conceptual
acquisitions and successful performance.