* 8855210
* The Young Scholars Program
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1989,06/30/1991
* Kenneth Adams, SUNY College at Plattsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Roosevelt Y. Johnson
* 06/30/1991
* USD 50,264.00

Fifteen young women and men with potential for becoming scientists will be
provided with an exciting opportunity to further their understanding of the
definition and practice of science. The project will instruct the participants
in the principles of scientific reasoning while offering them a hands-on
experience involving basic laboratory skills and techniques germane to many
areas of science. All activities are designed to enhance the individual's
interest in science and provide direction for selecting a field of scientific
endeavor. The ongoing proposed project encompasses two major phases: a summer
immersion experience and an academic-year research project. The summer immersion
experience is a four week program designed to give the participant broad-based
instruction and laboratory experience in several essential areas of science.
This session is organized into six modules: Orientation to the Science,
Chemistry, Physics,Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Ecology and Geology, and a
one day Transition module. In addition to subject matter content, each of the
modules will integrate such topics as scientific method, research techniques,
career choices in science, and the role of ethics in science. Each module is
coordinated by a university faculty who will enlist the service faculty from
SUNY Plattsburgh and the Miner Research Institute. Following the immersion
experience, each student will select a one semester research project under the
sponsorship of faculty mentors from SUNY Plattsburgh and the Miner Research
Institute. The research project will employ the skills learned during the summer
immersion experience and extend the participant's interest and knowledge in a
particular area of science. Written reports and oral presentations will aid in
the development of scientific literacy and the articulation of scientific
knowledge to others. In an effort to insure diversified participation among
secondary school students in this region, the project will create a
collaboration between university and secondary school science faculty.