* 8855562
* TIPS - Teacher Intern Project for Science
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1989,10/31/1992
* Brad Matthews, Museum of History and Science
* Standard Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 10/31/1992
* USD 450,000.00

The Museum of History and Science in Louisville will conduct an internship
program in support of the Jefferson County Public Schools' "Professional
Development Model for Science Improvement". The Teacher Internship Program in
Science (TIPS) will involve recruiting five talented beginning elementary of
middle school teachers to Jefferson County Public Schools each of the next three
tears and teaming them with five mentor teachers. The co-teachers will begin the
Internship Program with a ten week summer program, eight of material development
in June and July, and two of in-service training in August From September
through December, the beginning teachers will alternate being at the Museum
three days a week while working in the school classroom two days per week with
their mentor co-teacher. In the second term, the process will be reversed;
mentor teachers will intern at the Museum three days per week while their co-
teachers work in the classroom. This plan has been developed in direct
collaboration with an Advisory Team of classroom teachers, the Jefferson County
Science Supervisor, the University of Louisville, and the Museum staff. The
project will offer mentor teachers the reward of a sabbatical from normal duties
and the opportunity to learn both new content and new methodologies. Qualified
new teachers will be offered the opportunity to co-teach their first year with
an experienced mentor teacher, participate in a hands-on internship at the
museum, and receive leadership and in-service training. Using Starlab and other
resources such as kits, exhibits, and collections, teachers will learn new
methodologies, experiment with their ideas in new settings, and share a
professional relationship with new colleagues. Each intern will model successful
interactive teaching techniques in physics, chemistry, earth science, and life
science. The school system assures that each mentor and intern, aided by the
Museum and University staff, will teach ten other teachers in an in-service
program. This project provides a means of recruiting beginning teachers of high
academic quality, offers a system of induction into the teaching profession, and
provides an approach to retaining highly qualified experienced teachers. Science
Museums are particularly well suited to partners in these endeavors because of
their emphasis on participatory learning, their resources, and their position in
the community. The Jefferson County Public Schools and the Museum of History and
Science have contributed an amount equal to approximately twice that of the
National Science Foundation award.