* 8855617
* Hands On Data:  Direct--Manipulation Environments for Data  Organization and Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1989,05/31/1992
* Robert Tinker, TERC Inc
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 05/31/1992
* USD 618,348.00

Current trends in curricular thinking reflect the recognition that working with
real-world data can add richness, relevance and concreteness to the study of
mathematics and the sciences. However, the current poor state of student
abilities in data organization and data analysis suggests that we need ways of
helping students develop the skills and concepts of data modelling -- that is,
designing, collecting, organizing, interpreting and critiquing data. New
computing technologies make possible a class of highly visual, highly
interactive tools for working with "attribute data, " an important class of data
for which database programs are currently the primary available tool. These new
tools can (1) portray differences among categorical, ordinal and numerical data;
(2) let students interact more direcly with the structures in which the data are
embedded; and (3) put unprecedented analytical power at the disposal of students
of all ages. This project pursues the conjecture that such tools can support
students' learning of data modelling concepts and open up new opportunitites for
the development of world-situated, inquiry-based curricula of mathematics and
science which so many are noow advocating. This project will (1) identify
conceptual challenges relating to data modelling, and (2) develop and test
software facilities and pedagogical approaches targeted to these challenges.
Research and formative evaluation will be carried ouot in clinical settings,
primarily at the middle school level but with some attention to younger and
older students.