* 8855643
* Peer Interaction as A Context for Mathematics Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1989,10/31/1993
* Geoffrey Saxe, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond J. Hannapel
* 10/31/1993
* USD 104,256.00

The project is an effort to understand the way peer interaction can foster
mathematics understanding in second-and fourth-grade children. The domains of
interest are arithmetic operations, place value, and orthographic notation. In
Study 1, middle and low functioning second- grade children will participate in a
trading base-ten chips game over a two-week period. To assess the effects of
peer interaction, three peer play conditions will be compared: peer vs. solitary
vs. no play. In Study 2, second and fourth graders (who use inappropriate
("buggy") mathematical algorithms) will participate for a 12-week period in
three activity conditions that vary in use of place value concepts and
orthographic notation. In both studies, outcome analyses will use pre- and
posttests (both short-term and long-term) to investigate the way condition (peer
play condition or activity condition) affects mathematical understandings and
school mathematics performance. To understand social processes mediating the
effects, process analyses will investigate microgenetic shifts in children's
goals and the relations between social interactions and children's posttest
performances. Results will be widely disseminated to the research and
practitioner communities in mathematics education, among others. Joint support
for this project is being provided by the Spencer Foundation of Chicago.