* 8857453
* Presidential Young Investigator Award/Development of New    Organometallic Reagents (Chemistry)
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1993
* Joel Hawkins, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 12/31/1993
* USD 312,000.00

Dr. Hawkins is a new investigator under the Presidential Young Investigator
Award from the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program. Under this will be
studied the development of new organic synthetic methods using organometallic
reagents. These will increase our capacity to synthesize efficiently the complex
molecules used in modern medicine and agriculture. For the first project, metal
carbonyls will be treated with organic substrates containing compatible
nucleophilic and electrophilic sites. Addition of the nucleophilic moiety to the
carbon of coordinated carbon monoxide should generate a metal nucleophile in
proximity to the now pendant electrophilic moiety. The resulting complex will be
set up for cyclization to a metallacycle, which may then reductively eliminate
the desired selectively carbonylated organic product. Epoxy alcohols, epoxy
amines, and sulphonium ylides will be examined as the bifunctional organic
substrates. The anticipated reaction with epoxides corresponds to an aldol
synthon where the starting epoxide's geometry controls the product's relative
stereochemistry. Epoxy amines may accordingly give beta-lactams with
stereochemical control The sulphonium ylide substrates may provide a new route
to transition metal ketene complexes. The second project will involve the
synthesis, resolution, and application of chiral dihaloboranes containing pi-
bases. A substrate possessing both Lewis basic and pi-acidic sites such as an
alpha, beta-unsaturated ester should bind to these catalysts via simulataneous
synergistic Lewis acid-base and pi-acid base interactions. The constraints
imposed by this two-point binding may cause one face of the olefin to be
selectively blocked. Accordingly, the other face will be open to approach by
reagents. Dienes will be tested here; displacement of the corrdinated pi-base by
an incoming diene may result in an asymmetric Diels Alder reaction. No longer
containing a pi-acid for a second binding point, the cyclohexene product should
be displaced from the catalyst by the two-point binding starting material. The
catalyst structures will be varied in order to optimize this enzyme-like
scenario. Methods for the stereospecific vicinal bismethylation of a double bond
will be explored in a third project. Coordination of an olefinic substrate to a
heterobimetallic bis-mu-methylene complex may lead to insertion into one of the
metal-carbon bonds forming a 1,3-dimetallacyclohexane. This species may then
reductively eliminate a metallacyclopentane which can be protonolyzed to the
desired bismethylated product. Mo-Co and Mo-Fe complexes will be studied in this
vein.