* 8857188
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/1988,10/01/1989
* Christopher Sogge, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 10/01/1989
* USD 19,200.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award will support mathematical research
in the area of harmonic analysis related to problems of oscillatory integrals
and differentiation theory. Several important directions will be followed during
the period of support. Many of these have their roots in questions concerning
partial differential operators and efforts to measure bounds on their solutions.
These include bounds on the norm of spectral projections involving spherical
harmonic expansions of functions on a sphere. Other work involves problems of
Fourier analysis related to curvature of manifolds. This includes development of
uniform Sobolev inequalities and corresponding restriction theorems. Results
along these lines will provide powerful global conclusions from local
inequalities. Work will continue on the question of sharp Riesz means on
arbitrary compact manifolds, especially regarding the weak type end point
results which are invariably the most difficult to achieve. Other work will
focus on unique continuation of second order partial differential operators,
especially Schrodinger operators, unique continuation of hyperbolic and
parabolic differential operators and related eigenfunction expansions. A new
area of work will concern maximal estimates for Randon transforms or averages of
functions over lower dimensional surfaces. Interestingly the most difficult
questions in this context occur in lower dimensions where there has been
considerable activity lately.