* 8857510
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Robust Design of   Multivariable Feedback Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1994
* James Freudenberg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1994
* USD 144,800.00

PI's research interests are in developing theory to describe those properties of
linear feedback systems that are relevant to design. Of particular interest is
the way in which the structure of a system to be controlled limits the
performance and robustness properties achievable through feedback design. In the
scalar case, plants with nonminimum phase zeros, unstable poles, and time delays
cause design difficulty. These properties can also appear in multivariable
systems. However, in this context they are less well understood, and seek to
develop a mathematical framework within which to explore their properties.
Multivariable systems can also possess properties having no analogue in the
scalar case. Among these are directionality properties due to loop interactions
and to plant ill-conditioning. He seeks to understand these properties and the
design tradeoffs and limitations that they impose. He then plans to incorporate
this knowledge into various existing design methodologies as well as to develop
new methodologies. His ultimate research goal is to understand feedback system
properties sufficiently well that rules of thumb may be developed to aid in
design. This task will involve both development of the necessary theory, as well
as a substantial effort to translate that theory into the language of the
practicing engineer.