* 8857773
* Mathematical Sciences: Presidential Young Investigator
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/1988,09/30/1994
* Jalal Shatah, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* John V. Ryff
* 09/30/1994
* USD 199,500.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award provides support for research in
Applied Mathematics. The general areas of work will be partial differential
equations, differential geometry and Hamiltonian mechanics. Emphasis will be on
studies of nonlinear waves, Ginsburg-Landau theory of magnetic vortices, sigma-
models, wave guided and conformally invariant equations (strings). Specific
objectives will be to analyze the stability of infinite dimensional Hamiltonian
systems with symmetry groups. Related work will be done on conjugating flows of
general nonlinear evolution equations with corresponding linear flows. This
theory is well understood in finite dimensions but in the infinite dimensional
setting (i.e. partial differential equations) new difficulties present
themselves which are only partially understood. Work is also planned on problems
involving complicated phenomena of continuum mechanics. Of particular interest
are questions related to superconductivity and gauge-invariant theories such as
understanding magnetic vortices in superconductors. Efforts will be made to
understand the dynamics of the breakup of strong vortices of high vortex number
to weak ones. Also, the asymptotic behavior of generalized minimal surface
equations on Minkowski space will be studied to obtain a better picture of
closed strings in the conformally invariant field equation of string theory.