* 8857952
* Presidential Young Investigator Award (Computer Research)
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1988,08/31/1994
* Ahmed Elmagarmid, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 08/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

A heterogenous distributed database is a system of non- integrated and possibly
autonomous database management systems that employ different strategies for data
and/or transaction management. The individual databases comprising the
heterogeneous database system may differ in data models, data definition and
manipulation languages, transaction management (including concurrency control
and commit protocols), and internal data structures. The resulting incompatible
systems create "islands of information" that isolate users. The goal of the
heterogeneous database project is to bridge these islands by presenting users
with a centralized and homogeneous view of the heterogeneous distributed
databases. Hiding these incompatibilities may involve resolving issues in
architecture and operating systems, in addition to database management systems.
Well accepted principles in serializability and correctness must be redefined in
this new envoronment. New concepts in autonomy, heterogeneity and integration
must be investigated. As a result of this research, in database management
systems of the future, existing data will be accessible globally without costly
and time consuming redesign or restructing of constituent databases. Owners of
existing databases will be able to join or leave a federation of element
databases at will.