* 8857455
* Presidential Young Investigator Award/Role of Metal Ions    in Enzyme Action
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1992
* William Armstrong, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1992
* USD 240,000.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program will support research in biologically relevant
inorganic chemistry. The emphasis of the project will be the elucidation of the
role of metal ions in important biological transformations. Of particular
interest is the participation of transition metal ions in the terminal steps of
the reduction of dioxygen by cytochrome oxidase and the evolution of oxygen by
the photosynthetic apparatus. Small molecule analogs of the metal centers of
these and other metalloproteins, especially manganese-containing proteins, will
be synthesized and characterized. The general strategy to be taken will involve
the design and synthesis of organic ligands, preparation and purification of
their complexes with transition metals, and thorough characterization of such
systems by a variety of structural, magnetic, and spectroscopic techniques. In
addition to the systems mentioned above, others of interest include the
magnetically-coupled siroheme and iron-sulfur cluster in sulfite reductase, and
the participation of nickel in hydrogenase and methanogenesis activity. Finally,
the role of low valent vanadium in catalyzing the conversion of dinitrogen to
ammonia and hydrazxine will be explored. Comparison of the spectroscopic and
chemical properties of the model compounds is expected to yield valuable insight
into the detailed workings of the modeled biological systems.