* 8858030
* Presidential Young Investigator Award (Computer Research):  Programming Language Features Within a Type-Theoretic Frame-work
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1988,03/31/1994
* John C. Mitchell, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Forbes D. Lewis
* 03/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

Formal methods, as traditionally used in the mathematical analysis of logic or
natural language, have proven useful in several branches of computer science.
Here the interest is in using formal systems to study contemporary programming
languages, with general aims towards understanding current concepts more
precisely, and using this understanding to design simpler and more expressive
languages for the future. As a means for exploring pragmatic issues, it is
planned to assemble a "programming language work bench" comprising an
interactive, programmable front-end, such as the Cornell Synthesizer Generator,
and a standard incremental code generator. In another direction, logical and
linguistic problems related to database and knowledge representation systems
will receive attention. One problem in the study of programming languages is the
lack of standard terminology, which reflects a great diversity among
computational metaphors. For example, Smalltalk is presented using a metaphor of
"objects" and "messages", while Prolog is often explained as program synthesis
from specifications. The differences between approaches makes it difficult to
compare or combine features of different languages, or to evaluate the hazards
and benefits of such combinations. Various typed notations for describing
computable values, often called "type theories" or "typed lambda calculi" have
attracted increasing attention in recent years. These systems are generally
simply defined, without ad hoc syntactic restrictions related to implementation
considerations, and sufficiently expressive to serve as intermediate languages
for both theoretical analysis and practical implementation. Early work on
denotational semantics helped establish a connection between simple typed lambda
calculus and the Algol-like languages, while more recent work has both extended
this view to languages with polymorphic functions and data type declarations,
and refined the approach to be more practically useful. It is planned to
continue research into the mathematical properties of typed lambda calculi, and
efforts to apply these systems to programming language analysis and design. In
particular, it is planned to develop a modern course on programming language
theory and its application, and use the framework of typed lamdga calculus to
analyze contemporary language features such as class hierarchies and method
inheritance.