* 8858825
* Presidential Young Investigator Award
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1988,12/31/1993
* Elaine Romanelli, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin A. Cantor
* 12/31/1993
* USD 220,711.00

This award provides support to Dr. Elaine Romanelli under the National Science
Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards program. The objectives of
this program are to provide research support to the Nation's most outstanding
and promising young science and engineering faculty. The awards are intended to
improve the capability of U.S. academic institutions to respond to the demand
for highly qualified science and engineering personnel for academic and
industrial research and teaching. Dr. Romanelli has already made significant
research contributions to the field of Organization Theory, and has the
potential to become a leader in academic research and education. This award will
allow the investigator to pursue her research interest relating to the origins,
processes, and outcomes of entrepreneurship in high technology industries. Much
of Dr. Romanelli's career research focuses on the organizational backgrounds of
founders of biotechnology research and product development firms. These studies
will illuminate the dynamic underpinnings of entrepreneurial processes in
industries. In particular, better understanding of industry and organizational
conditions that "produce" entrepreneurs will lay an important groundwork for
analysis of when and why new firms are founded, as well as their impact on
changes in industry competitive structures over time.