* 8858310
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Engine Heat        Transfer and Combustion Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1993
* Dionissios Assanis, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* mary chen
* 12/31/1993
* USD 312,000.00

A single-cylinder research engine will be instrumented for measurements of
instantaneous wall surface temperatures, convective and radiative heat fluxes,
combustion chamber pressure and other pertinent flow-field parameters, and
exhaust emissions. The results will be used to develop a new generation of
multi-dimensional process models which will be suitable for realistic simulation
of Low-Heat Rejection (LHR) and conventional engines using available
supercomputers. The basis for these models will be the Los Alamos Kiva-II
program which can provide a detailed knowledge of in-cylinder fluid and
combustion processes. Improved gas-to-wall heat transfer models will relate
boundary layer phenomena to turbulence and combustion processes and in-cylinder
radiation to soot dynamics. Multi-dimensional finite element descriptions of the
combustion chamber components will also be incorporated into the code. Thus,
cyclically-varying gas-to-wall heat transfer phenomena, transient heat
conduction inside the components, unsteady boundary layer and deposit
characteristics, and engine combustion and emissions phenomena will be studied.
The proposed engine heat transfer and combustion studies will enhance our basic
understanding of the unsteady thermal phenomena in conventional and LHR engine
combustion chambers. This new knowledge will be used to optimize the performance
and emissions trade-offs resulting from the introduction of ceramic materials,
advanced component designs, and new fuels and lubricants in the engine
combustion chamber. The experimental studies will also provide realistic
boundary conditions which will be used in our analytical models to predict
transient temperature distributions, thermal stress levels, and lubrication
requirements of conventional and LHR combustion chamber components. This
coordinated research effort which takes advantage of advanced instrumentation
and ever-increasing computer capability can make a substantial contribution in
our efforts to produce more fuel efficient engines with acceptable emissions
characteristics.