* 8858062
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Ultrashort Laser-  Matter Interactions
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/1988,07/31/1994
* Howard Milchberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* William H. Carter
* 07/31/1994
* USD 326,948.00

The advent of focusable subpicosecond laser pulses of energy greater than about
1 mJ has made possible a wide range of studies of laser- matter interactions at
extremely high intensity and under very fine time resolution. The high
repetition rate of these lasers allows the use of low noise correlation
techniques such as pump-probe methods. The combination of high pulse energy and
short duration makes possible the measurement of the electrical properties of
solid materials over their transition from quantum solids to high temperature
solid density plasmas. Recently, the resistivity of solid aluminum up to 106 oK
has been inferred from reflectivity measurements. Onset toward and passage
through a resistivity maximum at 200 -cm was observed as the material disorder
and electron temperature increased, the first direct observation of this
phenomenon. This research is being extended to materials exhibiting band
absorption, such as copper, to study the effects on plasma behavior of the
condensed state. Preliminary results indicate that considerable band absorption
is still present even at elevated electron temperatures ( 50 eV). Short pulse
continuum soft X-ray emission from these plasmas will be used to perform time
resolved studies of semiconductor and metal conduction band plasmas, scattering
from crystals with large atomic plane spacing (such as KAP), time resolved
EXAFS, and preliminary experiments on pumping of soft X-ray laser transitions.
The effect of ultrahigh fields on gases will be investigated by studying time-
of-flight electron spectra and ion mass spectra from gases irradiated by
energetic ultrashort pulses. Of particular interest is the transition of gas
"breakdown" from the multiphoton ionization limit at low density to avalanche
breakdown at high density.