* 8858355
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Quantitative Models for Optimal Provision of Goods and Services
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1988,02/28/1994
* Margaret Brandeau, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* F. Hank Grant
* 02/28/1994
* USD 196,000.00

This recommended award provides research support to Dr. Brandeau under the
Foundation's Presidential Young Investigator Awards (PYIA) program. The research
concerns the development and solution of mathematical models of production
systems, with focus on facility location, manufacturing, and health care
delivery systems. Specifically she is developing analytical solutions for a
variety of planar location models, analytical worst case bounds for composite
heuristics in job shop scheduling, and a medical school financial planning
model. These are all extensions from her previous research. Dr. Brandeau has
made significant contributions to her field of engineering and has potential to
become a leader in academic research and education. The objectives of the
Presidential Young Investigator Award program are to provide research support to
the nations most outstanding and promising young science and engineering
faculty. The awards are intended to improve the capability of U.S. academic
institutions to respond to the demand for highly qualified science and
engineering personnel for academic and industrial research and teaching. In
accordance with these objectives, a Presidential Young Investigator Award is
recommended for Dr. Brandeau. This is a five year continuing grant, with
expected future funding levels of $62,500 for FY89, FY90, FY91, and FY92.