* 8858288
* Presidential Young Investigators Award:  Exploratory Studiesin Heat and Mass Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1988,05/31/1994
* John Lienhard, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 05/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

This research addresses a number of topics in the general area of heat and mass
transfer. One effort considers the high heat fluxes and enhancement techniques
to increase the maximum measured heat transfer. This problem will be pursued in
relation to the boiling of impinging liquid jets, with the general intention of
generating the greatest heat transfer rates possible. A key objective is to
determine what, if any, maximum exists for the energy transfer by phase change.
Another area for this year's work is an analysis of the effects of thermal
radiation on multilayer Rayleigh-Benard instability. A continuing study concerns
the effects of strongly stabilizing stratification on heat transfer in turbulent
flow. Large density gradients suppress turbulent heat convection, in a process
antithetical to natural convection. Studies of the coagulation of aerosols in
turbulent flows will also be initiated, with the objective of obtaining reliable
data on coagulation rates under given turbulent conditions. The high flux
studies will influence the handling of heat at high power densities. If
successful, they will provide the means of cooling such high flux systems as
fusion reactors and high power laser mirrors. The stability studies are directly
relevant to flat-plate solar collectors and will enable more efficient designs
to be implemented. The stratified turbulence studies are of fundamental
importance to the understanding of transport processes in the atmosphere and
oceans, as well as to a number of engineering situations. Control of the
stratification in a fluid (viz., the density gradient) enables control of heat
losses. The aerosol studies address a fundamental issue in particle transport
and have many potential applications to engineering.