* 8858387
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: Modified and         Linked Metalloproteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1988,12/31/1994
* Nenad Kostic, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 12/31/1994
* USD 318,212.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award from the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program is in the area of bioinorganic chemistry. Metal
ions will be used in a variety of ways to probe the structure and function of
biomolecules. Noninvasive transition-metal probes will be used to map the
binding surfaces of metalloproteins by selective tagging, and the effects of
ancillary ligands on the selective recognition between metal complexes and
biological macromolecules will be investigated. Intraprotein electron transfer
in metalloproteins will be explored through a systematic study of the kinetics
and mechanism of electron transfer reactions between active sites of
metalloproteins and excited states of inorganic chromophores attached
selectively to the protein backbone. Mononuclear and polynuclear transition
metal complexes will be used to cross-link metalloproteins to produce potential
multielectron redox catalysts. The cleavage of proteins and peptides by metal
aquo complexes will be explored, with special focus on the selective delivery of
hydrolytic agents to peptide bonds which are not cleavable by common enzymes.
Finally, Pt-195 NMR spectroscopy will be developed as a new technique for the
study of stereodynamics. This project is expected to provide versatile new tools
for the investigation of the function of metalloproteins.