* 8858352
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  High Speed          Optoelectronic Devices and VLSI Structures by Laser         Enhanced Epitaxy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1988,07/31/1994
* Sanjay Banerjee, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Brian J. Clifton
* 07/31/1994
* USD 312,000.00

This program will focus on low temperature, photo-enhanced chemical vapor
deposition techniques to achieve single crystal epitaxy. Non- selective photo-
excitation using a low pressure mercury lamp, as well as selective epitaxy using
an ArF excimer laser will be used coupled with rapid thermal processing using
incoherent arc lamps to rapidly adjust the substrate temperature during growth.
Two materials systems to be studied using this growth technique include silicon
N- i-P-i doping superlattices and Si-SixGe1-x strained layer
superlattices/pseudomorphic layers. These systems will be examined from the
viewpoint of novel device applications. They are, respectively, electroptic
modulation using the tunable bandgap properties of N-i-P-i superlattices and the
possibility of obtaining direct bandgap superlattices using a combination of
Brillouin zone folding and lattice strain in the Si-SixGe1-x strained layer
system. We believe a photo-enhanced CVD technique has significant potential
advantages over competing growth techniques. It does not require ultra high
vacuum conditions as in MBE. It allows selective excitation of precursor
species, allowing better crystalline quality with less contamination than
plasma-CVD. Substrate temperatures can be lowered compared to MOCVD. In
conclusion, excellent heterostructures with abrupt interfaces and doping
profiles should be achievable by photo-enhanced CVD to allow novel device
applications using compositional and doping superlattices.