* 8858415
* Presidential Young Investigator Award:  Studies of Time -   Dependent Fundamental Surface Phenomena.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1988,01/01/1992
* Steven George, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 01/01/1992
* USD 216,137.00

This Presidential Young Investigator Award project is in the general area of
analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of dynamic surface
processes. The emphasis of the research activities that are enabled by this
award is on the time- dependence of fundamental surface phenomena. Surface
diffusion, surface relaxation kinetics, desorption dynamics, and vibrational and
electronic energy relaxation on surfaces are the main areas of investigation.
These studies are being performed on well- characterized metal, semiconductor,
and oxide surfaces that are relevant to heterogeneous catalysis, electronic
device fabrication, and photochemical energy conversion. In order to measure
surface diffusion and surface reaction kinetics, Professor George is utilizing
laser-induced thermal desorption (LITD) techniques. Of particular interest is
the ability of LITD techniques to explore the effects of surface additives such
as carbon and sulfur on the surface kinetics of catalytically relevant
processes. He is also using LITD techniques to investigate the surface kinetics
of processes that are important in semiconductor processing. Additionally,
Professor George is exploring chemical bonding and reaction kinetics on silicon
surfaces using transmission Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) as a
vibrational spectroscopic probe of these surface processes. He is also seeking
to characterize the interactions and electronic energy transfer between
chromophores on dielectric oxide surfaces using laser induced fluorescence (LIF)
techniques that provide both structural and time-dependent information with sub-
monolayer sensitivity.