* 8858804
* Presidential Young Investigator Award: Computer Research    (Software) - Dynamic Construction of Large Software Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1988,09/30/1994
* David Notkin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/1994
* USD 312,500.00

The first project is on extendable systems, systems in which a user can add
capabilities that were not originally anticipated by the designer. Many such
extendable systems exist-such as Emacs, Excel, and Tex-but several key problems
with extension mechanism have not been solved. Reduced cost of constructing
extendable applications by providing a system-wide extension mechanism (called
the Extension Interpreter) that is shared by all applications, and reduced
problems of users having to learn new extension programming languages for each
extendable application by using existing languages (such as C and Icon) as
extension programming languages have been achieved. Currently exploring the
degree to which these approaches support not only extension but also the dynamic
construction of large software systems is underway. A second project is on
environments for parallel programming (this is joint work with Professors L.
Snyder and L. Adams). As a follow-on to work on Gandalf (and Snyder's work on
Poker), a graphical environment in which parallel programmers explicitly define
their programs through a number of views (for instance, a communication graph
view and an input/output view) is being built. The third project is on
heterogeneous computing systems (joint work with Professors Lazowska, Levy, and
Zahorjan). The overall goal of the project is to reduce the costs of introducing
a new system type (such as a Micro Vax, a Lisp Machine, or a Tektronix Pegasus)
into the department computing environment. This project combines research in
both software engineering and also distributed systems. Current work covers
heterogeneous filing and heterogeneous remote procedure call, as well as
understanding and carefully describing the software structure- emulation,
indirection, and interpretation-that have come up repeatedly in this project.