* 8860786
* Direct Oxidation of Hydrocarbons with a Bipolar Metal       Hydride Fuel Cell
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* William Ayers, Electron Transfer Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

A novel method for the direct oxidation of hydrocarbon fuels for the production
of electrical power in a fuel cell is planned. The method dissociates and
dehydrogenate hydrocarbon fuels, such as methanol and formic acid, at a bipolar
metal hydride diffusion electrode (MHDE). The pure atomic hydrogen that diffuses
through the MHDE is oxidized in either an alkaline or acid fuel cells. One side
of the MHDE is in contact with the hydrocarbon liquid. The other side forms the
anode of an alkaline or acid fuel cell. The system uses an electrostatic field
on the dehydrogenation side to control hydrocarbon adsorption and the chemical
dehydrogenation rate of methanol or formic acid to atomic hydrogen and carbon
dioxide. This approach to direct hydrocarbon oxidation has the advantage of
great simplicity since there is no need for a high temperature catalytic
reformer and reformer gas purification equipment presently required for indirect
dydrocarbon oxidation fuel cells. Furthermore, the system only transports atomic
hydrogen through the metal hydride electrode Hence it is not possible for carbon
oxides or other impurities to build-up or precipitate in the fuel cell side
electrolyte. If this appoach is successful, it could have a substantial impact
on fuel cell powered automobiles and other portable power applications.