* 8860510
* Novel Tungsten Metallo-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition    Source Reagents for VLSI Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Peter Kirlin, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

The continued drive toward VLSI and three-dimensional integration places ever-
increasing demands on metalization structures. New materials are needed to
advance these vital technologies. The many advantages of refractory metal thin
films prepared by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) including conformal step
converage, high electromigration resistance and low resistivity make them
attractive for gate, interconnect, contact, diffusion barrier and via plug
metalizations. However, the application of CVD tungsten and molybdenum to VLSI
processing has been impeded by the secondary reactions caused by the florine
ligands of the elemental source reagents used in the CVD process. These
reactions ultimately lead to the failure of the device. The objectives of the
proposed research are the elaboration of a set of molecular design criteria for
refractory metal source reagents and the identification of a novel
organotungsten CVD source reagent which revolutionizes VLSI metalization. These
goals will be met by applying a multidisciplinary approach in which results from
film growth and fundamental decomposition studies are used to refine the
molecular structure of the source reagents. The immediate commercial impact of
CVD refractory metals on VLSI processing would be the advance to a new
generation of metalization structures offering superior performance and
stability relative to existing components.