* 8860514
* Development of a Miniature Laser Capillary SpectrophotometerProbe for Liquid Dispersions
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Wayne Amato, Phaedron Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the topical
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of process
instrumentation. Research designed to establish the feasibility of an instrument
capable of measuring multivariate (size and concentration) drop distribution
data in heterogeneous liquid dispersions is the thrust of this activity. An
instrument of this type can have significant value both as a research device and
as a process monitoring tool. Such a device is needed to obtain fundamental
knowledge and to improve the design of liquid-liquid contact equipment in
various chemical, petrochemical, pharmaceutical, nuclear and metallurgical
processes. Phaedron Technologies, Inc. intends to demonstrate during this Phase
I activity that such a miniature probe can be developed for these applications
and made available at modest costs. The likelihood of attaining this goal is
supported by Phaedron's recent success in the development and utilization of a
Laser Capillary Spectrophotometer (LCS) system to obtain bivariate drop
distribution data. The planned research will be directed towards the design,
fabrication and testing of a miniature LCS probe for direct introduction into
process vessels to meet various process requirements. The LCS technique is based
on the measurement of a pulse width and height of an electrical signal due to
attenuated light as the dispersion is forced through a capillary across the path
of two parallel laser beams. The probe will be connected to optical fiber
bundles to transmit and receive light signals. In Phase I, a suitable
photoelectric circuit for data acquisition and the necessary software for data
analysis will be developed to implement the conceptual design, and the device
will be fabricated and tested. Economic competitiveness would accrue from
controlled production of specifically tailored specialty chemicals due to
monitoring capabilities heretofore not possible.