* 8860819
* Continuous Monitoring of Cations and Anions with Selective  Ligand-Bonded Concentrator Columns
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Ronald Bruening, IBC Advanced Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,755.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of trace analysis.
The thrust of this experimental effort is the rational design, synthesis, and
characterization of macrocyclic molecules for use as stationary phases in
concentrator columns with which trace level concentrations of cations and anions
of interest can be monitored. Macrocyclic molecules having high affinities for
association with cations of significant value or concern will be synthesized and
attached to silica gel. Once attached, the binding constants for a broad range
of test cations will be determined. Also, the association of anions of interest
with cations bound in these macrocycles will be characterized. These systems
will be evaluated using potable water samples and various acid matrices. There
is a need for a device to continuously monitor cations and anions in the ppb
range in the presence of other more concentrated matrix species. This need
exists in relation to species that are toxic, valuable, or otherwise of
interest. Such a device is needed in municipal water treatment plants,
industrial plants, and other places where these species should be monitored with
high accuracy and in real time. Macrocycles interact strongly and highly
selectively with many species or groups of species of such interest. The
innovation of this research lies in the ability to attach these macrocycles and
other ligands in a permanent bond to silica gel while maintaining their solution
complexing abilities. Such materials can then be incorporated in a concentrator
column for use in a continuous analytical procedure. The feasibility of the
material synthesis and concentration procedure will be shown in Phase I. In a
subsequent Phase II activity, concentrator columns containing these materials
will be incorporated into an automated analysis system using any one of a number
of conventional analytical instruments allowing for accurate, real time analysis
of a wide range of specific cations and anions in typical potable water and
industrial process and waste streams at the ppb level.