* 8860649
* A Compact, Inexpensive X-Ray Laser Driver
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Bryan Peterson, Multilayer Optics and X-ray Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

There is a rapidly increasing interest in the use of soft x-rays in many
research and engineering fields. The physically large drivers currently used to
demonstrate amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) in the soft x-ray region make
their use as laboratory x-ray lasers impractical. A capillary discharge or
sliding spark device provides an alternate way to achieve the plasma conditions
necessary for soft x-ray ASE in elemental gases such a argon and krypton.
Capillary discharges result in reproducible, stable, dimensionally correct
plasmas, and their high efficiency makes the production of a compact x-ray laser
feasible. In this phase of the research it is proposed to computationally model
and to design a capillary discharge device capable of producing the necessary
plasma conditions to demonstrate ASE in argon at a wavelength of about 700
Angstroms. Future phases of the research will involve the development and
diagnosis of the experimental apparatus necessary to demonstrate ASE in argon.
The scaling and modification of the apparatus to demonstrate ASE at shorted
wavelengths using higher-z materials will also be investigated. Future work
would also involve the development of robust multilayer cavity mirrors for
shorter wavelenghts to increase the overall intensity of soft x-ray lasers.