* 8860962
* Design and Synthesis of Ferroelectric Liquid Crystals for   High Speed Applications
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Michael Wand, Displaytech Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,885.00

The long range scientific goals of this research are to increase the
understanding of the correlation of molecular structure with physical properties
of ferroelectric liquid crystal phases and to test strategies for the design of
new materials. The practical goal is the invention of new materials with
properties suited for incorporation into commercial shutters and large-area
matrix displays. Ferroelectric smectic C liquid crystals have been shown to
exhibit high speed, multistate electro-optic and display device applications,
particularly when incorporated into the surface stabilized ferroelectric liquid
crystal light valve. The best materials for use in such devices would have a
high ferroelectric polarization and low orientational viscosity, affording a
fast electro-optic response time, broad temperature range, and excellent
chemical stability. No materials currently available possess the required speed,
temperature range, and stability to allow fabrication of large area multiplexed
arrays operating at video rates with gray scale. This work will be directed
toward developing materials to satisfy these needs. Demonstrating the concept
"steric coupling" of stereocenters in the tail with orientation of substituted
aromatic rings in the core to produce a family of crystals with extremely high
polarization and low viscosity for use in the above stated high speed
applications.