* 8860778
* A Carbon-13 Isotope Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Mark Zahniser, Aerodyne Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,945.00

Isotopic carbon analysis provides a valuable tool for studies of metabolic
pathways and for tracing carbon transformations in the environment. This project
will attempt to develop an optical technique for the convenient measurement of
carbon isotopic (13C/12C) ratios. The instrument will utilize a linear
photodiode array to image the spectra arising from plasma emission of the
carbon-containing molecules. Spectral processing algorithms will be applied to
remove spectral interferences and to correct for apparent isotopic ratio shifts
due to variations in sample pressure and power coupling. In this Phase I study,
the optimal bandheads for isotopic ratio determination using the CO molecule
will be identified. The criteria will include a minimal contamination from other
transitions of the 12C isotope. Different excitation sources and sample
preparation techniques will be studied with the intent of coupling the
instrument to an automated carbon-nitrogen analyzer in the Phase II work. The
results of the Phase I effort are expected to result in the ability to determine
the isotope ratio of carbon to a precision of 0.01% or 0.1 &amp; unit which
would make the method applicable to both natural abundance studies and tracer
addition studies. The relative simplicity and low cost of this instrument
compared to mass spectrometers will greatly expand the applications of isotopic
abundance measurements. Aerodyne is a known positive performer and will provide
excellent support for the work. The product, when available, should find
considerable use in ecological studies requiring the processing of large numbers
of carbon isotope ratio samples.