* 8860240
* Innovative Processing to Produce Advanced Intermetallic     Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Raouf Loutfy, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

There is an insatiable demand for high temperature, light weight, strong and
ductile materials in heat engine and structural applications. Intermetallics
such as titanium aluminide offer a significant opportunity for improved high
temperature properties over current state-of-the-art nickel base superalloys and
titanium alloys. However, titanium aluminide base materials with substantially
improved ductility, strength, oxidation and creep resistance have not been fully
developed. Grain refining, micro- and macroalloying and reinforcing of titanium
aluminide intermetallics are innovative approaches to improve the high
temperature properties of titanium aluminide. This program will utilize a rf
thermal plasma technique to synthesize ultrafine and ultrapure titanium
aluminide powders. The production mechanism is aluminum reduction of titanium
tetrachloride in an argon high temperature plasma. Micro- and macroalloying of
titanium aluminide will also be carried out in the plasma reactor simultaneously
with the synthesis of titanium aluminide powders. Reinforced titanium aluminide
composites will also be investigated. A titanium aluminide base alloy and
composite with improved ductility and high temperature properties will result
from this program.