* 8860057
* Luminescent Solar Concentrator for Energy Conversion
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Julie Harmon, Nanoptics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

There is a world-wide need for electricity produced directly by the sun at an
economical cost. During the decade of the 1970's and early 1980's, there was
significant effort to develop semi- conducting devices or cells which, when
exposed to sunlight, would produce electricity. These devices were not cost
effective, especially when the price of oil fell by more than a factor of two in
1984. In an effort to increase the cost effectiveness of solar cells, a parallel
effort was made to devise solar radiation concentrators. In this regard, the
luminescent solar concentrator (LSC) was developed for the purpose of
photovoltaic or photo-chemical energy conversion. This development work also
stopped around 1984 due to unsolved difficulties of photochemical stability of
the LSC. It was found that laser dyes from the Coumarin, Rhodamine, and Oxazine
families have 50 percent probability of photodegradation after use in a LSC for
a period less than one year. In the last three years, radiation resistant
plastic scintillation detectors have been developed to operate in the high
radiation environment of the new colliding beam machines such as the
Superconducting Super Collider (SSC) in the USA and Large Electron Positron
(LEP) collider in Europe. These detectors operate using the same physical
principles as the LSC. A one-hundred-fold reduction in photodegradation of
plastic scintillators has been achieved utilizing new combinations of plastics,
dyes, and their environment, compared to previous combinations. The development
work was done using one million volt Cobalt X-rays which could result in
excitation of plastic and dyes to all possible states, whereas solar radiation
would give an excitation distribution to a reduced set of states. It is,
therefore, not clear how to translate the improvement factor of one hundred in
photostability to the case of a LSC. Phase I of this SBIR Award is to conduct
experimental measurements of degradation rates for the new radiation stable
luminescent plastics in simulated and actual solar exposures. These measurements
will elucidate the technical feasibility of this new approach to photovoltaic or
photo-chemical energy conversion. ____________________________ ____________
Program Director's Signature Date//