* 8860742
* An Optoelectronic Integrated Circuit (OEIC) Galium Arsenide Receiver on a Silicon Substrate
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Gregory Olsen, EPITAXX Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,765.00

Development of a fully monolithic integrated receiver chip for the 1.3 and 1.55
micron fibre optic wavelengths is proposed. The chip will be fabricated on a Si
substrate so that conventional bipolar MOSFET technology can be used to
construct all of the preamplifier electronics. We will use an innovative method
for the growth of high-quality InP and related compound epitaxial layers on
silicon substrates. The hydride VPE technique would be used to compositionally
grade In(x)Ga(1-x)As films on a commercially purchased GaAs/Si substrate from x
= 0 to x = 0.53. InP or InGaAs(P) would then be directly deposited onto the
lattice- matched In(53)Ga(47)As. Performance goals of the OEIC include a 500
Mb/s data rate, -40 dBm sensitivity and efficient light detection out to 1.65
micron. During Phase I, 75 micron planar InGaAs photodiodes, grown on GaAs/Si
substrates, will be fabricated, lifetested and delivered as prototypes along
with an epitaxial layer of InP grown on a silicon substrate. In Phase II, these
detectors will be combined on a single chip with a Si bipolar preamplifier, thus
resulting in a monolithic integrated receiver. Detector and receiver design and
characterization will be done in conjunction with Prof. S.R. Forrest in the
Department of Electro Physics at the University of Southern California.