* 8860125
* Protein Purification Using an Affinity Membrane
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Paul van Eikeren, Bend Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,912.00

The proposed work is directed at the development of a novel and highly selective
membrane for the continuous purification of valuable proteins such as interferon
from complex and dilute mixtures. Production of proteins requires three main
steps: fermentation or cell culture, isolation, and purification. Fermentation
and cell-culture processes have undergone much development; isolation and
purification are now the weakest parts of the overall scheme. The goal of the
Phase I program is to establish the feasibility of employing "affinity
membranes" to purify hydrophobic proteins. The affinity membrane consists of a
microporous membrane in which the pores have been filled with an affinity ligand
that selectively binds the desired protein. Transport of proteins across the
filled pores occurs by dissolution into and diffusion through the pores. Alpha-
chymotrypsin is an inexpensive protein that will be used as a model compound in
Phase I; it is a good substitute for proteins like interferon, which are of very
high added value. Preliminary calculations indicate that the membrane-based
purification of interferon can be performed by the membranes to be developed in
the project at a cost as low as $0.46/million units of interferon--less than 1
percent of the current selling price. The proposed work is directed at the
development of a novel and highly selective membrane for the continuous
purification of valuable proteins such as interferon from complex and dilute
mixtures. Production of proteins requires three main steps: fermentation or cell
culture, isolation, and purification. Fermentation and cell-culture processes
have undergone much development; isolation and purification are now the weakest
parts of the overall scheme. The goal of the Phase I program is to establish the
feasibility of employing "affinity membranes" to purify hydrophobic proteins.
The affinity membrane consists of a membrane in which the microscopic pores,
which normally allow water to channel through the membrane, have been filled
with an immobilized solution of molecules which selectively bind the desired
protein. Proteins will be transported across the filled pores as they dissolve
into the immobilized solution inside the pore and diffuse through to the other
side, where they will be collected in an appropriately buffered water solution.
Alpha-chymotrypsin is an inexpensive protein that will be used as a model
compound in Phase I; it is a good substitute for proteins like interferon, which
are of very high added value. Preliminary calculations indicate that the
membrane-based purification of interferon can be performed by the membranes to
be developed in the project at a cost as low as $0.46/million units of
interferon--less than 1 percent of the current selling price. In contrast, a
general rule of thumb in conventional separations of proteins produced by
fermentation or cell culture is that the separation costs account for 90 percent
of the final cost of the product.