* 8860768
* Very Large Scale Integrated High Throughput Rate            Architectures for Systolic Array Processors
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Tsun-Yee Yan, Linknet
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,523.00

The Lease-Squares (L.S.) algorithm is the basis for many modern signal
processing applications including spectral analysis, beamformation, direction
finding, adaptive antenna array, equalization, Kalman filtering and parameter
estimation. Triangular and linear systolic arrays are the most efficient ways to
achieve high computational throughput rates for high performance real-time
applications. The company is making a detailed comparison of the arithmetical
complexity (number of multiples, divides, etc.) and finite precision
computational effects of the triangular and linear internal and boundary
systolic processing cells under Givens, fast Givens, modified fast Givens,
modified Gram-Schmidt, and Householder transformations for l.s. estimation based
on the QR decomposition approach. By selecting the processing algorithm with the
least computational complexity, it can determine the architecture of the high
throughput rate systolic array processor for VLSI fabrication. A generic
(programmable) systolic array processing chip can be developed for a variety of
signal processing applications. Reviewers awarded this uniformly high scores of
16, 17 and 18. They said that the research problem was precisely defined and was
one of high impact. The proposal is knowledgeable, current and comprehensive.
Success will lead to signal processing architectures with very high throughput
rates. The personnel have excellent qualifications. This research will
contribute to the design of future instruments that require a high rate of data
manipulation.