* 8860518
* Unsymmetrical Tellurides as Novel Metallic-Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD) Reagents for Tellurium Alloys
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Duncan Brown, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

This project is in the general area of materials chemistry and in the subfield
of organometallic chemistry. The thrust of this experimental activity is the
synthesis and characterization of new molecules as more efficient precursors for
the fabrication of thin metal film devices by metalorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD) technology. Unsymmetrical tellurides (RTeR') represent a
novel alternative to the non-optimal source reagents currently in use. These
unsymmetrical tellurides will have increased volatility while maintaining labile
tellurium-carbon bonds by appropriate choice of the R and R' groups. The
technical approach in this Phase activity is the synthesis and characterization
of a series of five compounds of formula RTeR' by modifications of literature
procedures. These five compounds will be pyrolized and the products identified.
The relative role of carbon-based vs. tellurium-based radicals on the
decomposition rate and growth temperature will be studied. Low growth
temperatures are essential for the MOCVD of abrupt heterojunction devices
fabricated from mercury cadmium telluride. Success in Phase I will result in the
identification of new, low temperature source reagents for the MOCVD of
tellurium alloys. Upon successful completion of this Phase I research, the
utility of these reagents will be demonstrated in the fabrication of mercury
cadmium telluride films in a subsequent Phase II effort.