* 8860688
* Growth of Grain Oriented Ingot of High Critical Temperature Superconducting Oxides by Zone Refining
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* John Baker, Universal Energy Systems, Inc (UES, Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,759.00

High temperature superconductivity materials will permit development of a wide
variety of electronic devices with decreased power requirements. This program
will create large single crystallites of 1-2-3 compound superconductor material;
increased current carrying capacity of large single crystals will allow a
practical use of high Tc materials. The objective of Phase I of this program
will be to enlarge the size of microscopic crystallites to a size such that they
may be cut out of ceramic material and used as an interconnection in a circuit
device. The procedure used to increase the size of single crystal form of high
Tc material will take advantage of initial formation of crystallites at 950
degrees centigrade. Solid phase epitaxial growth of larger crystallites will be
performed by developing a temperature gradient in a tube furnace. A very narrow
zone (mm long) will be created at 950 degrees centigrade while the remainder of
the tube furnace will be maintained at approximately 850 degrees centigrade.
This narrow zone will be moved slowly along the length of the material to permit
solid phase epitaxial formation of larger crystallites. The objective of
obtaining larger crystallites will be attained by studying the mechanisms
involved in creation of oriented crystallites in the heat treatment processing
of ceramic materials.