* 8860421
* A New Burst and Random Error Correcting Code: Non-Binary    Projection Coding
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Gary Lomp, InterDigital Telecom Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 09/30/1989
* USD 47,603.00

This project is funded under the National Science Foundation's (NSF) Small
Business Innovation Research (SBIR) program, which is designed to provide an
opportunity for small business, particularly the small high technology firm, to
participate in NSF research. Phase I of the SBIR program serves as a filter to
select promising proposals and determine if the firm can do high quality
research. Phase II is the principal research project. Phase III is the
conversion of the NSF-funded research into commercial applications and
technological innovation supported by follow-on private venture capital or other
non-federal financing. This is a Phase I project to conduct research in a new
error correction coding technique based on an extension of majority logic
coding. The code has an algebraic structure that permits a hybrid code design
that employs cyclic coding in a natural fashion withn the basic code. The
resulting hybrid code has increased random error correction capability while
retaining the simple iterative scheme, wherin the number of errors is reduced
significantly with each iteration. The research will extend binary projection
code theory to non-binary elements (symbols) and investigate the performance of
these non-binary projection codes. Erasure decoding of both binary and nonbinary
projection codes will also be investigated. A successful effort could lead to a
relatively inexpensive codec capable of efficient operation at high code rates
and very high bit rates. Numerous commercial and government applications exist,
including broadband ISDN, packet data switching and satellite and meteor burst
transmission systems.