* 8860729
* Monolithic Optical Data Transmitters
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Colin Wood, North East Semiconductor Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

This proposal describes a six month program to address the feasibility of
commercial production processes for monolithic integration of a semiconductor
laser diode and its associated driving/modulating transistor. The initiative for
this work stems from an identified market. Pacific Monolithics has told NESI
that they would purchase large quantities of this type of product if available.
The laser will be of the Graded Index Separate Confining Heterostructure Single
Quantum Well (GRINCSH-SQW) type which has produced the highest performance
semiconductor lasers to date. The transistor structure will be the strained
channel, Modulation Doped Field Effect Transistor (MODFET) type. This type
MODFET has produced the world's fastest transistor for the proposed geometry.
The AlGaAs quantum well laser and transistor structure will be grown by
Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE) and transferred in Phase II to Organometallic Vapor
Phase Epitaxy (OMVPE) for mass production (cost reduction). These individual
devices and materials, as well as the growth and fabrication technologies have
been demonstrated at Cornell University. Phase I of this program would extend
this knowledge to include the integration technology. This is a necessary
condition for confidence in future manufacturability. The lasing wavelength will
be = 850 nm, suitable for short haul plastic or multimode glass fibers (local
area) optical signal transmission. In the future this technology would lead on
to optical networking.