* 8860275
* Advanced Infrared Spectroscopy for Improved Characterizationof Chemical Systems
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Philip Morrison, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,409.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of process
analytical instrumentation. The goal of this research is to demonstrate the
feasibility of a rugged, relatively inexpensive, sensitive and versatile
detector for the simultaneous on-line analysis of compositions, concentrations,
and temperatures of gases and particles in process streams. This instrument is
based on Phase Sensitive Fourier Transform (PS-FT) spectroscopy, and it will be
designed to (1) substantially reduce the noise in measurements of hot streams
that are turbulent, inhomogeneous, or contain particles, (2) increase the limits
of detection in a noise-free environment, and (3) provide a sensitive method of
performing spatially resolved measurements. PS-FT will expand the capabilities
of Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) Emission and Transmission (E/T)
spectroscopy which is a technique that has been developed and patented by
Advanced Fuel Research, Inc. This Phase I project will demonstrate the
capabilities of PS-FTIR. The technique will be implemented by modifying a
commercial FT-IR and will demonstrate the reduction of noise from detectors, the
rejection of noise from sample streams, and the application of a crossed beam
technique for obtaining spatially resolved data. Modern chemical analysis of
process streams requires increasingly sophisticated methods to understand
complex chemical processes. Often, many variables must be measured
simultaneously, in-situ, and at the lower limits of detectability. While many
techniques are available as in-situ diagnostics, in general they only measure
one property, so that several instruments are required to analyze the stream.
This Phase I research will demonstrate the feasibility of enhancing the
sensitivity and spatial resolution of FT-IR while retaining its broad spectral
bandwidth. The successful development of this instrument as planned would have
both a technological and a cost advantage over combinations of diagnostics
currently available.