* 8861436
* Preparation of Pervaporation Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Richard Baker, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

Pervaporation is a promising new membrane process for the separation of solvent
mixtures. This firm has recently been developing pervaporation systems using
thin-film composite membranes in spiral- wound membrane modules. They propose to
develop improved membranes and processes for the separation of small amounts of
dissolved hydrophilic polar solvents from water. These solutions represent a
considerable opportunity for pervaporation. In the Phase I program, they will
demonstrate the overall feasibility of the concept in small 0.1-0.2 square meter
spiral-wound membrane modules. In the Phase II program, the most promising
membranes would be optimized. These results would then be used to complete a
technical and economic analysis of the process. Pervaporation is a promising new
membrane process for separating a low concentration of a volatile solute from
solution. For example, organic molecules like those found in gasoline can be
removed from water by passing the solution through a membrane unit in which the
membrane is permeable to the organic molecules, but not to the water. This is
much less expensive than an energy intensive process like distillation, since
the water does not have to be heated. Currently, however, there are no
commercial membrane systems which can separate a more water-like molecule, such
as ethanol, from water. Development of membranes with this capability would
extend the process of pervaporation to this important class of separations. The
company proposes to test the feasibility of several potential membrane systems
to perform such a separation in Phase I. The most successful membranes would
then be optimized in Phase II, and the design data necessary for a complete
technical and economic analysis of the process would be gathered.