* 8861461
* High Surface Area Lead Dioxide Anode for Electrosynthesis
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Norman Weinberg, The Electrosynthesis Company, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in the general
area of analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfields of
electrocatalysis and electrochemical synthesis. A novel high surface area lead
dioxide electrode will be prepared, characterized and employed in this Phase I
research effort for a variety of organic electrochemical processes. High surface
area carbons of high oxidation stability will be used as the substrate on which
lead dioxide will be deposited from strongly acidic media. The effectiveness of
the high surface area lead dioxide relative to that of planar lead dioxide will
be evaluated for the regeneration of Cr(VI) and Ce(IV). The Cr(VI) and Ce(IV)
will then be used for the "extra-cell" synthesis of naphthoquinone and
anthraquinone. The number of stable, inexpensive, electrocatalytic anode
materials available for the electrosynthesis of chemicals is quite limited. It
is expected that the high surface area lead dioxide electrode will provide
superior performance when compared to planar lead dioxide. The use of stable,
inexpensive, high surface area lead dioxide anodes may provide higher
selectivity and stability than presently utilized anodes, thereby allowing lower
capital and operating costs for the electrochemical synthesis of various organic
chemicals via regeneration of Cr(VI) and Ce(IV).