* 8861029
* High Utilization Carbon Supported Platinum Electrocatalyst  for Solid Polymer Electrolyte Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* N.R.K. Vilambi, Physical Sciences Incorporated (PSI)
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,827.00

Economical solid polymer electrolyte fuel cells (SPEFCs) have potential
commercial applications for example as auxiliary power fuel cell systems for
cruise ships, offshore platforms, and remote navigation systems. Compared to
other currently used electricity generating systems, fuel cells offer many
advantages, including (1) high fuel to electricity conversion efficiency at both
rated and part load; (2) molecular construction; and (3) low pollutant levels. A
major impediment to the commercialization of SPEFC is the high cost of the
unsupported platinum electrocatalyst. In this work the PIs plan to develop high
utilization pulse plated carbon supported electrocatalysts for SPEFC
applications which reduce the platinum cost by factors of 20 to 40 relative to
the state-of-the-art. In order to obtain a high utilization carbon supported
SPEFC electrocatalyst, the PIs plan to electrodeposit the platinum catalyst
particles onto the carbon support after it has been fabricated into a gas
diffusion electrode and impregnated with Nafion. In this approach a porous gas
diffusion electrode structure will be prepared with high surface area carbon
(not Pt catalyzed) and Teflon using conventional techniques. A solution of
solubilized Nafion will then be painted or sprayed into the porous carbon
electrode structure. The membrane side of the electrode will then be exposed to
platinum electroplating solution and small particles of platinum will be
deposited. In this manner, the platinum catalyst particles are deposited onto
the carbon support only in regions accessible by the solid electrolyte.
Consequently, all the platinum particles have ionic accessibility and result in
greatly increased platinum utilization. The objective of this Phase I research
program is to demonstrate the feasibility of preparing a high utilization carbon
supported platinum electrocatalyst using pulse plating. Towards this objective,
the following questions will be addressed: o Can small platinum particles (15 to
35>) be deposited onto a smooth graphitic or glassy carbon surface using pulse
plating? o Can the pulse plating deposition technique be extended to solid
polymer electrolyte coated carbon surfaces?