* 8861022
* Magnetostatic Coalescence
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Robin Oder, EXPORTech Company Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

The company will investigate the use of magnetic fields to separate water and
oil from emulsions of these materials. The method calls for the use of very
small amounts of either water-soluble or oil-soluble magnetic additives to
impart magnetic properties to the liquid occupying the smaller volume of the
mixture. Magnetic fields are employed to cause the droplets which make up the
inner phase of the emulsion to coalesce in a manner analogous to electrostatic
coalescence, which is currently used in desalting and dewatering of crude oil.
It is estimated that with use of very small amounts of magnetic chemicals which
are designed to concentrate at the boundary between the liquid making up the
droplets and the liquid the droplets are dispersed in, that magnetic fields on
the order of two Tesla or less can create coalescence forces of the same order
of magnitude as a large electrical field. Magnetic fields of two Tesla are
commercially available and are widely used in many practical applications. The
magnetostatic method is applicable to oil/water separations where there is high
electrical conductivity in either the oil or water; this type of system cannot
be treated by the conventional electrical method. The new method is safer to use
in petroleum refining applications than is the electrostatic method because high
voltage electric fields are not employed. Potential commercial applications of
the research are in desalting and dehydration of crude oil, enhanced oil
recovery, preparation of injection water in secondary oil recovery, waste
treatment, oil spill cleanup, and demulsification in the food, pharmaceutical
and cosmetics industries.