* 8861368
* Vector Processors for Systolic Arrays
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Michael Griffin, Peregrine Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 50,000.00

The digital signal and image processing industry continues to grow. However,
many compute-bound, high-end, real-time needs are not currently being met.
Application areas typifying these requirements are communications, radar/sonar,
speech and scene analysis, computer vision and graphics. A new and powerful
class of digital processor architectures is required to meet this need. This
research is on a new digital processor design that has potential for significant
increases in speed, area-speed and cost-performance measures. It can provide
multi-megahertz fixed and floating point operation on one VLSI chip. Its
innovative bit-serial interprocessor I/O structure makes it a candidate for
fine-grain systolic array applications. The design goal is a system which
achieves ten to one hundred MFLOP per chip computational bandwidth in a small,
low cost package. This is in the class of desktop supercomputers. Such a machine
could be used as an attached co-processor in general applications or embedded
into signal and imaging systems in application specific environments. Reviewers
gave this scores of 15, 15 and 18, which are quite high relative to all the
scores. The three reviewers saw this as having al well-developed research plan,
with high probability of good results leading to Phase II work. They said it is
an important problem with substantial payoff. Solutions will contribute to the
design of future instruments that depend on rapid processing of large arrays of
numbers. The qualifications of the personnel are excellent.