* 8861484
* Improved Aluminum Reduction Technology to Exploit           Non-Consumable Anodes
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1989,09/30/1989
* Theodore Beck, Electrochemical Technology Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1989
* USD 49,688.00

Current production of aluminum in the United States is approximately 3.8 x 106
metric tons per year. The presently used system for the production of aluminum
is the Hall-Herault cell. It is operated at 950> to 980>C and consists of a
carbon cavity (lining) which conducts current from a molten aluminum cathode on
the bottom of the cathode cavity. Consumable carbon anodes are suspended in a
cryolite electrolyte (bath) which floats on the aluminum cathode (metal pad).
Alumina powder is fed periodically or continuously, carbon anodes are consumed
continuously (with periodic replacement in prebaked anode plants), and molten
metal product is siphoned approximately daily. In this work the PI will examine
new electrode materials and new concepts for electrochemical cell design and
operation which could save energy and lower operating costs on retrofit older
plants, as well as decrease both capital and operating costs for new aluminum
reduction plants. The aluminum industry has for decades been pursuing a non-
consumable anode that can be substituted for the consumable carbon anodes in the
Hall-Herault cells. The PI plans to test a new alumina/carbon composite anode
made of a Ni-Fe-Cu cermet material. This composite anode technology utilizes the
same reaction as the Hall-Herault technology but the alumina in the anode is
dissolved at the anode-bath interface at exactly the location where oxide ions
are discharged on the carbon matrix. The result is that high alumina solubility
in the bath is not required, and low-temperature baths could be used. The bath
to be used in this research project is a mixture of sodium and lithium cryolites
having a freezing point less than 670>C and operating at about 700>C Titanium
diboride sleeves inside the crucible will serve as an alternate cathode to
graphite. The phase I objectives include: o Maintenance of slurry in suspension
without formation of deposits. o Limiting current density as a function of Al2O3
particle size in the feed and slurry density. o Effect of bath temperature on
limiting current density and other operating parameters in the range of 700> to
800>C. o Mixed fluoride-chloride bath performance compared to all- fluoride
bath. o Potential distribution in respect to thermodynamic overpotentials and
ohmic drops. o Corrosion of cermet anode contamination of aluminum metal by
cermet anode components.