* 9500614
* CAREER: Time-Resolved Nonlinear Terahertz Spectroscopy
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Xi-Cheng Zhang, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 07/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

This research project proposes the development of a novel source of ultra-
intense, ultrashort pulsed electromagnetic radiation for time-resolved terahertz
(Thz) spectroscopy. This table-top radiation source will emit subpicosecond
electromagnetic pulses with Thz bandwith and gigawatt (GW) peak power. The
technique consists of using an amplified femtosecond laser beam to illuminate a
large-aperture semiconducting emitters, and to generate electromagnetic
radiation produced by the rapid current transients due to optical injection of
free carriers into the static electric fields associated with the semiconductor
surfaces and interfaces. Since the energy carried by submillimeter-wave pulses
is derived mainly from the electrostatic energy capacitively stored at the
surface rather than from the incident laser energy, the total energy of the
radiation can well exceed the incident of the laser beam. The academic proposal
results from a need to develop a new curriculum for the Optical Physics Program
at Rensselear. A pilot program is being developed to improve student learning
and motivati on through computer-based interactive teaching using graphics,
multi-media, numerical simulations, and hands-on experiments. The proposed
Advanced Optoelectronic Laboratory for undergraduates will be furnished with
state-of-the-art equipment and instrumentation. A computer-assisted Modern
Optics Teaching Room is under construction. Undergraduate student research
participation is strongly emphasized to tightly couple experimental and class
work activities.