* 9500299
* U.S.-Sweden Workshop:  Worldwide Access of Emerging         Mathematical Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, August 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Brian Malloy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 06/30/1996
* USD 16,400.00

This award will support travel of 7 U.S. participants to a U.S.-Sweden workshop
in computer algebra in Stockholm, Sweden, June 7-9, 1995. The co-organizers are
David P. Jacobs and Brian Malloy of Clemson University and Torsten Ekedahl of
Stockholm University. The purpose of the workshop is to discuss the use of world
wide web and other networks for sharing mathematical software systems with the
scientific and educational community. The workshop addresses issues concerning
the development of common standards and codes, multimedia approaches, and
appropriate software development tools for building interfaces. Many specialized
mathematical software systems are emerging to perform such diverse computations
as solving systems of equations, constructing algebraic structures, examining
properties of geometric objects, and visualizing abstract mathematical systems.
These systems are not easily transported because of different formats and varied
conventions for the interchange of data. The emergence of world wide web now
offers an opportunity for sharing different systems through remote access to
software programs. The workshop takes advantage of interaction with Swedish
computer algebra specialists and other Europeans through POSSO (Polynomial
Systems Solver) group.