* 9500983
* Mathematical Sciences: Coding Methods in Algebra,           Computability Theory and Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Andre Nies, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9500983 Nies Nies' research concerns areas of algebra and logic that involve
coding with first-order properties in structures and in classes of structures.
He is interested in proving undecidability of fragments of elementary theories
consisting of sentences with few quantifier alternations, in particular, for
theories of classes of finite groups, the theory of finite distributive
lattices, and for the theory of the lattice E of enumerable sets. Interest in
such fragments arises from their containing the first-order sentences that
usually occur in mathematical practice. Moreover, he will work toward
determining the complexity of theories of degree structures from structural
complexity theory and toward using coding methods to investigate model-theoretic
properties of the structure D of enumerable Turing degrees. Both E and D are
central structures in computability theory. Also using coding methods, he
intends to prove nonelementary equivalence of various degree structures and
intends to introduce a measure of the informational content of isomorphism types
of structures belonging to various classes of structures from model theory. In a
further project, he plans to separate complexity classes that are
generalizations of deterministic and nondeterministic linear time. The general
idea of coding is to represent objects of one kind by objects of another kind,
with a fixed decoding key used to retrieve the information from an object of the
second kind. In this project, the objects are certain structures from algebra,
computability theory, and model theory. The decoding key consists of a
collection of formulas in first-order logic, a formal language which can be
viewed as a formalization of a major part of natural language within
mathematics. A coding of a structure A in a structure B guarantees that B is at
least as complex as A. Nies will investigate the abstract ordering on classes of
all possibly infinite structures by comparing their co mplexity and will apply
similar methods to classes of finite structures, a field which has been the
focus of interest in recent years for its connections with computer science. In
a second part of this project, coding methods will be applied to computability
theory, that part of mathematical logic which deals with computability in the
ideal sense. Undecidable sets can vary with respect to their computational
complexity. The goals here, beyond determining the complexity of the associated
first-order theory, are to find out the symmetries of the structures and to find
a simple characterization of these structures. These questions are important for
deepening the understanding of computation. ***