* 9500389
* Engineering Research Equipment: Electrical Discharge        Grinding Machine
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Kamlakar Rajurkar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 03/31/1997
* USD 80,000.00

9500389 Rajurkar This engineering research equipment award is to purchase an
electrical discharge grinding machine (EDGM), that will be modified as part of
the empirical and analytical program at the University of Nebraska to build an
innovative new machine, the Abrasive Electrical Discharge Grinding Machine
(AEDGM). There is a subtle difference in the commercial machine that they will
purchase - the EDGM - and the prototype they will develop - the AEDGM. The
commercial machine they will purchase removes material only by spark erosion
with a rotating graphite wheel acting as an electrode. Adding abrasives to the
wheel allows for mechanical mechanisms to remove material as well. This is
important when processing metal matrix composites or ceramics, because the
electrical-thermal mechanism only works on conductive materials, leading to low
removal efficiency and poor finish for this class of advanced materials. By
adding the abrasive mechanical mechanism, this team of researchers will broaden
the types of materials, the rates for processing, and the quality of products
produced. The work will be done at the University of Nebraska's Nontraditional
Manufacturing Processes Laboratory, a facility that has an international track
record in this field of research. This award will build the experimental
infrastructure to investigate this new process - abrasive electro discharge
machining - which promises higher productivity in shaping advanced materials
like titanium based alloys, tungsten carbide, and polycrystalline diamond. ***