* 9500906
* Late Quaternary Climate Change Across Northern Alaska:      A Comparison of Lake-Level and Pollen Variations
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Mary Edwards, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 106,526.00

Abstract ATM-9500906 Finney, Bruce University of Alaska Title: Late Quaternary
Climate Change Across Northern Alaska: A Comparison of Lake-Level and Pollen
Variations This research project will address paleoclimatic questions and
hypotheses for northern Alaska during the late-Quaternary (21,000 yr BP to
present) using lake-level records as proxies for effective moisture. Results of
climate model simulations and conceptual paleoclimate scenarios provide
hypotheses to be tested against the geologic record. Other questions are derived
from regional changes in the paleovegetational record that require climatic
explanations. Specific paleoclimatic questions are: 1) was there an east-west
gradient in effective moisture across northern Alaska during the late glacial as
well as the Holocene, 2) when did the major increase in effective moisture
related to late-glacial circulation changes occur, 3) was precipitation either
enhanced or reduced during the period 11,000-6000 (calibrated) yr BP, when
temperatures were probably warmer that present, and 4) are there other rapid,
regional effective moisture changes in the record? The major contributions of
this research will be 1) empirical data on regional paleohydrology, and 2) an
assessment of changes in vegetation and other factors of the terrestrial system
(e.g., eolian processes and watershed geochemistry) in the light of the
paleohydrologic and other paleoclimatic data.