* 9500477
* Engineering Research Equipment: A FTIR Spectrometer Coupled with an Ultraviolet Light Source for Polymerization Reaction Engineering and Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* John Falconer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/1997
* USD 31,200.00

Bowman 9500477 The PIs plan to purchase a Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR)
Spectrometer for use within the Department of Chemical Engineering at the
University of Colorado. This instrument will be used to study the molecular
processes involved in UV-initiated polymerizations and in UV photocatalysis. The
FTIR spectrometer has the high resolution (0.3 cm-1) and high speed (20 scans
per second) required to study these processes, which are fast even at room
temperature. In addition to the spectrometer and associated computer, a fiber-
optic UV light source, filters, and multiple internal reflectance accessory will
be purchased while a controlled-atmosphere cell for catalytic studies will be
constructed. This spectrometer will be equipped with two sample/detection
compartments so that it can effectively be used by two investigators.
Polymerization reactions for the production of highly cross-linked polymers will
be initiated by the UV light, and a novel technique for studying reaction
diffusion termination mechanisms will be employed. This technique involves
monitoring small changes in the double bond conversion after the UV light has
been turned off. In this manner the importance of reaction diffusion will be
established, and the reaction diffusion constant will be measured. The changes
in surface concentrations of reactants and intermediates and identification of
adsorbed intermediates will be measured with the FTIR spectrometer during
photocatalytic oxidation of organics on titania catalysts. These transient
measurements will help identify reaction steps and measure their rates when
combined with mass spectrometric detection of reaction products. Temperature-
programmed desorption and reaction will also be used to identify adsorbate
concentrations. The addition of an FTIR spectrometer will enhance funded
research that is currently in progress in these areas. It is anticipated that
the spectrometer will also be valuable in other polymerization and catalysis
research. At presen t, there is no IR spectrometer in the College of
Engineering. Both PIs have experience at other universities with FTIR
spectrometers. The University of Colorado will aost share 40% of the purchase
price of this equipment, and the equipment will be maintained by research grants
of the two PIs.