* 9500631
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematical Models of Structured   Population Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Glenn Webb, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 80,000.00

Webb The investigtor studies the qualitative behavior of the linear and
nonlinear partial differential equations of structured population dynamics. In
these equations structure variables such as age, size, maturity, or other
physical attributes of members of the population relate individual population
behavior to total population behavior. The methods of the research employ the
theory of semigroups of linear operators in Banach spaces, the spectral theory
of linear operators in Banach spaces, and the theory of positive linear and
nonlinear operators in Banach lattices. The project appliies these researches to
(1) models of the blood production system and abnormalities in this system such
as aplastic anemia, (2) models of loss of telomeres in ends of chromosomes in
proliferating cell lines and the distinction of normal and cancer cells in these
loss processes, (3) qualitative models of AZT treatment of AIDS and the
development of resistant strains of HIV as a result of treatment, (4) models of
periodic chemotherapy of tumor cell populations, and (5) models of epidemics
with infection incubation periods and geographical dependence. This project
studies the ways in which populations may behave, if the behavior is described
by certain kinds of equations that incorporate features of the populations. Such
features include the age, size, or maturity of members of the population. The
mathematical results are applied to models of populations of cells, of
epidemics, and mf treatments. In these various applications the qualitative
behaviors of physical and biological phenomena are modelled as dynamical
population processes. The significance of this work is in the development of
mathematical methods to analyze the qualitative behavior of solutions of the
equations that describe structured populations, and to apply these methods to
the qualitative understanding of biotechnological processes.