* 9500518
* Wall Turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Thomas Hanratty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 08/31/1998
* USD 270,750.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9500518 HANRATTY UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS This proposal deals with
turbulence generated by flow over a solid boundary. The goals are the
determination of how turbulence is produced, of how to control turbulence, of
how to predict Reynolds stresses and the properties of small scale turbulence.
An important feature of the research is that it uses direct numerical
simulations (DNS), pulsed-image velocimetry (PIV), two-component laser-Doppler
velocimetry (LDV), and a specially constructed facility for optical studies of
turbulence. The chief thrust is to develop a conceptual framework for wall
turbulence which can be used to analyze complex flows and to determine how
turbulence can be modified. The approach taken is to consider the structure and
dynamics of stress producing eddies. Studies will be made of (1) "simple" wall
turbulence, such as fully developed flow in a channel or Couette flow, (2) flow
over a wavy solid boundary, (3) flow of a solution of drag-reducing polymers.
PIV and DNS will be used to study large scale eddies in the outer flow.
Particular attention will be given to their origin and to their interaction with
the flow oriented vortices close to the wall which are very large producers of
turbulence. Proper orthogonal decomposition will separate large and small scale
turbulence. Flow over a wavy boundary is fundamentally different from flow over
a smooth boundary in that turbulence production close to the wall is associated
with a separating shear layer rather than wall vortices. The addition of a long
chain polymer, in amounts as small as 3 ppm, dramatically decreases drag by
changing the structure in the viscous wall region, in ways which are poorly
understood.