* 9500394
* Towards a New Generation of Robust Interrogation Methods    in Computer-Aided Design and Computer-Aided Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* Nicholas Patrikalakis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9500394 Patrikalakis The objective of this project is to construct numerically
robust and topologically reliable unstructured triangular meshes of surfaces
which are the faces of complex solid models for computational fluid dynamics.
The project builds on fundamental work completed earlier by these investigators
in interval solid modeling to address basic robustness problems in interrogation
methods for solid models. The research plan involves first the conversion of
older legacy designs to interval solid models to maximize impact of the method
in large-scale industrial rather than only academic problems. The research will
also explore some of the essential elements of piecewise linear and
topologically reliable approximation of planar contours, followed by three
dimensional contours that can represent space interval non-uniform rational
B-spline curves of arbitrary complexity. This will be extended to explore
features of surface triangularization of surface patches and entire solids,
followed by three dimensional domain tetrahedrization. This sequence of
problems, where the solution of an earlier problem assists in the solution of a
more complex problem, is expected to allow the development of a reliable and
efficient overall algorithm for solving such problems. An industrial advisory
committee will follow the work and assure its relevance to long-term industrial
interests. This work seeks to advance the state of knowledge in robustly
interrogating the geometry of complex objects using imprecise or discrete
computer arithmetic and developing the necessary theory and relevant algorithms
which can form the intellectual basis for computer-aided design and computer-
aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) systems of the future. It could significantly
decrease the time required during product design and hence decrease production
cost. It could also decrease the rate of failure of design processes. It
provides a sound and flexible basis for future CAD/CAM systems because these
will need to includ e precise simulation of kinematics, fluid, structural and
dynamical process on complex objects during the design, manufacturing and
operational period of the object. The knowledge and experience gained through
this research will be integrated into the teaching curriculum of two graduate
courses at MIT.