* 9500572
* Subdivision Methods for Computer-Aided Design and           Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Joe Warren, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1999
* USD 150,086.00

Representing curved shape is a fundamental problem in geometric modeling and
design. A variety of approaches currently exist for modeling curved shape, by
far the most popular of which is a boundary representation (B-rep) whose
surfaces are trimmed NURBS (non-uniform rational B-splines). Unfortunately,
building a modeler based on trimmed NURBS is exceedingly difficult for at least
two reasons. First, trimming two NURBS patches to agree along a common edge
usually involves complex surface/surface intersection algorithms and substantial
approximation. Second, even in the absence of sharp edges, patching is often
required since a single NURBS patch is capable of modeling only surfaces
topologically equivalent to planes, cylinders, and tori. Modeling surfaces of
other topological types (even those as simple as a sphere) require the surface
be decomposed into a quiltwork of individual NURBS patches. Complicated
continually conditions must then be imposed to guarantee that adjacent patches
join smoothly. Subdivision provides a promising alternative to NURBS. Using
subdivision, a polyhedron is mapped to a sequence of denser polyhedra whose
limit is a curved object. Each new polyhedron is derived from the previous
polyhedron by splitting each of its faces into four new faces and positioning
its new vertices using a fixed averaging mask. Different masks yield surface
features such as corners, curved edges, or smooth faces in the limit object. The
method is simple, requiring only polyhedral modeling. The method is general,
producing objects with smooth faces and sharp curved edges without trimming or
patching. Finally, subdivision provides a hierarchical representation that
allows the design of efficient multi-resolution processing algorithms. This
research addresses a combination of theoretical and applied problems whose
solution is essential if subdivision is to be of use as a practical method for
modeling curved shape. Specifically it develops: Curvature continuous
subdivision methods; Subdivision methods for local refinement and introduction
of shapes and edges; Functional subdivision methods over irregular
triangulations (necessary for FEA) and algorithms for: Conversion to and from
other representations such as NURBS, Editing and display of subdividion
surfaces, Finite element analysis over subdivision surfaces, Computing the
intersection, union, or difference of subdivision surfaces.