* 9500291
* Mathematical Sciences: Semigroup of Endomorphisms of        Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* William Arveson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9500291 Arveson The research proposed here addresses problems related to the
structure and classification of semigroups of automorphisms of operator algebras
and their relationship to several areas of modern analysis, quantum physics, and
probability theory. A principal component of the project is to establish a
connection between certain semigroups and continuous tensor products of Hilbert
spaces. more precisely, the classification of E_0-semigroups up to cocycle
conjugacy was shown to be equivalent to the problem of classifying these
continuous tensor product systems. In turn, the latter structures give rise to
computable invariants of various types: numerical (an index invariant),
topological (a non-commutative topological space, the spectral C*-algebra).
Moreover, such continuous tensor products occur naturally in probability theory;
for example, they can be associated with random distributions having stationary
independent increments, and with other martingale-type processes as well. A
secondary project is to continue the proposer's recent work on the role of
operator algebras in the problem of computing the spectra of infinite
dimensional self-adjoint operators. The general area of mathematics of this
project has its basis in the theory of algebras of operators on Hilbert space.
Operators can be thought of as finite or infinite matrices of complex numbers.
Special types of operators are often put together in an algebra, naturally
called an operator algebra. These seemingly abstract objects have a surprising
variety of applications. For example, they play a key role in knot theory, which
in turn is currently being used to study the structure of DNA. ***