* 9500499
* CRB:  Risk of Extinction and Conservation Biology of Rare   Plants in Oceanic Islands
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,03/31/2000
* Tod Stuessy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2000
* USD 180,000.00

The purpose of this research is to provide eneral guidelines for assessing risks
of extinction in rare plants on oceanic islands by studying their genetic and
morphological variation and aspects of the reproductive biology/. Allozymes and
RAPDs will be used to measured diversity within populations of different sizes
in selected species of rare plants on the Juan Fernandez Islands that differ in
reproductive biology. This will determine whether smaller populations may be at
greater risk of extinction because of lower genetic diversity and/or reduced
seed set due to inbreeding depression, lack of pollinators, or skewed sex ratios
in dioecious species. The level and apportionment of genetic diversity within
and among populations of species differing in aspects of reproductive biology
such as breeding systems, pollinators, and seed dispersers will also be
assessed. The data generated in this study should provide guidelines for
assessing the risk of extinction in the many endangered and threatened species
endemic to oceanic islands, as well as for fragmented and small populations in
contin ental areas. The proposed work will have a strong educational component
because National Park guides on the islands, Chilean graduate students, and
Chilean faculty members will receive training in various aspects of conservation
biology.