* 9500213
* Experimental Studies of Surface and Interface Magnetism
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Herbert Hopster, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 340,000.00

9500213 Hopster This research project is an investigation of the magnetism of
surfaces, ultrathin films, and interfaces. The focus is on metallic systems,
including transition metals and rare earth metals. The magnetic order and the
surface atomic moments of transition metals of the 3d, 4d, and 5d series will be
studied by spin-polarized electron energy loss spectroscopy. The magnetic domain
structure of gadolinium films below and above the bulk Curie temperature will be
investigated by spin polarized secondary electron emission microscopy. Magnetic
ordering phenomena in antiferromagnetic films will be studied by preparing
multilayered materials which include thin ferromagnetic layers between the
antiferromagnetic layers. The research is focused on fundamental magnetism
issues, but the results will also be of much broader interest, particularly in
the context of information storage technology. %%% This research project
investigates ultrathin multilayers of magnetic metals. The magnetic behavior of
the multilayers depends on the thickness and composition of the various layers--
in ways that are incompletely understood. The experimental approach involves
study of the interaction of magnetic electrons with the thin films. The
scattering of the magnetic electrons by the materials can be analyzed to deduce
important information about the magnetic state of the films. The materials are
of fundamental interest, and have great technological relevance in the context
of information storage technology based on hard drives, and related devices. ***