* 9500292
* Seismological Analysis of the Erzincan and Izmir            Earthquakes, US-Turkey Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* David Brumbaugh, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1996
* USD 4,500.00

Description: This project supports cooperative activity by Dr. David Brumbaugh,
Department of Geology at Northern Arizona University, with Dr. Cemil Gurboz, and
Dr. Niyazi Turkelli, both at the Kandilli Observatory and Earthquake research
Institute at Bogazici University, Istanbul, Turkey. They will conduct studies on
two earthquakes that occurred in Turkey, the Erzincan earthquake of March 1992
(Ms 6.8), and the Izmir earthquake of November 1992 (Ms 6.0). The research will
include a thorough analysis of the available data to study the crustal
structure, aftershock sequence, and focal parameters for both earthquakes. This
analysis is expected to result in a better understanding of the characteristics
of deep, non-surface rupturing, strike-slip earthquakes. Scope: This research
collaboration involves four trips: an initial visit by Brumbaugh to Turkey, to
provide the Turkish colleagues with a crustal model (using VELEST software), and
to train them in its use for subsequent crustal modeling and aftershock
analysis; one visit by the two Turkish scientists to the US, to transfer to the
US team the results of the crustal modeling and to discuss the results of their
work; and a final visit to Turkey by Brumbaugh to transfer information, discuss
results, and to synthesize the results in a manuscript for publication. All
other costs, including living expenses and other research costs during the four
trips are to be covered from other sources. This project represents a good
collaboration that meets INT objectives in utilizing complementary capabilities
and sharing of research costs.