* 9500798
* Mathematical Sciences:Theory and Applications of Finite-    Dimensional Nonlinear Control
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Hector Sussmann, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 165,000.00

9500798 Sussmann Research will be carried out on nonlinear control theory,
continuing the principal investigator s previous work in this area on a broad
class of problems in optimal control, applications to robotics, feedback
stabilization, and nonholonomic motion planning. The methods used will be those
of differential geometric control theory, nonsmooth analysis, and the theory of
real analytic maps and their associated stratifications. Necessary mathematical
tools will be developed to solve a number of open problems in the areas of
optimal control, controllability, and realization theory. In particular, recent
results of the principal investigator on the Pontrayagin Maximum Principle for
systems of vector fields will be extended, with the goal of proving a general
Maximum Principle for systems of differential inclusions under minimal
hypotheses. The question of the regularity of optimal trajectories will also be
addressed. The proposed research fits within the general framework of control
theory, which is concerned with design problems in which some components of a
dynamical system are accessible to a controlling agent that can modify them so
as to alter the system s behavior. The object is to control the system so as to
achieve a desired behavior, or meet some specifications. Situations of this kind
occur everywhere in engineering as well as in all of the physical and biological
sciences, and many apparently different problems turn out to have common
structural features from the mathematical point of view. The purpose of the
mathematical theory of control systems is to study these features in a
systematic way and to develop techniques for solving particular design problems,
such as causing a robot arm to carry out a particular task, or keeping an
antenna focused. The issues considered in this project deal with (a) optimal
control, in which the goal is to determine how to control a system so as to
optimize some criterion; (b) stabiliz ation, where the object is to drive the
system towards some desired operating point and keep it there; and (c) motion
planning, where it is sought to find a control strategy that will cause a system
to move along some prescribed path. ***