* 9500817
* GOALI: Industry/University Cooperative Research Project:  Development of a Novel Thin Film Deposition Process: A Combined Experimental and Computer Simulation Study
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1995,03/31/2001
* James Engstrom, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2001
* USD 298,404.00

9500817-Engstrom - GOALI ABSTRACT Deposition and growth of thin films represents
an enabling technology that impacts a number of existing and emerging
industries, including microelectronic and optoelectronic device fabrication.
This work will investigate the use of collimated supersonic jets of molecular
thin film precursors under conditions of medium to ultrahigh vacuum to grow thin
films. Previous work by the principal investigator has demonstrated explicitly
that kinetic limitations to epitaxial growth can be overcome by the use of
molecules possessing hyperthermal kinetic energies. This work is being extended
to a fundamental examination of the connections between the chemical dynamics of
the adsorption reaction and the resulting thin film morphology, as well as an
explicit, quantitative evaluation of the hypersonic flow field. The studies will
be conducted in a supersonic molecular beam growth chamber that has been
optimized for thin film growth and evaluation of the hypersonic flow field, the
latter including the pertubing effects of the substrate itself. Computational
studies of the flow fields will be made employing the direct simulation Monte
Carlo (DSMC) approach. These large-scale simulations will be performed on a
massively parellel computing platform. Specific materials systems to be
investigated include: selective epitaxial growth of silicon; deposition of
silicon carbide on silicon; and deposition and growth of carbon-nitride. It is
expected that these studies will provide a fundamentally-based pathway for
scale-up of the process necessary for eventual commercial applications.