* 9500763
* Propagation of Waves of Chemical Activity in Stratified     Media
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1998
* John Tyson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hilderbrandt
* 11/30/1998
* USD 175,800.00

John Tyson is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to perform theoretical studies of propagating waves of
chemical activity in stratified media. In collaboration with Pavel K. Brazhnik,
Tyson will study wave propagation in media with stratified inhomogeneities
attempting to characterize the reflection and refraction of traveling waves at
boundaries between layers. The study will be carried out by analytical,
numerical, and experimental techniques. Analysis will be done by two
complementary methods: the kinematic approach, and singular perturbation theory.
Numerical simulation will also exploit complementary methods: standard finite-
difference approximations to partial differential equations, and cellular
automaton modeling of excitable media. The analytical and numerical results will
be compared with experimental observations of wave propagation in a stratified
chemical excitable medium, the Belousov-Zhabotinsky reaction. Traveling waves of
chemical reaction are unusual but not uncommon occurrences in the natural world.
Examples abound in combustion chemistry, catalytic converters, waves of membrane
depolarization propagating through muscle tissue, waves of cyclic AMP production
in slime mold growth, and a prominent Calcium wave signaling the fertilization
of an egg by sperm. Chemical wave propagation has been studied for many years in
homogeneous, isotropic media. Tyson's work would be the first attempt to study
wave propagation in media with stratified inhomogeneities which are more
realistic mimics of important biological systems.