* 9500766
* Mathematical Sciences:  Modeling of Pattern Formation by    Cellular Tractions on in vitro Extracellular Matrix
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Sharon Lubkin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 213,000.00

Murray Traction forces are a crucial mechanism of pattern formation in
morphogenesis. Cells of many types, when seeded on Matrigel, form aggregates due
solely to traction forces. The traction mechanically deforms the gel, creating
fiber tracks between aggregates. The fiber tracks induce cells to elongate and
migrate along them by contact guidance. The pattern formation occurs
sufficiently quickly that there are no complications of cell proliferation or
secretion or degradation of the matrix, affording a unique opportunity to study
pattern formation by traction forces in isolation. The investigator and his
colleague develop and analyze a mathematical model of the cellular tractions and
the resultant mechanical response of the Matrigel, incorporating a description
of the essential material and behavioral anisotropy which develops in response
to traction. Analysis consists of linear bifurcation analysis, nonlinear
analysis where appropriate, and a strong component of numerical analysis. The
latter entails development of algorithms to simulate the nonlinear conservation
and evolution equations in two spatial dimensions. The study aims at a deeper
understanding of biological traction and the mechanics of extracellular matrix,
and ultimately to a greater understanding of morphogenesis and remodeling in
general. The investigators develop and analyze a mathematical model of a
particular case of cellular pattern formation with the aim of a better, more
fundamental understanding of (1) the mechanical interaction by traction forces
between cells and their growth medium (natural or artificial), (2) the subtle
anisotropic mechanics of the extracellular matrix that forms a large part of the
human body, (3) later restructuring such as wound healing and tumor growth, (4)
human embryonic development, and (5) biological pattern formation in general.
The technique of mathematical modeling allows a logical construction of
biological theories to test, and a method o f testing those theories with
"mathematical experiments." Furthermore, the analysis of the mathematical model
leads to predictions which may then be confirmed or refuted by appropriate
laboratory experiments. It is by a close communication between experiment and
theory that understanding is gained. The project addresses fundamental
biological questions using mathematical and computational techniques, in close
collaboration with experimentalists.