* 9500920
* Mathematical Sciences:  Parallel and Distributed Diffusion  Models for Heterogeneous Media
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Ralph Showalter, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2000
* USD 104,053.00

DMS-9500920 Showalter Mathematical models of diffusion in heterogeneous media
will be developed as nonlinear systems of partial differential equations. These
diffusion processes include examples of diffusion through porous or fissured
media (with saturation, absorption, or phase change) and conduction through
composite semiconductor materials. The singular or degenerate nature of these
systems arise from material properties and from the geometry of the composition.
Major objectives include the development by homogenization theory of two-scale
models, proof of well-posedness results in appropriate function spaces, and the
investigation of properties of solutions for the various systems. Mathematical
models of diffusion in composite media will be developed. These diffusion
processes include examples of heat conduction (with solid - liquid phase
change), diffusion of fluid through porous or fissured media (with saturation),
absorption by granulated substance, and the macroscopic description of current
flow in semi-conductor materials. The singular or degenerate nature of these
systems arise from properties of the materials and from the geometry of the
composition. Major objectives include the development of exact small-scale
models to describe the flow across the intricate interface between the
components of the media and averaged large-scale models which are necessary for
the computation of solutions.