* 9500948
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Dynamics of Oscillator     Arrays
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Steven Strogatz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 180,000.00

DMS_9500948 Strogatz The proposal is to study the nonlinear dynamics of
oscillator arrays, using mathematical methods of dynamical systems theory,
bifurcation theory, and perturbation theory, along with numerical simulation.
One project concerns arrays of superconducting Josephson junctions, and will be
carried out in collaboration with an experimental group at MIT. This work is
aimed at understanding the phase-locking properties of series arrays; the
propagation and instabilities of kinks in one-dimensional parallel arrays; and
the behavior of vortices and row-switched states in two-dimensional arrays. A
second project (in collaboration with an experimental group at Georgia Tech)
will address the dynamics of laser arrays. Areas of investigation will include
phase-locking in slightly detuned laser arrays; controlling chaos in laser
arrays; and mutual synchronization of chaotic lasers, with possible applications
to private communication. The Principal Investigator and his experimental
collaborators will study the dynamics of superconducting Josephson arrays and
laser arrays. Josephson arrays can be used as very sensitive detectors of
magnetic fields (with biomedical and astronomical applications), voltage
standards, power generators at submillimeter wavelengths (a part of the spectrum
that is difficult to access by other technologies), and as ultrafast switching
devices and transmission lines. All of these technologies would benefit from a
deeper mathematical understanding of synchronization and vortex propagation in
Josephson arrays. The goals of the laser array project are to find methods for
improving the phase-locking characteristics of laser arrays (to increase their
power output), and to develop novel encryption schemes for private
communications, based on mutual synchronization of chaotic lasers.