* 9500908
* Mathematical Sciences: Optimality Conditions and Algorithm  Covergence Behavior for Optimal Control Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Joseph Dunn, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1998
* USD 104,523.00

9500908 Dunn Optimal control problems are often naturally formulated as
specially structured mathematical programs in infinite-dimensional function
spaces. In such cases, a study of algorithms for the limiting infinite-
dimensional programs can predict the behavior of standard computational schemes
that are actually implemented in approximating finite-dimensional spaces, and
can also suggest new algorithms that have no counterparts in the standard
methodology for finite-dimensional mathematical programs. In particular, recent
studies have shown that standard nonlinear programming algorithms are best
suited to optimal control problems with Hamiltonians that are uniformly convex
in the control input vector, while other optimal control problems may require
strong variation methods based on the inherently infinite-dimensional necessary
condition of Pontryagin. The proposed investigation has the following immediate
objectives: (i) to establish the convergence properties of Newtonian projection
methods in Chebychev norm neighborhoods and root-mean-square neighborhoods of
control functions that satisfy recently developed local optimality sufficient
conditions for nonconvex nonquadratic constrained input regulator problems; (ii)
to extend the analysis in (i) to hybrid algorithms that employ Newtonian
projection and Lagrangian augmentation techniques for regulator problems with
control variable and state variable constraints; (iii) to establish the
convergence properties of strong variation methods in root-mean-square
neighborhoods of control functions satisfying sharp local optimality sufficient
conditions in the root-mean-square norm for optimal control problems with
Hamiltonians that are not convex in the control input vector; (iv) to
corroborate the predictions of the infinite dimensional convergence analyses in
(i)--(iii) for approximate finite dimensional computations on fixed and nested
grids. Optimal control problems arise in aircraft and spacecraft trajectory
calcula tions, nuclear and chemical reactor control, structural and aerodynamic
design, management of ecological systems, and many other applications. In the
generic optimal control problem, a large number of control variables (forces,
voltages, temperatures, etc.) are chosen at various points in time and space to
bring some physical system into a desired state, and to accomplish this at the
lowest possible cost (manuever duration, fuel or power consumption, etc.).
Control and state variable values are also typically constrained by hardware or
safety considerations, and state transitions are often governed by complicated
systems of ordinary or partial differential equations. The associated
optimization task is therefore demanding, and requires algorithms that
effectively exploit control problem structure in the computation of their
successive approximations, and also exhibit good global and local convergence
characteristics for the problems in question. In broad terms, the goal of the
proposed investigation is to understand which algorithm types are most effective
for a given problem structure in the context of optimal control. ***