* 9500673
* Data Distribution Independent Parallel Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Jose Fortes, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 10/31/1998
* USD 299,756.00

This project is exploring the possibility of a parallel programming paradigm
that is data-distribution independent (DDI) in the sense that the user would not
be required to program or even invoke data communication routines (hereon called
modules). The need for data redistribution would either be eliminated or
transparent to the user. The emphasis this work is on the systematic design of
computational modules so that either there is no need to redistribute input data
or, when this cannot be achieved, the cost of (automatic) redistributionis
minimized. In this context, source-to-source program transformations, called
modular mappings, and properties that allow commutative parallel processing are
being explored as techniques and concepts that enable DDI computation. The
extent to which a DDI paradigm could replace existing approaches, complement
them or merely apply to special application domains is unclear and this is one
of the issues under investigation. In addition, hardware and architecture
features that support DDI computation on both general and special purpose
aprallel processors are being investigated. The experimental validation is being
done in the context of three application areas and program implementations on a
fine-grain distributed memory SIMD machine (Maspar MP-1 with 16 thousand
processors) and a coarse- grain distributed memory MIMD machine (Intel Paragon
with 140 processors). The areas of interest are dense linear algebra, sparse
linear algebra and symbolic compute algebra which can be applied to numerous
scientific and engineering computing problems. For these three areas, DDI
modules are being developed as well as entire programs built of several modules.
Performance comparisons are being made between DDI implementation and their non-
DDI counterparts.