* 9500601
* Collaborative Research:  JGOFS: Bacterial Cycling           of Dissolved and Particulate Carbon in the Oligotrophic and Eutrophic Production Regimes of the Arabian Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1994,11/30/1997
* Hugh Ducklow, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1997
* USD 444,464.00

9500601 Ducklow This is a joint research project by Drs. F Azam H. Ducklow to
perform quantitative studies on the significance of bacteria in mediating and
regulating biogeochemical fluxes of carbon and nitrogen in the Arabian Sea, as a
component of the USJGOFS Arabian Sea Process Study. These scientists will make
core measurements used by bacteria to respond to dramatic changes in primary
production that occurs regularly due to monsoonal reversals in the Arabian Sea.
The JGOFS core measurement s will include bacterial abundance and biomass,
bacteria production (by both 3H thymidine and 3H leucine incorporation methods),
DOC, POC and PON. The research is designed to address two key questions
concerning microbial heterotrophic processes identified by US JGOFS: 1) How do
the community structures which occur during the oligotrophic vs. eutrophic
periods differentially impact carbon storage and export fluxes? and 2) Does the
decomposition of sinking particles slow down in the suboxic zone and result in
enhanced vertical flux through this layer? The investigators hypothesize that
sequential occurrence of highly eutrophic and oligotrophic productivity regimes
creates a uniquely robust microbial loop during the oligotrophic period at the
expense of slow- to-degrade DOM which accumulates during the eutrophic period.
They predict that the strong dominance of the microbial loop renders the
oligotrophic period net- heterotrophic and this has implications for spatial and
temporal patterns of carbon oxidation and exchange. The 'stored' DOC may also
support high bacterial carbon demand (higher than would be supported by particle
flux) below the mixed layer following shoaling of the pycnocline. A second
hypothesis they wish to test is that sinking particles in the surface waters are
rapidly solubilized by hydrolytic exoenzymes of colonizing bacteria but the
enzymatic solubilization is greatly reduced in the suboxic layer resulting in
much slower depth dissipat ion of POC.