* 9500957
* Mathemetical Sciences: Variational Analysis and Dynamical   Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1998
* R. Tyrrell Rockafellar, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 10/31/1998
* USD 158,910.00

9500957 Rockafeller This project centers on optimization problems concerned with
the management or control of systems with dynamical structure. For problems in
continuous time, such as arise in the optimal control mf engineering systems and
economic models, new forms of variational analysis will be developed in order to
characterize solutions more concretely and in a wider variety of settings. In
particular, issues of solution stability will be studied. For problems in
discrete time, models of decision-making under uncertainty will be the focus.
Connections between stochastic programming and dynamic programming will be
elucidated and made the basis of new approaches to the design of computational
methods for finding solutions. The work will deal with mathematical innovations
necessary to understand the effects of different control strategies in
situations that heretofore have resisted effective modeling. Especially
important are the ways of representing mathematically the revelation over time
of information about random elements in a problem's structure. A combination of
scenario trees with state-variable dynamics will be explored for this purpose.
Extended linear-quadratic programming will be utilized to allow penalty
expression of constraints and to promote dualization leading to numerical
schemes in which problems of enormous scale can be broken down iteratively into
problems solvable on high-speed computers. ***