* 9500108
* The CSU-Chill Radar Facility
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1995,10/31/2002
* Steven Rutledge, Colorado State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* James R. Huning
* 10/31/2002
* USD 3,493,133.00

9500108 Rutledge Colorado State University (CSU) has operated a National
Facility, CHILL Radar, under a Cooperative Agreement (CA) with NSF for the past
five years. This proposal is for a new five year renewal of the CA between NSF
and CSU to continue operation of the CHILL Radar as a National Facility. The
radar facility is used to support education and research activities, both at CSU
and at other universities or research institutions supported by NSF. Under this
renewal of the CA, additional upgrades will be completed for a dual-transmitter,
dual receiver system which will provide the atmospheric community with a state-
of-the-art, highly advanced surface based radar facility for cutting-edge
polarimetric and Doppler research. The CHILL Facility will be one of the most
advanced meteorological radars available for basic research and education. The
facility will be directed by faculty from the Departments of Atmospheric Science
and Electrical Engineering of CSU. A full time staff composed of a Facility
Manager and Senior Engineer will operate and maintain the radar facility. The
proposal offers technical improvements to the radar system, access to an
advanced radar facility for the university research aommunity, an in-house
research program, and integration of the facility into the atmospheric and
electrical engineering educational activities.