* 9500752
* Mathematical Sciences:  Lattice Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2000
* Ralph Freese, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/2000
* USD 109,311.00

This award supports research on the structure of finitely presented lattices as
well as the study of algorithmic problems of finite lattices. In finitely
presented lattices, efficient solutions to basic structural and representation
problems will be sought. Such problems include finding a polynomial time
algorithm to decide if an element of a finitely presented lattice has a lower
cover, if a finitely presented lattice is finite, if it is weakly atomic, and if
it has finite width. A proof of the conjecture that a finitely presented lattice
of infinite width must contain a free lattice will be sought. Furthermore,
faster algorithms for the recognition and construction of finite lattices will
be investigated. Using theorems on free lattices, finitely presented lattices,
and projective lattices, efficient methods for solving systems of equations in
free lattices will be sought. These methods should lead to efficient algorithms
for determining the unification type of such a system. Lattices are discrete
mathematical objects with a structure reflecting to some extent the structure of
set theory or logic. This very weak structure means that lattices can be found
in many mathematical environments. It also means that problems are easy to
state, hard to solve and of a very general nature. The results of this work will
impact many areas of mathematics, computer science, the social sciences and
business management.