* 9500503
* Mycofloristic, Revisionary, and Monographic Studies in the Xylariaceae
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1999
* Jack Rogers, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/1999
* USD 179,991.00

9500503 Rogers Fungi, even those with conspicuous fruiting bodies (spore-
producing structures), remain poorly known, especially from tropical parts of
the world. Dr. Jack Rogers of Washington State University continues to pursue
studies of ascomycete fungi of the family Xylariaceae, a group of ca. 37 genera
and hundreds of species distributed worldwide. These include species of wood-
rotting forms, some that are plant pathogens, and some that live internally in
plants but without known destructive effects (known as fungal endophytes). With
the help of colleagues in Europe and in Latin America, Dr. Rogers is collecting
new specimens of the fungi, and where possible culturing these in the laboratory
in order to determine complete life cycle stages that link anamorphic (asexual,
conidial) forms with teleomorphic (sexual) stages. Mating tests in the
laboratory also help to determine the boundaries between closely related
species, and provide preliminary genetic data on incompatibility reactions. The
taxonomic revisionary and inventory research on Xylariaceae fungi represents a
productive extension of Dr. Rogers' long-term studies of poorly known
ascomycetes. This early or "alpha" taxonomic stage of research focuses on the
study of morphological characters and life histories, in order to determine
reliable features that can be used to discriminate among closely similar
species. The foundational knowledge thus acquired will eventually permit
analysis of phylogenetic or genealogical relationships among these taxa, and
their biogeographical histories and ecological interactions.