* 9500886
* Mathematical Sciences: Noncommutative Geometric Methods in  Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Ronghui Ji, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9500886 Ji This project involves the study of operator algebras associated with
discrete groups and C*-dynamical systems by the method of noncommutative
differential geometry. Central to this study is the construction of smooth and
dense subalgebras of the corresponding crossed product C*-algebras and the
related analysis to the smooth subalgebras. The main techniques employed are
Connes' cyclic theory for associative algebras and the Schwartz cohomology for
discrete groups introduced by the investigator. Completion of the projects
described in this proposal help elucidate deep properties of operator algebras,
algebraic topology and differential geometry, such as, a further understanding
of noncommutative Toeplitz index theory; a solution to the rational injectivity
of the Baum-Connes map, the Novikov conjecture and the Kadison-Kaplansky
conjecture for the class of rapidly decaying discrete groups. This research lies
at the interface between geometry, analysis and algebra. A modern approach of
Connes studies geometrical invariants using non-commutative algebraic
structures. A good example of a noncommutative structure is the multiplicative
structure on the collection of square matrices of fixed size. This project will
employ Connes machinery to elucidate other important non-commutative algebras
called operator algebras which can be viewed as collections of infinite
matrices. The results will impact algebra, geometry and analysis. ***