* 9500875
* Mathematical Sciences: Phenomena of Metric Topology and     Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Alexander Dranishnikov, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1996
* USD 24,600.00

9500875 Dranishnikov The investigator is going to study the topology of geodesic
spaces and their visual boundaries. The geodesic spaces which are the universal
covering spaces for finitely presented groups are of primary interest.
Essentialy this project is an attempt to find groups whose boundary has
dimensions of different kinds that disagree. Such a group for integral
cohomological and covering dimensions would give a counter-example to some form
of the Novikov conjecture. First he plans to construct and investigate groups
whose boundaries have rational cohomological dimension and covering dimension
that are different. The phenomenon first was observed by Bestvina-Mess. While
cohomology groups of the sphere at infinity have a relation to the Novikov
conjecture, cohomology groups of the tangent sphere of a geodesic space are
relevant to the Hilbert-Smith conjecture. These two spheres are connected by a
map, called the geodesic contruction map. It turns out that the geodesic
contruction map can raise dimension even in the case of Coxeter groups. That
phenomenon is relevant to the old problem in Group Theory: Does geometric
dimension of a group coincide with the cohomological dimension? The
corresponding problem for topological spaces was solved negatively by the
investigator. One of the most basic of topological properties is the notion of
dimension. For very common spaces such as spheres and planes, the dimension is
clear. However, when one attempts to formulate a general definition that will
apply to a much wider class of spaces, some of them quite complicated, the
"obvious" notion of dimension turns out to be elusive. In fact some spaces, the
so-called fractal spaces, have a natural dimension that is not even a whole
number. One is left with several alternative definitions, all of which agree for
uncomplicated spaces, but which may differ in general. To understand the notion
of dimension fully, one should understand when the differen t definitions can be
expected to agree and when they may not. The investigator is exploring several
of the outstanding conjectures and problems along these lines. ***