* 9500644
* Mathematical Sciences:  Chaos-Integrability Transition in   Nonlinear Dynamical Systems:  Exponental Asymptotics        Approach
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Alexander Tovbis, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Janice Alexander
* 05/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9500644 Tovbis The objective of the project is to study the transition from
integrable (predictable) to nonintegrable (chaotic) dynamics in perturbed
nonlinear systems. This transition plays a fundamental role in a very wide
variety of physical, biological, chemical, etc. problems (turbulence in
incompressible fluids, scattering of atoms from metal surfaces, host -
parasitoid models in population dynamics, complex formation in atom-diatom
collisions, etc.). It is also crucial in understanding the nature of numerical
instabilities (numerical chaos) in computational problems. The proposed approach
to the problem combines classical analytic and modern asymptotic technique
(exponential asymptotics). In our initial studies the model example shows an
excellent agreement between the "theoretical" results and numerical simulations.
%%% The objective of the project is to study the transition from integrable to
nonintegrable (chaotic) dynamics in singularly perturbed nonlinear systems. This
transition plays a fundamental role in a very wide variety of physical,
biological, chemical, etc. problems. It is also crucial in understanding the
nature of numerical instabilities (numerical chaos) il computational problems.
Of our particular interest are situations when the effect of perturbation is
exponentially small in the small parameter of the problem. We propose to apply
the technique of exponential asymptotics to the study of the analytical
mechanism of the onset of chaos in perturbed integrable systems and to
approximate the dynamics of perturbed systems. This approach has proven fruitful
in our initial investigation. ***