* 9500726
* Young Investigator Symposium at the 1995 Workshop on SteroidHormones and Brain Function: March 13-April 4, 1995:        Breckinridge, CO
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/1995,02/29/1996
* Susan Fahrbach, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* James Koenig
* 02/29/1996
* USD 6,100.00

Fahrbach IBN-9500726 Steroid and thyroid hormones are integral modulators of
neural communication and development. These simple molecules, acting as
hormones, have the potential to influence all neural function from the
initiation of neural development to the activity of individual synapses in
adults. Recent advances in knowledge documenting non-genomic actions of the
steroid hormones, the existence of receptor isoforms for the thyroid hormones,
the involvement of non-neuronal cells in reproductive function, and the
production of steroid hormones by the brain itself have had striking effects on
neuroendocrine physiology, neural cell biology, reproductive behavior and non-
reproductive behaviors such as learning and memory, aggression, feeding and
emotion. This action will provide support for a Young Investigator Symposium to
be held at the 1995 Workshop on Steroid Hormones and Brain Function in
Breckenridge, CO on March 31-April 4, 1995. This workshop brings together
scientists using different approaches to address important and timely issues
concerning growth factor, steroid and thyroid hormone involvement in brain
function. Molecular biologists, neuroanatomists, neurophysiologists and
behaviorists will examine such issues as sexual differentiation of the brain,
steroid hormone interactions with other growth factors and neurons, thyroid
hormone mechanisms of action and the role of non-neuronal cells in brain
function. These are fundamentally important questions in a field that is rapidly
changing and advancing. The inclusion of the Young Investigator Symposium will
provide a mechanism to foster young scientists and facilitate collaborative
efforts that may significantly enhance our understanding of basic
neurobiological mechanisms.