* 9500330
* GOALI: Characterization of Active Sites in Zeolites for     Hydrocarbon Cracking Reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Harold Kung, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 04/30/1998
* USD 318,000.00

ABSTRACT Harold Kung This is an investigation of the active sites in zeolite
catalysts used for cracking of hydrocarbons. Strong Bronsted sites in steamed HY
zeolites are isolated by poisoning with an amine such as pyridine and then
blocking the unpoisoned (weaker) hydroxyl sites by silylation. Careful
regeneration of the strong sites then allows them to be studied separately from
the weaker sites. This is done using nuclear magnetic resonance, infrared
spectroscopy, and microcalorimetry of adsorption of basic probe molecules. A
separate set of experiments is designed to explore the effects of extraframework
cations on catalytic activity and hydroxyl-group properties. Extraframework
aluminum, gallium, or lanthanum ions are introduced into HZSM-5 by reacting the
zeolite hydroxyl groups with the chloride or alkyl of the metal introduced in
the gas phase. Subsequent hydrolysis gives dispersed extraframework species that
can be characterized for structure, cation location, and catalytic activity.
Hydrocarbon cracking is a crucial step in the production of gasoline from crude
oil. Although it is well established that steaming of HY zeolite results in a
very active cracking catalyst, the factors responsible for this remain
mysterious. This study is an attempt to identify and to isolate those sites that
are responsible for the catalytic activity and to study their interactions with
extraframework matter in the zeolite matrix. This is a collaborative research
effort between Northwestern University and Amoco Oil Company. ***