* 9500941
* Mathematical Sciences:  p-adic Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Jeremy Teitelbaum, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

This research involves the study of p-adic symmetric spaces, the arithmetic of
modular forms, and a number of computational and algorithmic questions in number
theory and algebraic geometry. In the general area of p-adic automorphic forms,
known results about the relationship between analytic functions and measures on
the p-adic upper half plane and measures on its boundary are generalized to
Drinfeld's higher dimensional p-adic upper half spaces. Such results have
implications for the geometry of algebraic varieties which are uniformized by
the Drinfeld spaces, including certain Shimura varieties and Drinfeld modular
varieties. They also have important consequences for the p-adic representation
theory of the general linear group. In the area of modular forms, the principal
investigator is continuing to study questions relating to the "exceptional zero
conjecture". Finally, earlier work on algorithms for computing Picard-Fuchs
differential equations and the Gauss-Manin connection are extended. The research
in this project lies in the general areas of arithmetic geometry and automorphic
forms. Algebraic geometry is one of the oldest parts of modern mathematics. In
the past ten years, it has blossomed to the point where it has solved problems
that have stood for centuries. Originally, it treated figures in the plane
defined by the simplest of equations, namely polynomials. Today, the field
utilizes methods not only from algebra, but also from analysis and topology;
conversely, it is extensively used in those fields. Moreover, it has proved
itself useful in fields as diverse as physics, theoretical computer science,
cryptography, coding theory and robotics. Automorphic forms arose out of non-
Euclidean geometry in the middle of the nineteenth century. Both mathematicians
and physicists have thus long realized that many objects of fundamental
importance are non-Euclidean in their basic nature. This field is principally
concerned with questions about the whole numbe rs, but in its use of geometry
and analysis, it retains connection to its historical roots and thus to problems
in areas as diverse as gauge theory in theoretical physics and coding theory in
information theory. This research involves the study of p-adic symmetric spaces,
the arithmetic of modular forms, and a number of computational and algorithmic
questions in number theory and algebraic geometry. In the general area of p-adic
automorphic forms, known results about the relationship between analytic
functions and measures on the p-adic upper half plane and measures on its
boundary are generalized to Drinfeld's higher dimensional p-adic upper half
spaces. Such results hate implications for the geometry of algebraic varieties
which are uniformized by the Drinfeld spaces, including certain Shimura
varieties and Drinfeld modular varieties. They also have important consequences
for the p-adic representation theory of the general linear group. In the area of
modular forms, the principal investigator is continuing to study questions
relating to the "exceptional zero conjecture". Finally, earlier work on
algorithms for computing Picard-Fuchs differential equations and the Gauss-Manin
connection are extended. The research in this project lies in the general areas
of arithmetic geometry and automorphic forms. Algebraic geometry is one of the
oldest parts of modern mathematics. In the past ten years, it has blossomed to
the point where it has solved problems that have stood for centuries.
Originally, it treated figures in the plane defined by the simplest of
equations, namely polynomials. Today, the field utilizes methods not only from
algebra, but also from analysis and topology; conversely, it is extensively used
in those fields. Moreover, it has proved itself useful in fields as diverse as
physics, theoretical computer science, cryptography, coding theory and robotics.
Automorphic forms arose out of non-Euclidean geometry in the middle of the
nineteenth century. B oth mathematicians and physicists have thus long realized
that many objects of fundamental importance are non-Euclidean in their basic
nature. This field is principally concerned with questions about the whole
numbers, but in its use of geometry and analysis, it retains connection to its
historical roots and thus to problems in areas as diverse as gauge theory in
theoretical physics and coding theory in information theory.