* 9500627
* CAREER:  Living Ring-Opening Polymerization:  A New Route   to Emissive Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,02/11/1999
* Guillermo Bazan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/11/1999
* USD 312,500.00

9500627 Bazan The aim of this proposal is to take advantage of our recently
developed paracyclophan-1-ene based PPV-poly(para phenylenevinylene) methodology
to resolve issues of technical importance. Emphasis will be placed on new
macromolecular approaches that improve the environmental stability of conjugated
polymers while maintaining photo optical features of interest. We are also
interested in investigating stereoregularity issues on polychromophores, their
influence on secondary structure and, ultimately, bulk properties. During the
grant period, specific aims are: (1) To expand the scope of our mild and living
polymerization route to defect-free PPV so that electronpoor versions of PPV can
be prepared in this way. (2) To study, by use of molecular modeling, how the
secondary structure in poly(paracyclophan-1-ene)s enforces chromophore
aggregation. (3) To investigate whether photogenerated acids are capable of
catalyzing a solid state dehydration reaction to form PPV so as to permit
patterning using microlithographic processes. (4) To examine the effect of chain
length and degree of aggregation on the emission quantum yield and durability of
PPV prepared via our new route, in the hope of optimizing these properties. (5)
To begin an investigation into the microheterogeneous properties of block
copolymers containing PPV fragments. (6) To characterize, using standard
solution methods, the ability of PPV chains to form excited state dimers
(excimers) with both donor and acceptor molecules. %%% Conducting polymers are
reaching maturity as a scientific field. Fundamental advances in synthetic
methodology, primarily brought about by chemists, have permitted their use by
physicists and engineers as components in electronic and electro-optic devices
such as light emitting diodes, electrophotographic photoreceptors, solar energy
conversion systems, polymer based capacitors and photodetectors. The interest in
applying polymers to these functional de vices stems from their superior
processability and low density, relative to inorganic materials, as well as
their intrinsic amorphous nature. However, the structural and bonding features
that lead to a small band gap not only reduce significantly the solubility and
processability of the material but inevitably make chemical oxidation of this
class of materials facile. This reactivity places severe limits on their
environmental stability and general longterm durability. Successful
implementation of these molecular- based electronic and electro-active devices
will therefore depend to a large extent on our ability to design and synthesize
a new generation of conjugated polymers that are environmentally stable. During
this grant period, the junior-level advanced inorganic/organic methods and
instrumentation course will continue to be innovated to include for the first
time x-ray structure determination. This course will combine rigorous chemical
manipulations with an introduction to stae-of-the art instrumentation. Funds for
the purchase of computer equipment have already been raised. ***