* 9500460
* Femtosecond Spin Dynamics in Magnetic Semiconductor         Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Nitin Samarth, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Toulouse
* 06/30/1997
* USD 109,780.00

9500460 Samarth The effects of reduced dimensionality a quantum confinement on
fundamental magnetic and electronic spin dynamics are being investigated in
quantum structures fabricated from II-VI diluted magnetic semiconductors (DMS).
Magneto-optical spectroscopy probes spin-dependent phenomena such as carrier
spin-flip scattering, spin dependent electronic tunneling and localization,
magnetic polaron formation, and spin-lattice relaxation processes. The program
combines state-of-the-art techniques in femtosecond optical measurements,
integrated DCSQUID technology and epitaxial materials fabrication to obtain a
real-timed view of dynamical behavior in quantum magnetic systems. % % % This
project involves optical spectroscopy on very small particles that are both
magnetic and semiconducting. The small size of the particles influences the
electrical properties of the particles in interesting ways. In addition, the
electronic properties of the particles are influenced by their magnetism. This
means that the semiconducting properties can be tuned by an external magnetic
fields. The electronic properties are being investigated by ultra- fast optical
techniques. The state-of-the-art materials and experimental techniques are of
interest for fundamental physics, and may lead to new devices for electronic and
magnetic applications. ***