* 9500625
* High Temperature Superconducting Materials:  Study,         Synthesis and Search
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Paul C. W. Chu, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9500625 CHU Professor C. W. Chu proposes to search for , synthesize, and study
novel high temperature superconducting and related oxide and intermetallic
compounds by fully exploiting the exceptional expertise and capabilities that
have been acquired by his research group. The proposed research will enable
Professor Chu and fellow scientists to address the critical issues of high
temperature superconductivity, such as, the maximum transition temperature
possible, the occurrence of high temperature superconductivity, the
superconducting pairing symmetry, and the formation of high temperature
superconducting compounds. The knowledge obtained by this research will shorten
the path toward the eventual commercialization of high temperature
superconductors. %%% Professor C. W. Chu proposes to continue to apply his
expert ability to search for and study novel high temperature superconducting
materials that are scientifically challenging and technologically promising. The
research proposed will enable Professor Chu to learn how high temperature
superconductivity occurs, why it happens, and how one makes it happen. By
unraveling the mystery of high temperature superconductivity and understanding
the formation of high temperature superconducting compounds through this
investigation, one may be able to discover compounds with even higher transition
temperatures and better engineering properties, thus expediting the
commercialization of high temperature superconductivity. ***