* 9500006
* GOALI/CRISP:  Characterization of Geometric Variations for  Design and Manufacturing of Aluminum Automotive             Space-Frames
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Paul Fussell, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Warren DeVries
* 06/30/1998
* USD 135,000.00

9500006 Wang This award for a Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) research project will develop a new methodology for reducing
geometric variation in aluminum automotive space frames. The space frame
structures are fabricated in a "Tinker Toy" manner from aluminum extrusions, and
they promise light weight, very good strength and crash worthiness. Tight
geometric variation targets of less than 0.5 mm are are to assure good fit-up
when these structures are joined, so they reach their full strength potential
when used to fabricate features like door openings. The technical approach will
use measurements of the structural shapes made with a coordinate measuring
machine (CMM), parameterizing this data as deviaitons form a geometric model of
the desired structural form, and from this representation identify the needs for
process improvement, modify tooling using rapid prototyping technology, and
predicting tolerance stackup. Two of the types of problems that will be attacked
that involve curvature: in one case nominally straight extrusions that have a
bow, and in the other curved extrusions that have deviations from the design
curvature or possibly multiple bends. This work began as a GOALI/EFI award with
ALCOA in FY94, and this collaboration will continue with this research project.
This will enable high volume manufacture of these light weight, structural frame
members that contribute to safety and fuel economy in automobiles, aircraft, or
where there are important strength to weight tradeoffs. ***