* 9500037
* Fuzzy Optimization for Order and Production Scheduling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Peter Luh, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 05/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9500037 Luh This research addresses the problem of integrating scheduling
decisions on order.s deliveries and job scheduling in a manufacturing
enterprise. The problem of scheduling order deliveries is focused on when
materials and supplies are to be delivered at a manufacturing site to support
the manufacturing function. Job scheduling is focused on the problem of
determining the sequence in which jobs are to be processed on machines and when
to start and complete each job so as to meet some objective. In most operations,
these two forms of scheduling decision are independently made from one another
even though decision in one area affects the other. Because of this
relationship, this research aims to develop decision procedures to integrate
them. The multiple objectives pursued in the research include: (1) development
of optimization models and near-optimal solution methodologies for the
integrated problem for job shops, flow shops, and hybrid shops in a
deterministic setting by using Lagragian relaxation, (2) extension of the
different shop models to handle uncertainty by using fuzzy set theory, and
develop fuzzy optimization techniques within the Lagrangian relaxation
framework, and (3) development of algorithms for the unconstrained optimization
of nonsmooth functions with a large number of variables, which arise in one of
the steps of the Lagrangian relaxation approach. Given the traditional
scheduling problems are known to be notoriously hard to solve, the integrated
problem will pose additional challenges to solve. However, given the critical
nature of the problem, attempts to characterize the problem to provide some
insight will be beneficial to the research and the practitioners community.
Industries stand to benefit economically if a successful solution to the problem
is developed.