* 9500642
* Problems in Anisotropic Nonlinear Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Debra Warne, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9500642 Polignone This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for Women
Scientists and Engineers Award. Preliminary work on problems involving
nonlinearly elastic deformations of anisotropic materials will be conducted.
Several areas of research will be considered. The first concerns the
determination of instabilities describing non- radially symmetric deformations
(of both isotropic and anisotropic) solids under symmetric loading conditions.
Mathematically, boundary value problems for nonlinear ordinary and partial
differential equations governing equilibrium will be studied. A second related
issue is to examine the effects of loading perturbations on bifurcation
solutions describing radially symmetric cavitation instabilities (void
nucleation and growth in solids). The third focus will be on the determination
of (i) generalized elastic moduli for nonlinear anisotropic materials, (ii)
their connection to the corresponding linear moduli, and (iii) constitutive
inequalities to describe physically reasonable response of hyperelastic
materials. Finally, problems in which the direction of anisotropy (transverse
isotropy) is non- constant will be considered, with interest toward potential
applications in biomechanics, such as modeling of the heart. The National
Science Foundations mandate to ensure the vitality of the Nations scientific
enterprise includes concern for the quality, composition, distribution and
effectiveness of the human resource base in science and engineering. Within this
context, the Foundation is committed to enhancing the current rate of
participation of women in science and engineering careers, in general, and as
active participants in all of its programs. Research Planning Grant awards are
made: (1) to help increase the number mf new women investigators participating
in NSFs research programs; and, (2) to facilitate preliminary studies and other
activities related to the development of competitive research p rojects and
proposals by women who have not previously had independent Federal research
funding. Research Planning Grants are one-time awards that may be used for
preliminary work to determine the feasibility of a proposed line of inquiry,
and/or for other activities that will facilitate proposal development.