* 9500545
* Engineering Research Equipment:  Development of a Prototype Laser Shaping System for Advanced Ceramic Material          Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Serope Kalpakjian, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 04/30/1997
* USD 60,185.00

9500545 Todd This Engineering Research Equipment Grant allows for the purchase
of a versatile, automated, laser-based rapid Prototyping system, (comprised of a
laser, positioning system, beam scanner, non-contacting positioning system, beam
conditioner and Computer Aided Design and Manufacturing system) capable of
producing shapes through controlled layer ablation/deposition of ceramic,
metallic or polymeric materials. The equipment will support research projects
including: (a) Laser Shaping of Advanced Ceramic Composite Materials; (b) Laser
Shaping of Si3N4 Components; (c) Studies of Ceramic Airfoils for solar turbines;
and (d) Laser Shaping Graphite Fuel Cell Stacks. Expected outcomes are (1)
models relating machine parameters such as scan rate, feed, beam power and
polarization of process measurables such as material removal rate and surface
roughness; (2) strategies for optimizing processing of Si3N4,SiC, carbon and
A12O3-based ceramics; and (3) comparison of laser shaping with alternative
ceramic shaping technologies such as diamond grinding, ultrasonic and waterjet
machining. Rapid prototyping manufacturing is a fast moving technology that the
industrial sector has started to take advantage of, particularly form and fit
model making with easy to produce plastic parts. In order to move the technology
to higher temperature structural components such as ceramics and metals, laser
shaping process has the potential to drive down the cycle time from design to
commercialization giving the end user a competitive edge in the market
introduction of new products.