* 9500940
* Mathematical Sciences:  Nonlinear Partial Differential      Equations and Their Applications to Evolving Surfaces, Phase Transitions and Stochastic Control
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Halil Soner, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 56,633.00

9500940 Soner This is a proposal to National Science Foundation to work on the
applications of nonlinear partial differential equations to phase transitions,
evolving surfaces and stochastic control. The proposed studies in evolutionary
phase transitions and evolving surfaces concern the development of the
asymptotic analysis of systems of reaction-diffusion equations (including the
phase-field, Cahn-Hilliard, and the vector valued Ginzburg-Landau equations),
the further study of the interface propagation with three or more phases, the
analysis of the dynamics of surfaces with it arbitrary codimension, and the
development of a level set approach for these surfaces. The proposed studies in
stochastic control concern the analysis of mathematical financial models and the
approximation of complex, controlled systems by simpler and more tractable
continuum models. The theory of viscosity solutions have been very successful in
establishing the connection between various approximate and the original models.
Proposed here is to continue this research when the continuum models are
singularly controlled. In mathematical finance, partial differential equations
have been an efficient tool not only in the analysis but also in numerical
computations. Option pricing provides a good example of this. The principal
investigator proposes to use the theory of viscosity solutions in the analysis
of models with transaction costs. %%% Research on the phase transitions and
evolving surfaces is related to several models in materials science modeling the
dynamics of grain boundaries, interfaces between different phases and defects.
Understanding the propagation of defects and interfaces is of fundamental
importance not only for its intrinsic interest but also for its technological
importance. Research on stochastic control is related to problems in
manufacturing, communications and mathematical finance. In mathematical finance,
Black-Scholes type option pricing problems will be investigated in the presence
of transaction costs. ***