* 9500858
* CAREER:  Critical Issues in the Growth of Semiconductor     Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Christopher Roland, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9500858 Roland This is a CAREER award to conduct theoretical research on thin
film growth of semiconductor materials and to undertake realted educational
activities. The research focus will be on issues relating to the effects of
atomic beams and strain on thin film growth. By using a low-energy atomic beam,
a pulse of energy may be delivered locally to the growth surface and tune the
kinetics. The effect of such atomic beams on low temperature growth, on three-
dimensional clustering mechanisms and on the crystallization of amorphous
material and regrowth phenomena will be investigated. In addition, the effects
of biaxial strain on the initial stages of growth and step distributions will be
investigated. The main tool of study will be molecular dynamics simulations
using realistic potentials, coupled with ab initio molecular dynamics and
kinetic Monte Carlo simulations. The educational component includes the
development of a course on modern numerical methods in physics, development of
educational videos related to the research and research experiences for
undergraduates. %%% This is a CAREER award for computer simulation studies of
the growth of thin films of semiconducting material. Understanding the growth
mechanisms of these films is vitally important for the semiconductor industry in
addition to providing fundamental insights into the underlying physical
phenomena. The educational component includes the development of a new course on
computer simulation for physics, the production of educational videos related to
the research and the incorporation of undergraduates in the research process.
***