* 9500718
* Mathematical Sciences:  Analysis, Algorithms, and           Computations for Models of High-Temperature                 Superconductivity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Qiang Du, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

ANALYSES, ALGORITHMS, AND COMPUTATIONS FOR MODELS OF HIGH-TEMPERATURE
SUPERCONDUCTIVITY Qiang Du Department of Mathematics Michigan State University
E. Lansing, MI 48824 Project Abstract During the past few years, the
investigator and his colleagues have achieved significant progress in the
modeling, analysis, and computation of superconducting phenomena. The proposed
work of the investigator and his collaborators includes the further development
and refinement of their previous work on mezoscale models (in particular, the
Ginzburg-Landau model and its variants), as well as new computational and
analytical explorations into the macroscale (homogenized) models. At the
mezoscale level, the investigator continues the development and implementation
of efficient algorithms for treating a variety of interesting phenomena
involving the motion of vortices in type-II superconductors, especially the high
critical temperature layered superconductors. At the macroscale, the
investigator proposes to develop enhancements of existing models that can
account for inhomogenieties and for applied currents and voltages and to develop
and implement discretization and solution algorithms for determining approximate
solutions for these models. The types of phenomena the investigator and his
colleagues wish to simulate include vortex liquid and vortex glass structures,
pinning by normal impurities and thickness variations, motion and de-pinning due
to thermal fluctuations and applied currents and voltages, resistivity caused by
motion, and critical currents. Superconductivity is one of the grand challenges
identified as being crucial to future economic prosperity and scientific
leadership. With the advent of modern computational technology, scientists,
engineers, and mathematicians who wish to design superconducting devices and/or
who wish to study the physics of superconductivity are in need robust and
efficient algorithms and codes for the numerical simulation of superconduc ting
phenomena. The investigator and his colleagues are aimed at meeting such a need.
Useful tools will be developed not only for the use of physicists and material
scientists interested in studying superconducting phenomena at the vortex level,
but also for those involved in the design of superconducting devices.