* 9500839
* Mathematical Sciences: Structural Properties of             Non-Selfadjoint Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* David Pitts, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9500839 Orr This proposal describes research into the structural properties of
non-self-adjoint operator algebras. This is a field which combines the algebraic
insights of the older field of self-adjoint operators, from which it grows, with
the techniques of single operator theory. The aim in this proposal is to build
on the success that recent applications of a new circle of ideas have had with
important and difficult problems in the field. The last few years have seen the
interplay of two ideas, "infinite multiplicity algebras" and "interpolating
operators" lead to the solution of a number of longstanding problems in the
field. The effect has been to open up one class of non-selfadjoint operator
algebras to a whole new level of understanding. In individual work, one
investigator proposes to further study and classify maximal triangular algebras,
while Pitts proposes to study (and hopefully complete) the similarity theory for
distributive commutative subspace lattice algebras and to classify the analytic
algebras of this type. Operators can be viewed as finite of infinite matrices of
complex numbers. In this way a collect of operators can often be given an
algebraic structure and referred to as an operator algebra. The study of these
algebras of operators is rooted in mathematical physics. The main problem in the
theory of algebras is to classify these algebras so that equivalent or similar
algebras can be recognized. This project deals with the classification problem
for operator algebras that have elements (viewed as matrices) in triangular
form. ***