* 9500672
* Mathematical Sciences:  Numerical Solution of Differential  Equations in Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Min Chen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 124,000.00

9500672 Arnold This project will involve devising, improving, and analyzing
methods for the numerical simulation of complex physical phenomena modeled by
partial differential equations. A major emphasis will be on the modeling of thin
structures (plates and shells). Specifically, an innovative new finite element
method recently proposed by a team of computational engineers for plate bending
will be analyzed and a new approach the investigator introduced in collaboration
with Brezzi to develop and analyze new finite element methods for modeling the
deformation of elastic shells will be pursued. This latter approach has produced
the best theoretical results to date for avoiding the phenomenon known as
membrane locking which has plagued shell computations. In addition to studying
numerical methods and the errors they introduce, the investigator will consider
the errors introduced by mathematical models of thin structures. Specifically, a
new technique of analysis to study the convergence of two-dimensional models of
thin plates will be used. This technique gives the possibility of obtaining
sharp convergence estimates for plate modeling errors both globally and away
from the lateral boundary (where convergence may be higher). It is hoped that
this research will clarify in what situations the Reissner-Mindlin plate model
affords better approximation than the classical Kirchhoff model, an important
question that eluded resolution for decades. A second area of emphasis will be
on the development, implementation, validation, and dissemination of a finite
element code to simulate the collision of black holes. This problem involves the
solution of the Einstein field equations on an unbounded domain in four
dimensional space-time and is extremely demanding computationally. Work will
focus, at least initially, on the solution of the initial data problem for black
hole collisions, i.e., the determination of physical ly consistent and
meaningful initial data. The initial data problem is a nonlinear elliptic system
posed on an unbounded three-dimensional domain. For this problem the computer
code to be produced will involve a variety of sophisticated modern techniques
that have not yet been applied in computational relativity, including adaptive
tetrahedral mesh generation and multigrid preconditioning. The investigator's
work is directly related to several critical technological issues. It is
generally agreed by practitioners that the current state of the art of numerical
modeling of shells is inadequate, and this has been implicated in the failure of
engineering structures such as stadium roofs and airplane fuselages. The
investigator's work in both the area of the development and analysis of finite
element methods for plates and shells, and on plate modeling errors is directed
at overcoming these problems. The work on the simulation of black hole
collisions is directly motivated by the ongoing construction of the LIGO
gravitational wave observatory. LIGO is expected to be able to detect radiation
from black hole collisions early in the next decade. Massive numerical
simulations are needed to identify the cosmological events which are the sources
for the detected radiation. It is clear that these simulations push the limits
of available hardware and software technology. The investigator's work is
directed at improving the speed and accuracy of these simulations by employing
and adapting recent advances in numerical algorithms. The resulting computer
codes will be adapted to parallel computer architectures and will provide an
excellent opportunity for the graduate students and postdoctoral fellows working
under the supervision of the investigator to learn high performance computing
techniques.