* 9500581
* Polytopes, Subdivisions and Piecewise Polynomial Functions
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Louis Billera, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Murray M. Schacher
* 05/31/1998
* USD 113,000.00

This research project involves the use of algebraic, geometric and combinatorial
methods to attack fundamental questions involving convex polytopes, their
subdivisions, and piecewise polynomial functions defined over them. Questions
considered involve structures on the set of all subdivisions and enumerative
properties of general polytopes and of spaces of piecewise polynomials. A major
focus is the application of the techniques developed to specific polytopes of
interest in optimization theory and in the theory of multivariate discriminants.
These polytopes arise in the solution of problems in manufacturing and
distribution, and the results obtained in this project will be of interest in
these areas. This research is in the general area of Combinatorics.
Combinatorics attempts to find efficient methods to study how discrete
collections of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is
extremely important to modern communications. For example, the design of large
networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of
algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this
makes use of combinatorial research. In addition, the type of enumerative
information being sought in this project has been of use in the design of
geometric algorithms for problems in robotics and motion planning.