* 9500786
* Mathematical Sciences:  Studies in Commutative Algebra      and Its Applications to Computational Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Wolmer Vasconcelos, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph P. Brennan
* 05/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

This award supports the study of Cohen-Macaulay structures, in algebra,
combinatorics, and geometry and is driven by their wide presence and the
opportunities offered in issues of computational complexity. The principal
investigator will investigate invariants of blowup algebras for their role in
deciding the property of Cohen-Macaulay; will contribute to the ongoing process
of algebraization of tangent and secant algebras; will study the role of various
measures of complexity in the processing of basic operations of computational
algebra; and will develop methods and algorithms that facilitate the efficient
processing in large scale computations in cDaljit Ahlu geometry. This project is
in the general area of computational algebra and the computer-aided
computational aspects of this field. There is a growing interest in using
computers to answer theoretical questions in algebra and conversely, algebra is
quite useful for the development of algorithms. This research will not only aid
in the development of computer programs in commutative algebra but will
influence the development of computer programs in other areas. One aspect of
this project concerns the development of a computer program which will solve
systems of polynomial equations. This is significant in manufacturing both for
modeling and for the development of robots.