* 9500231
* RUI:  Investigations of the Gamma Ray Detection Capabilitiesof Low Energy Threshold Air Cherenkov Telescopes
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Mary Kertzman, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 10/31/1999
* USD 134,311.00

9500231 Kertzman Gamma ray astronomy encompasses a very broad range of energies,
from a few MeV to over one hundred TeV. Currently, the critical energy region
from 20 GeV to 200 GeV is inaccessible to observation. At lower energies, gamma
rays are observed with satellite borne detectors. At higher energies ground
based detectors indirectly observe gamma rays, from astrophysical sources, by
detecting the Cherenkov light emitted from the electromagnetic cascade which
results from the passage of a gamma ray through the Earth's atmosphere.
Satellite borne detectors observe an abundance of sources up to approximately 20
GeV. Groundbased detectors, with energy thresholds of 200 GeV see very few gamma
ray sources. The intermediate region is therefore of extreme interest, and the
goal of the next generation of ground based air Cherenkov detectors is to lower
the energy threshold into this region. Essential to the process of designing a
low energy threshold air Cherenkov detector is the ability to model the
detectors sensitivity to gamma ray induced air showers. The KASCADE simulation
system is a series of computer programs developed to model air Cherenkov
detector systems. The KASCADE system simulates the air showers due to both
incident gamma rays and incident protons, generates a model of the associated
Cherenkov light, and tests the response of a specific telescope design to these
air showers. The system can be used to study the energy threshold, flux
sensitivity, and gamma ray versus proton discrimination power, of a telescope.
The long term goal of the research program is to develop a design for a low
energy threshold air Cherenkov detector. The research program will also make
improvements to the KASCADE system, including developing a more "user friendly"
form of the system to distribute to interested users, undertake several small
scale studies of the properties of Cherenkov images related to the detection and
discrimination of gamma rays, and model cur rently existing and proposed air
Cherenkov systems. A low energy threshold ground based air Cherenkov telescope
for detecting gamma rays in the region from 20 GeV to 200 GeV will open a new
window to the universe. If it is possible to develop this technique, a low
energy ground based telescope could be designed, built and operating in less
than a decade. In contrast, the next generation of satellite borne detectors has
a longer development timescale, and detection of gamma rays is unlikely to reach
energies higher than 50 GeV.