* 9500808
* Mathematical Sciences:  Applications of Sweep Differential  Equations to Automated Manufacturing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Denis Blackmore, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 08/31/1999
* USD 140,000.00

9500808 Blackmore The objectives of the project are: 1) to further develop the
sweep differential equation (SDE) approach so as to enhance its applicability to
the analysis and representation of swept volumes; and 2) to translate the
improvements of the SDE method into algorithms and software tools for solving
motion verification and planning problems in automated manufacturing. In the SDE
method, the surface of the region traversed by an object moving through space
(the swept volume of the object) is characterized in terms of a differential
equation (the SDE). A major goal of the project is to obtain a generalization of
the SDE - incorporating the geometry of the object - that has the property that
its trajectories foliate most of the boundary of the swept volume. This leads to
a reduction of one dimension in the set that generates the swept volume, and it
promises to yield an order of magnitude decrease in the computational complexity
of algorithms based on this new method. Algorithms based on this new method
shall be developed, and the unique features of the approach shall be exploited
to obtain approximate numerical and graphical representations of swept volumes.
In particular, the foliation of the boundary surface shall be incorporated into
new interpolation procedures, and a natural functional criterion for trimming
(or excluding) points not belonging to the swept volume boundary shall be
employed. The algorithms shall be used to develop computer programs for
automatic verification and generation of numerically controlled (NC) machining
programs and robot motion planning problems. The project represents an
interdisciplinary collaboration between an applied mathematician and a
mechanical engineer aimed at developing new theory that is to be implemented for
practical manufacturing related problems, thereby advancing the state-of-the-art
in advanced manufacturing. A primary objective is to develop new tech niques
that enable one to characterize swept volumes essentially by a curve on the
boundary surface of an object in its initial position - with the swept volume
being generated by solutions of a differential equation. This innovation is to
be used to develop accurate computer-aided methods for obtaining numerical and
graphical representations of configurations swept out by objects moving through
space. The algorithms based upon this theoretical framework have the potential
to reduce the computations of existing algorithms by at least an order of
magnitude. As swept volume plays an important role in such diverse areas of
automated manufacturing as NC machining, robot motion planning and computer-
aided design, the applications of the research in this project should have a
significant impact on modern manufacturing theory and practice.