* 9500041
* SBIR Phase II: Indetification of Anaerobic Bacteria and     their Metalbolic Capabilities for Bioremediation
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Barry Bochner, BIOLOG INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9500041 Bochner Anaerobic bacteria possess metabolic activities for biodegrading
a range of polluting chemicals including aromatic, halogenated aromatic, and
halogenated alkene compounds. Anaerobes make up a significant portion of
terrestrial bacteria and should be considered as potential agents of
bioremediation. However, knowledge of these organisms, their diversity,
taxonomy, and metabolic capabilities, is still at a rudimentary level. The
purpose of this project is to design an efficient, easy-to-use, instrumented
test kit system that can be used both to study the catabolic capabilities of
anaerobes and to identify different species of anaerobes based on these
capabilities. To develop this kit, the catabolic potential of over 300 species
of anaerobes will be surveyed and cataloged against at least 300 different
organic compounds, including some important xenobiotic chemicals. From computer
analysis of these data, a set of 95 carbon source utilization tests will be
selected to be incorporated into a commercial microplate test kit. The survey
will provide an overview of the range of catabolic activities of the anaerobes
in question. If successful, the test kit system will be marketed commercially to
microbiologists doing environmental, industrial, and medical testing and
identification of anaerobes.