* 9500244
* Satellite Magnetic Fields Data Analysis:                    Magnetospheric/Ionospheric Currents and Waves
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Thomas Potemra, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 435,000.00

This proposal is a request for the continuation of NSF support for analysis of
magnetic field observations acquired by APL-developed satellite experiments. The
proposed research will make substantial contributions to NSF initiatives such as
GEM, CEDAR, and Space Weather. Satellite magnetic field data from Freja and
Viking, HILAT, DMSP-F7, TRIAD, AMPTE/CCE, MAGSAT, and UARS will be used in
studies of large and small scale current systems and magnetic wave phenomena
associated with the magnetospheric boundaries and current source regions. The
intent is also to disseminate data and information by way of scientific journal
publications, presentations, and collaborative efforts with individual
scientists and agency programs. The proposal includes the Freja data processing
and analysis effort. The following areas will be investigated: (1) Multiple data
sets will be used to characterize the distribution and source regions of the
large scale currents and their variation with the phase of geomagnetic storms,
including theoretical investigation of the current disruption process. (2)
Identify and analyze simultaneous observations of large scale currents to
thoroughly characterize the local time and altitude structure of the current
systems. (3) Conduct pilot studies of Poynting flux using the Freja electric and
magnetic field data, concentrating on small and intermediate scales. (4)
Investigate the detailed correlation of magnetic fluctuations with field aligned
currents and particle precipitation regions to put the use of AC Fluctuations on
a firm scientific footing. (5) Refine empirical models of the auroral oval shape
and size to allow a more reliable extrapolation of the auroral position in local
time. This will involve inter-comparison of real-time predicted auroral dynamics
with Geomagnetic Induced Currents to quantitatively test the model and
forecasting system. (6) The usefulness of the Freja data and its importance to
other programs motivates the developme nt of an efficient means of rapidly
disseminating these data to the scientific community. (7) Continue studies of
wave phenomena. Freja data cover a previously unexplored frequency range, and
the availability of simultaneous electric field and high time resolution 3-D
particle measurements assures that study of these phenomena will yield important
results concerning the dynamics of the Birkeland current flow regions. Also
pursued, will be the fluctuations inherent to the magnetopause current layer
paying particular attention to the correlation of these fluctuations with
theoretical predictions of current layer turbulence.