* 9500746
* Optimization of Jump Stochastic Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Eugene Feinberg, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 05/31/1999
* USD 146,990.00

9500746 Feinberg This research is focused on the optimization of continuous time
jump stochastic systems. In particular, the research is aimed at developing new
methods for analyzing stochastic syqtems: (1) study the structure of optimal
control strategies, (2) develop algorithms to compute optimal strategies, and
(3) develop structural and computational results for optimal strategies in
production/inventory and telecommunications systems. The investigator is
proposing a new method of analysis for jump stochastic systems. The potential
for the research work is that it will provide a unified framework for the
analysis of both the Continuous Time Markov Decision Processes with piecewise
constant trajectories and Semi-Markov Decision Processes. By using the new
framework and some other modeling and analysis techniques, including finite and
infinite-dimensional linear programming, the research will pursue to develop
structural results and efficient algorithms for the solution of continuous time
problems, including problems with multiple criteria and constraints. The results
of this project will provide analytical methods and computational tools for
dynamic optimization of a wide range of natural and man-made systems whose
behavior can be described by stochastic processes with piecewise constant
trajectories. Knowledge of how to control dynamic stochastic systems beyond
Markovian systems is in its infancy. This research will advance the frontier
toward a better understanding and control of generalized Semi-Markov Processes.
Stochastic models that can adjust based on real time data are needed. This work
paves the way toward the realization of such a goal.