* 9500909
* Mathematical Sciences:  New Results in Sampling and Wavelet Applications in Tomography
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/1999
* USD 47,919.00

9500909 Walnut The project consists of two parts. First, the investigator
proposes to apply new results in sampling theory to do high-resolution signal
processing by combining several low-resolution versions of a given signal. It
was observed by Berenstein and others that a mathematical model of this problem
(called multisensor deconvolution) is uniquely solvable but ill- posed, and
difficult to solve numerically. The investigator has found Shannon-type sampling
formulas on unions of regular lattices with incommensurate densities, which
provide simple solutions to the multichannel deconvolution problem in special
cases. The following applications are envisioned: 1) Sharpening measurements
taken by CT scanners by combining measurements from several low-resolution
detectors. This could ultimately lead to inexpensive measuring devices with
resolution comparable to expensive high-resolution machines. 2) A recently
proposed scheme to increase resolution in an industrial tomography problem
involves sampling on unions of regular grids of incommensurate size. The
investigator's sampling results could lead to a complete solution to this
problem. 3) New techniques are required to do "superresolution" in electronic
imaging since the theoretical limit of pixel resolution is rapidly being
reached. Deconvolution at high-resolution of several low-resolution images is a
natural approach to this problem. Second, the investigator and others have
successfully shown that wavelets are a natural tool for recovering edge features
of an image from local Radon transform data. The investigator proposes to
develop these local algorithms with the following goals envisioned: 1) Find ways
to recover locally density as well as edge features of an image, and develop an
algorithm competitive with existing local tomography algorithms and 2) Identify
the wavefront set of an image using wavelets, and ultimately apply the
techniques to the at tenuated Radon transform. The first part of the project is
concerned with increasing the resolution of remote sensing devices such as
electronic cameras. Suppose, for example, that a CCD camera has a resolution of
1 millimeter, that is, it can distinguish features of a scene that are at least
1 mm on a side. Features smaller than that are blurred into their surroundings.
Berenstein and others observed that some classical mathematics led to a possible
way to increase resolution without designing an expensive high-resolution
device. If one took several images of the scene with cameras identical to the
first but which had slightly poorer resolutions than the first (this could also
be achieved by repositioning the same camera), then in theory one could recover
features of the original scene to arbitrary resolution. In practice, arbitrary
resolution is not possible, but it seems that real increases in resolution can
be achieved. The investigator has formulated an approach to this problem from
the point of view of sampling theory. Using this approach, the investigator has
been able to produce numerically stable twenty-fold increases in resolution in a
one-dimensional model problem. More work is required, but the following
applications are envisioned: 1) Producing high-resolution measurements from CT
scanners by combining the measurements from several low-resolution scanners and
2) Increasing the resolution in a specific industrial tomography problem by a
direct application of the investigator's new sampling results. The second part
of the project is concerned with "local" CT scans. In existing CT scanners, an
entire slice of a patient's body must be exposed to radiation even if the doctor
is interested in looking at only a small region. The investigator proposes to
use a new and powerful signal processing technique called wavelets to find
efficient algorithms for obtaining an image of a small area of a patient's body
while only exposing the area of interest to radiation. It is hoped that these
techniques will be competitive with existing so-called local tomography
algorithms.