* 9500568
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Waves, Nonlinear Materials and Chaotic Mixing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* James Glimm, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9500568 Grove This project seeks to develop a fundamental approach to the study
of mixing layers, nonlinear materials, and fluid chaos. Nonlinear waves in
hyperbolic conservation laws commonly display sensitive dependence to the
problem formulation and to numerical solution algorithms. A completed theory of
a hyperbolic wave should contain the following ingredients: (1) jump conditions
describing the influence of the wave on the flow in which it is embedded, (2)
the width or growth rate of the layer, (3) a complete theory of the internal
structure, and (4) a systematic unfolding of all possible sensitive dependencies
for the wave. The mathematical tools and theories used in the analysis are
varied, and include: partial differential equations (hyperbolic conservation
laws), random fields, perturbation theory (ordinary and renormalized),
renormalization group methods, traveling wave analysis, bifurcation theory, and
the geometric theory of ordinary differential equations. A representative mixing
layer problem is acceleration driven layers, arising in instabilities of a fluid
interface. Such mixing layers arise in many areas of basic science and
technology, including supernovae, inertial confinement fusion, and injection
jets in carburetors for internal combustion engines. Detailed mathematical
modeling and analysis will seek to modify and refine the defining mathematical
equations describing such flows and develop an improved understanding of the
structure of these equations. This analysis will in turn be used to develop high
resolution numerical methods for the solution of these equations. The nonlinear
material wave patterns we study describe important metal forming processes such
as punching and cutting (shear bands) and flow instabilities in forming plastic
components by injection molding (viscoelastic materials). The analysis of waves
in nonlinear materials uses a similar integrated approach: modeling, theor y,
computations, and applications. Interactions with collaborators will allow
transfer of this technology to appropriate applied physics and engineering
communities.