* 9500072
* The Importance of Foraging Pattern on Reproductive Success  in the Northern Fur Seal, Callorhinus Ursinus
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Daniel Costa, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/2001
* USD 285,231.00

9500072 Costa Over the last several decades many populations of pinnipeds and
seabirds have undergone significant declines. Many hypotheses to explain the
declines have been made and numerous studies have been undertaken to search for
the underlying causes. Juvenile survival, however, may be one of the most
critical factors influencing the growth and recovery of depleted populations of
pinnipeds. Maternal resources imparted to offspring prior to weaning are
important for a successful transition from nutritional dependence to
independence and subsequent survival. This may be particularly so of species
whose life histories are constrained by rearing young at high-latitudes and
species which wean their young abruptly. Growth and recovery of depleted
populations at high-latitudes are further constrained when life- history
fecundity schedules limit individuals to producing one offspring per year. Thus,
the quantity and quality of maternal investment to the young are a critical
determinant of post- weaning survival. This research will examine the
relationship between foraging behavior and maternal investment in northern fur
seals. The research will be conducted in the Pribilof Islands; Alaska, where
lactating northern fur seals have been shown to have three distinct foraging
patterns (shallow, deep, and mixed). The location of the Pribilof Islands, near
the edge of an extensive continental shelf, fortuitously gives animals breeding
there two distinct foraging environments, one on the continental and one off.
Each environment has a distinct assemblage of prey species. Previous studies
show the deep diving foraging pattern to be associated with foraging over the
continental shelf. We will quantify the foraging costs and total investment in
pups associated with the different foraging strategies observed in northern fur
seals. This will be done by comparing the maternal investment in terms of both
the actual energy and material delivered to the pup and the ene rgetic cost to
the mother. These data will be used to determine if one foraging strategy is
energetically more efficient or beneficial and if this is so, does it allow the
mother to make a greater investment in her young.