* 9500617
* Quantitative Study of Strain-Enhanced Atomic Transport in   Mechanically Milled Metal Powders
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1999
* Michael Atzmon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 04/30/1999
* USD 324,414.00

9500617 Atzmon A quantitative study is made of the temporal evolution of
structural and microstructural parameters of metal powders during ball milling.
A ball mill design is employed which allows precise knowledge and control of the
powder temperature, milling intensity and atmosphere with the temperature and
milling intensity as main control variables. Materials parameters of interest
include grain size, root-mean-square elastic strain, long- and short-range order
parameters, solubilities in supersaturated solutions, domain sizes in two-phase
mixtures, and the crystallized fraction in amorphous alloys. Characterization of
the material is by x-ray diffraction, differential scanning calorimetry, and
scanning and transmission electron microscopy. Elaborate analysis of
experimental results should provide expressions for the contributions of plastic
deformation and thermal recovery to the evolution of each parameter. The results
are interpreted in analogy with theories of radiation-enhanced diffusion and
radiation-induced phase formation. Most importantly, quantitative evidence for
plastic deformation enhanced diffusion is expected to be obtained from the
thermal recovery term. %%% This work is expected to provide new and quantitative
understanding of microscopic processes occurring during ball milling. It is
anticipated that the experience gained in systematic microstructural design will
help in prospective practical applications. ***