* 9500181
* Numerical and Experimental Investigation of Unsteady-State  Material-Laser Interactions with Application to Laser       Cutting Process
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Y Lawrence Yao, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/1998
* USD 206,300.00

9500181 Yao This project is aimed at advancing knowledge of material-laser
interactions under unsteady state conditions. The laser cutting process has been
chosen for investigation because the effects of unsteady state conditions on
material-laser interactions are more pronounced in the laser cutting process
than other similar processes like laser welding. Specific objectives are (1)
advance knowledge of geometric effects on material-laser interactions, (2)
understand the mechanism of using variable process parameters to offset the
detrimental effects of unsteady-state material-laser interactions, (3) explore
the nature of oscillatory phenomena in general and striation formation in
particular in the laser cutting process, (4) expand the technology base
necessary for improving process reproducibility, eliminating the needs for
trial-and-error, and optimizing the process under unsteady state conditions. The
project will develop a transient three-dimensional model embracing the coupled
continuity, momentum and energy equations for the molten liquid layer, solid
workpiece and gas jet. The liquid/solid will be modeled as a single domain with
an enthalpy-porosity formulation for the phase change. A control-volume based
finite-difference algorithm with power-law scheme for convective terms and
pressure correction algorithm will be used to solve the equations. Instability
of the molten layer will be numerically studied by introducing perturbations.
The model can accurately predict the kerf geometry, energy transport and melt
flow. The model will be used to investigate various unsteady state phenomena as
mentioned above, the effects of Computer Numerical Control (CNC) interpolations,
and optimization strategies under unsteady state conditions. Oxygen assist
carbon dioxide laser cutting of mild steel will be the focus. Experimental
investigation under various unsteady state conditions will be undertaken,
including boundary encroachment, cornering, contour cuts and variable process
parameters. Experimental techniques to be used include high speed filming to
investigate cutting front mobility and striation formation; close focus
pyrometer and thermocouples to investigate cutting front temperature and
workpiece temperature distribution under unsteady state conditions. Focused heat
delivery capability of lasers makes it ideal for modifying materials in a very
selected local zones. Delivery of such high energy concentration also poses
difficulties in continuously controlling the unsteady process. Successful
demonstration of controlled laser cutting as a result of the predictive model
developed in this project will significantly impact the use of lasers in
materials processing industries.