* 9500694
* The Geometry of Shock Waves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* John Temple, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 92,000.00

DMS-9500694 Temple This proposal addresses the problem of constructing,
analyzing and numerically computing shock-wave solutions of systems of
nonlinear, hyperbolic conservation laws, with emphasis on the compressible Euler
equations of gas dynamics. Shock-waves are modeled by discontinuous solutions in
inviscid equations, and shock-waves are what introduce time-irreversibility,
decay, loss of information, dissipation and increase of entropy into the
dynamics of solutions. The author's recent construction of a shock wave solution
of the Einstein equations takes advantage of the fact that the gravitational
metric is continuous across a shock, even though the fluid variables are
discontinuous. This allows for solutions that are weaker than shock wave, and
the proposal explores the organizing effect that the gravitational metric has on
the geometry of shock wave propagation. In the nonlinear theory of sound waves,
the authors address the open problem of explaining the stability of periodic
solutions. Their idea is to treat Lie bracket errors in wave interactions as
virtual waves, and thereby they can identify and study a nonlinear cancellation
mechanism that explains why the dissipation due to increasing entropy defeats
the amplification of waves due to nonlinear interaction in the long time. The
proposal involves the analysis and interpretation of the author's recent
construction of a new shock wave solution of the Einstein equations of general
relativity. This exact solution resolves a problem that was first posed in a
famous 1939 paper by J. Robert Oppenheimer and his student H. Snyder. The new
shock wave solution of the Einstein equations of general relativity provides a
model in which the universe begins with a shock wave explosion instead of the
well established ``Big Bang'' scenario (in which the entire universe burst from
a single point). The proposal explores the possible application of this
construction to modeling the dynamics of stars.