* 9500810
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematial Modeling and Dynamics of Premixed Flames as Hydrodynamic Discontinuities
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* John Bechtold, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9400810 Bechtold The investigator proposes to study several fundamental aspects
of premixed flame propagation. Of primary concern will be flames whose
characteristic dimension is much larger than their thermal thickness so that the
flame can be viewed as a hydrodynamic discontinuity. Such flames have taken on
new significance in recent years due to their role in modeling turbulent
combustion. In one phase of the project, hydrodynamic flame models will be used
to study the dynamics and extinction characteristics of premixed flames in
unsteady environments. The investigator also proposes to extend existing flame
models that have employed one-step-chemistry approximations by considering a
two-step mechanism that better captures the branching-recombination nature of
flames. The methods that will be used include asymptotic and perturbation
techniques together with numerical computations. This work will provide a better
understanding of flame-flow interactions which are an important feature of
turbulent combustion. Nearly all combustion devices of practical importance
operate in a turbulent combustion regime. This includes spark-ignition engines,
incinerators, rockets, forest fires, etc. The complexities inherent in each of
these systems have prevented a deep understanding of turbulent combustion.
However, a partial understanding of this topic can be achieved by first
comprehending various fundamental aspects that are common in many of these
systems. For example, a turbulent flow field is characterized by random spatial
and temporal variations, and a flame situated in such a flow will get stretched
and distorted. In addition, the heat released by the combustion process will
affect the flow field. In this work the investigator proposes to study these
interactions theoretically. There are two main themes: (i) to examine flame
response in unsteady (time-dependent) flows; and (ii) to extend existing flame
models to include additional eff ects due to chemical reaction. This work will
provide a better understanding of flame-flow interactions which are an important
feature of turbulent combustion.