* 9500660
* Mathematical Sciences:  The Topology and Geometry of        Intrinsically Bent DNA
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* James White, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 50,000.00

White The investigator studies the structure of closed circular DNA. The
theoretical approach employs displacement based Finite Element Analysis (FEA), a
well-established technique for obtaining solutions to engineering problems in
nonlinear solid mechanics. FEA is used to describe closed DNAs containing
multiple coplanar bends that are in-phase; containing bends that do not lie in
the same plane; and containing bends are distributed both symmetrically and
asymmetrically. It is predicted that the twist distribution is uniform
throughout the regions between the bends; that the fraction of the linking
number change (DLk) converted into writhe increases with the number of bends;
and that the regional contribution to the writhe increases if the bends are
clustered in that region. Methods are devised for solving the problem of
avoidance of passage of the DNA strand through itself as DLk becomes greater
than 12. This includes a novel approach, the use of special contact elements
(gap elements). These have the property that when the gap distance reduces to
some specified value, nodal motion constraints are relaxed if the nodes
subsequently tend to separate. Finally, methods are developed for decomposing
changes in DLk into changes in writhe and twist. Biologically, closed circular
DNA is one of the most important structural forms of DNA. This includes not only
free DNA molecules, such as the plasmids used in all genetic engineering
experiments, but chromatin as well, which is now known to be divided into
domains of supercoiling. Bent regions in DNA appear to be significant in
regulating the initiating of transcription. This project provides the physical
basis for understanding the combined effects of these two structures. DNA is not
only a repository for genetic information but also is involved in many aspects
of the expression of this information. For example, it is often necessary to
bring together portions of the DNA molecule that lie at considerable distances
from each other along the DNA contour. This juxtaposition of distant genetic
elements makes possible the expression of biological information that is not
otherwise possible. This process is accomplished by forming a loop, in which the
two elements that are to be brought together interact at the site of loop
closure. The bringing together of these distant genes depends in a sensitive way
upon the length of the DNA piece that separates them and upon the helical
periodicity. This project shows how the presence of internal bends in DNA within
the loop fundamentally changes how distant segments are brought together. The
distribution of these internal bends can thus have profound biological
consequences.