* 9500106
* Engineering Research Equipment: Pulsed Laser System for     Dynamical Studies of Photonic Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Stephen Ducharme, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 04/30/1996
* USD 32,807.00

9500106 Ducharme The Department of Physics and Astronomy at the University of
Nebraska will purchase a pulsed laser system for us with several research
projects. The proposed pulsed laser system consists of: 1) a commercial
Q-switched Nd:YAG pump laser and second harmonic generator, 2) a custom narrow
bandwidth pulsed dye laser, and 3) an optical table, detectors, and optical
elements suitable for use with high power lasers. The pulsed laser system will
be used to conduct dynamical measurements on a much shorter time scale (equal to
or greater than 5 ns) than is possible with our CW lasers (equal to or greater
that 1 ms), extending the scope of several research projects. These projects
include: 1) Dynamical studies of photorefractive polymers elucidating charge
generation, trapping, and transport processes, 2) All-optical modulation caused
by combined pyroelectric and electro-optic response in pyroelectric materials in
the sub- microsecond time scale during which the pyroelectric effects are
dominant, 3) Dynamical response of the photorefractive nonlinear Fabry-Perot
etalon which exhibits intensity dependent asymmetric transmission and may
exhibit optical bistability, 4) Spectroscopy and dynamics of modulated
absorption in photorefractive materials to obtain energies, lifetimes, cross
sections, and other information concerning ("deep" and "shallow") traps, and 5)
Nonlinear optical effects on polymer/crystal nanocomposites. ***