* 9500162
* A New Process for Manufacturing Optical Disks
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/1999
* USD 224,888.00

9500162 Bifano The research will investigate a new manufacturing process for
optically encoded information disks (eg: compact disks or CDs). Two major
changes in the current manufacturing techniques will be undertaken; namely, (1)
replacement of the glass master disk substrate by a tough ceramic, which will be
used as the injection mold stamper, and (2) replacement of electroplating,
peeling, protecting, polishing, and punching operations by a single ion
machining step. The most important and technically challenging step is the ion
machining process for recording CD information on the master disk. The technique
will be broad beam ion machining though a mask to produce billions of features
with uniform good quality on a single substrate. If this novel precision
manufacturing strategy can be proven for CDs, it carries the potential to
complete against other micromachining techniques. This research has the
potential to cut manufacturing process time by half reducing both manufacturing
cost and work in process inventory. Further, by eliminating electroplating and
other steps requiring stringent environmental controls, ion beam machining can
provide the alternate choice for an environmentally benign manufacturing
process. With the boom of information technology, mass storage capabilities in
CDs, this manufacturing process holds the promise for continually driving the
cost of information dissemination.