* 9500609
* Quantum Affine Algebras and Elliptic Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Ian Grojnowski, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Ann K. Boyle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

This award supports research on certain generalizations of affine Lie algebras.
The first of these is the quantized analogue of the enveloping algebra of an
affine Kac-Moody algebra, the quantum affine algebra. The finite dimensional
representations of this have very subtle behaviour, similar to the spherical
representations of a p-adic group, and the proposed approach is to use
techniques developed by Kazhdan and Lusztig in their study of affine Hecke
algebras. The principal investigator intends to construct the representations of
these quantum affine algebras and determine which admit perfect crystals, study
their tensor category structure, and investigate the relations with the highest
weight category. The second theme of this project is to define and study
elliptic quantum groups. The principal investigator will study their more
arithmetic behaviour, arising from the moduli of elliptic curves. It is expected
that these algebras will have serious implications for the study of the XYZ
Hamiltonian of statistical mechanics. This research is concerned with a
mathematical object called a Lie algebra. Lie algebras arise from another object
called a Lie group. An example of a Lie group is the rotations of a sphere where
one rotation is followed by another. Lie groups and Lie algebras are important
in areas involving analysis of sperical motion.