* 9500782
* U.S.-Switzerland Cooperative Research on Dynamic Multi-AgentOptimization (Applied Mathematics)
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Dean Carlson, University of Toledo
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 10,140.00

This award supports Professor Dean A. Carlson of the University of Toledo to
collaborate in mathematics research with Professor Alain B. Haurie, Department
of Management Studies, University of Geneva, Switzerland. They share an interest
in the analysis and numerical solutions of dynamic optimization models involving
one or several decision makers. Professor Carlson brings to the program a strong
theoretical background in dynamical systems and infinite horizon optimal
control. Professor Haurie brings extensive experience in modeling economic
processes using various optimization models. Uniting this complementary
expertise will enable them to work effectively on the development of the theory
of dynamical systems and the computational methods permitting solutions based on
real data, for a class of models relevant to microeconomic analysis. Dynamical
systems are the backbone of modern economic theory and have found applications
in studying topics such as economic growth, investment and bargaining, among
others. The scientific outcome of this program of research will extend the
knowledge dynamical systems that are typical of economic modeling and in the
numerical solution permitting a numerical computation of solutions. This area of
knowledge provides a framework which may be applied to global economic models
that more accurately reflect the true nature of international business
activities.