* 9500942
* Advanced Constraint Techniques for User Interface           Implementation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1995,10/05/1998
* Scott Hudson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 10/05/1998
* USD 313,990.00

This project explores the use of advanced constraint-based techniques for the
production of high quality user interfaces. Constraints as a general technique
allow the declaration of a set of relationships that are to hold between
entities. Constraint satisfaction systems are then used to maintain those
declared relationships automatically without explicit programming. The use of
constraint techniques offers to dramatically simplify the task of user interface
implementation and hence make the creation of easy to use computer applications
substantially easier. This project will employ propagation-based constraint
techniques and seek to provide advances in several related areas. Tools to make
existing constraint techniques more practical will be produced and distributed
to the user interface community. New applications of constraints to user
interface tasks will be explored, and new visual notations for constraints will
be developed. Finally, this project will develop new concurrent algorithms for
constraint satisfaction which will, for the first time, allow constraints to be
effectively employe d in multi-user interfaces distributed across networks.
Taken together, these advances will serve to make a wide variety of high quality
user interfaces easier to construct, and hence will promote creation of dynamic
computer applications that are significantly easier to use.