* 9500049
* U.S. Participation in Two Workshops on Science and          Technology Education; Milton Keynes, U.K., May 15-17, 1995  and Enschede, The Netherlands, May 19-20, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Dean Zollman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 04/30/1998
* USD 16,925.00

This proposal supports the participation of ten U.S. scientists and educators in
two consecutive workshops in May, 1995, in Great Britain and The Netherlands, to
share experience in using innovative science educational materials focusing on
the physics and technology of the bicycle. The workshops are organized and
hosted by Dr. Keith Williams, Dean of Technology, British Open University, at
Milton Keynes, Great Britain, and Dr. Frits Gravenberch, Director of Research,
National Institute for Curriculum Development, Enshede, The Netherlands. U.S.
participation is coordinated by Dr. Dean Zollman, Physics Department, Kansas
State University. A collaborative effort by participants from these three
countries, joined by a few invited experts from other countries, will identify
priorities and improve the efficiency of future research to benefit the science
and technology education communities in all three countries. Parallel research
and development in the United States, Great Britain and The Netherlands has lead
to the creation of science and technology teaching materials which focus on the
bicycle. These materials have proven to be effective in enabling students to
learn about scientific principles as well as technological applications, in a
familiar and interesting context. Groups in each of the three countries are now
in the early stages of enhancing their traditional instructional materials by
adapting them to a digital multimedia environment. By working together, these
groups can collaborate to develop instructional materials which build on the
strengths of each group. The results of the collaboration should be a set of
truly international instructional materials which utilize the most recent
advances in digital multimedia.