* 9500888
* Synthesis of Methanofullerenes for the Fabrication of New Organic Materials: Environmentally Stable Metals and Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1998
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1998
* USD 450,000.00

Abstract 9500888 Wudl The objective of this research is to continue the
development of molecules which are designed to be molecular precursors to
organic metals and high-temperature organic superconductors. Three approaches
will be pursued: (a) synthesis of new methanofullerenes consisting of variously
substituted C61 and C66, (b) preparation of new materials based on
periconjugative effects of methanofullerenes C61-C66 with electron rich and
super-electron rich olefins as well as alkali metals, and (c) preparation of new
materials based on new electron donor methanofullerenes. Once prepared, the
physical properties of solids will determined using the latest developments in
experimental condensed matter physics, in collaboration with other groups. %%%
It is a rare event in the history of science when a new starting material is
uncovered for chemical transformations and the eventual development of exotic
compounds and novel materials. That is the case with the discovery of
buckminsterfullerene (C60 ) and the fullerenes. The family of spherical and
oblong molecular allotropes of carbon, the fullerenes are formed at temperatures
upward of 2000 C, yet the smaller, isolable and characterizable members of a
large family are reactive molecules at room temperature. Because C60 (and C70)
is a relatively strong electron acceptor, it is of interest to explore its
reactions with a number of diazomethanes. This research has led to the discovery
of methanofullerenes and fulleroids, functionalized fullerenes. The proposed
work is the continuation of prior studies in the same area. Ultimately, these
and other related new compounds may be utilized for the fabrication of novel
molecular metals and superconductors.