* 9500659
* Phenotypic and Evolutionary Adaptation to Temperature:      Symposium at the Annual Meeting of the Society for          Experimental Biology in St. Andrews, Scotland in April 1995
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Albert Bennett, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 03/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9420155 Bennett Water temperature is a critical environmental variable that
plays a major role in determining the distribution and abundance of fish
species. Temperature changes alter muscle function and hence escape speed and
vulnerability to predators. This project will examine the effects of
temperature, temperature changes and predation on escape behavior of fish.
Acclimation to long-term temperature changes will be examined in several species
of cyprinid fish by high speed video filming of escape behavior and analysis of
muscle contractile properties and the enzymatic bases of those properties. The
same techniques will be used to examine the effect of historical
(multigenerational) exposure to differing levels of predation on fish
populations to determine whether exposure to predation causes divergence in
locomotor performance capacities. The research will provide a basis for
predicting likely effects of water temperature on stock performance in nature,
the ability of those stocks to adjust performance over longer term temperature
exposure, and potential evolutionary changes in fish stocks introduced into new
areas with new predatory regimes. This information is important to both
fisheries management and to understanding how populations of cold-blooded
vertebrates may adjust to climate change or range extension.