* 9500398
* RUI: Genetic and Molecular Characterization of a Novel      Transcription Unit in Bacillus subtilis
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1995
* Leticia Marquez-Magana, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1995
* USD 35,000.00

9500398 Marquez The primary objectives of this starter grant are to 1) identify,
and characterize the pattern of expression from the promoter sequence that
initiates transcription of the sigD operon, and 2) obtain the genetic sequence
that forms the 3' end of this transcription unit. The sigmaD factor of the
bacterium Bacillus subtilis is encoded by the sigD structural gene, and is
required for the transcription of flagellin, motility, and chemotaxis genes.
Interestingly, sigD is the last complete open reading from in a very large
operon (>26 kb), containing genes which encode structural proteins that form the
hook-basal body complex, the multi-subunit structure that tethers the flagellum
to the bacterial cell, as well as regulatory proteins required for chemotaxis.
Transcription of this operon is initiated, at least in part, by a promoter
element about 24 kilobases upstream of the structural gene for sigmaD. This
promoter element has been cloned as part of a 5.7 kb insert in the plasmid
pAZ210 and is known to reside within a 3 kb restriction fragment. The sequence
of this fragment is being obtained in order to identify candidate promoter
elements based on their homology to known promoter consensus sequences in B.
subtilis. The information obtained will allow for the synthesis of the
appropriate primer extension probes. These probes will be used in a primer
extension reaction to determine which of the candidate promoter sequences is
utilized in vivo to initiate transcription of the sigD operon. Primer extension
analysis will also be used to generate an accurate representation of how
expression from this promoter element is regulated throughout development. The
pattern of expression obtained may provide clues as to the molecular mechanisms
involved in regulating transcription of the sigD operon. In parallel studies the
3' end of the sigD transcription unit is being obtained and characterized. As
indicated above, sigD is the last complete open reading frame in the region of
DNA that h as been cloned and sequenced. There are no sequences within this
region which are characteristic of transcriptional terminators, and a partial
open reading frame has been identified immediately downstream of the
translational stop for sigD, suggesting that this transcription unit is greater
than 26 kb in length. In order to obtain the 3' end of this transcription unit,
a B. subtilis genomic library will be probed with a restriction fragment from
the 3' end of the sigD gene. The resultant clone(s) will be sequenced in order
to identify potential transcription terminators and any additional open reading
frames. Utilizing this information an S1 probe will be prepared to map the 3'
end of the sigD operon by S1 analysis and in this way verify that the 3' end of
sigD transcription unit has been obtained. %%% The information generated by this
study will provide basic information as to the genetic organization and
regulation of a very large and important group of bacterial genes. ***