* 9500741
* Surface, Interface and Micromagnetic Studies of Novel,      Epitaxial Magnetic System Confined in 1, 2 and 3 Dimensions
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,02/28/1996
* Carl Rau, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9500741 Rau This program focuses on the synthesis, processing, and
characterization of new magnetic heterostructure with dimensions at the
nanometer level, including one-, two- and three- dimensional patterned
structures. Besides the application of a series of high-sensitivity magnetic and
nonmagnetic spectroscopies, a newly developed technique, scanning ion microscopy
with spin analysis (SIMPA) will be used. SIMPA not only allows for element-
specific, micro-magnetic domain imaging, but also provides for in situ sample
processing using a focused ion beam of 35 nm spot-size. The new magnetic systems
are expected to exhibit novel magnetic properties that contrast strikingly with
the properties of presently known materials. %%% This program focuses on the
study of novel magnetic materials and systems which are engineered at the atomic
scale and do not exist in nature. These new systems are expected to exhibit
specifically tailored macro- and micro-magnetic properties. The design,
synthesis characterization and processing of such new systems will not only lead
to new or advanced materials with superior properties and performance, but will
also help to improve the fundamental knowledge base in materials research. These
one, two, and three-dimensional patterned structure are expected to be used in
new applications and devices of potential future technological importance such
as ultra-high density, thin film magnetic recording media and heads or high-
speed devises, where a detailed physical understanding of their micromagnetic
properties, which are studied using a novel technique at Rice, will determine
their ultimate performance. ***