* 9500975
* Mathematical Sciences:  Non-Normal Matrices and Operators:  Analysis, Computations, Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Lloyd Trefethen, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/1999
* USD 276,500.00

Trefethen The investigator studies problems in the mathematical sciences
involving highly non-normal matrices and operators. Approximately speaking, this
means matrices and operators whose eigenvectors or eigenfunctions are far from
orthogonal. Most matrices and operators that arise in applications are normal or
close to normal, but the highly non-normal cases constitute an important
minority, one that has been poorly handled by traditional methods based on
eigenvalues. The emphasis of this project is on methods that avoid the use of
eigenvalues. Some of these make use instead of certain sets in the complex plane
known as pseudospectra, defined in terms of perturbations of the spectrum or
equivalently as regions bounded by level curves of the norm of the resolvent.
The applications investigated fall in three areas: numerical solution of non-
self-adjoint partial differential equations; iterative solution of large-scale
matrix problems; and fluid dynamics, specifically hydrodynamic stability and
transition to turbulence. This work is connected with some major ongoing
developments in science and engineering. One is a basic change in the prevailing
view of how fluid flows become unstable and eventually turbulent, with potential
applications across many branches of mechanical, aeronautical, and civil
engineering as well as in meteorology, geophysics, and other scientific fields.
A second, less accessible to the public but still of great importance, is the
great shift underway in computational science from "direct" to faster
"iterative" methods for solving large-scale linear algebra problems. The work of
the investigator's group in both of the areas just mentioned has had
considerable visibility. It is also having a growing educational impact through
the idea of "pseudospectra" mentioned above, a way of visualizing these
mathematical problems on a computer that many students (and professors!) find
visually and conceptually appealing.