* 9500852
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Analysis of Kinetic     Quantum Transport Models for Semiconductors
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Anton Arnold, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

DMS-9500852 Arnold The object of the proposed research is the mathematical and
numerical analysis of quantum kinetic equations in solid state physics. We will
first investigate relaxation-time Wigner-Poisson models (quantum Boltzmann
equation). The existence and uniqueness analysis will be based on the
reformulation of this nonlinear evolution equation in terms of the density
matrix operator. The analysis of the large time behavior and the steady states
in thermodynamic equilibrium will be based on compactness methods and a quantum
entropy functional. Absorbing boundary conditions for the 1D Wigner equation
will be extended to 2D situations, the coupled Wigner-Poisson and relaxation-
time models. The well- posedness analysis will be based on considering the
Wigner equation as a limit of finite dimensional hyperbolic systems. The models
of quantum mechanical transport equations have become the most important basis
for accurate simulations of novel, ultra-integrated semiconductor devices
(quantum devices, electron wave guides). A sound mathematical understanding of
the evolution equation will form the basis for numerical implementations. The
numerical simulation of hypersonic gas flows around rigid objects (e.g., space
shuttles in the high altitude phase of their re-entry into the atmosphere) is
usually accomplished by numerically coupling two different transport models . A
refined coupling strategy is proposed here, which will be equally relevant for
gas dynamics applications, and for efficient simulations of ultra-integrated
semiconductor devices. We will numerically compare it to existing coupling
strategies and investigate its stability.