* 9500653
* Bubbles, Ions, and Vortices in Cryogenic Fluids
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Gary Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9500653 Williams This project is devoted to the study of cryogenic fluids. The
major project is interdisciplinary and involves aspects of physics, chemistry
and optical science. The research deals with the new phenomena of
sonoluminescence; particularly single bubble sonoluminescence. A vapor bubble,
trapped at the center of fluid contained in an acoustic resonator, radiates
bright flashes of light that are easily seen by the naked eye. In the process,
energy densities can increase by a factor of 1012, and 50- picosecond light
pulses are synchronized with the acoustic cycle to a few parts in 1011. This
project extends the sonoluminescence experiments to low temperatures by
employing cryogenic fluids (nitrogen, argon, neon, and helium). Initial
experiments with nitrogen have revealed a spectacular increase in luminosity
over prior room temperature work involving aqueous media. The mechanism of the
sonoluminescence in not known, and this project will obtain information that may
allow a mechanism and theory of the sonoluminescence to be developed. Additional
subprojects deal with helium films adsorbed in porous materials, sound
propagation in these fluids, and a theoretical study of the nature of the
superfluid transition in helium. %%% This project is devoted to the study of
cryogenic fluids. The major project is interdisciplinary and involves aspects of
physics, chemistry and optical science. The research deals with the new
phenomena of sonoluminescence; particularly single bubble sonoluminescence. A
vapor bubble, trapped at the center of fluid contained in an acoustic resonator,
radiates bright flashes of light that are easily seen by the naked eye. This
project extends the sonoluminescence experiments to low temperatures by
employing cryogenic fluids (nitrogen, argon, neon, and helium). Initial
experiments with nitrogen have revealed a spectacular increase in luminosity
over prior room temperature work involving aqueous media. The mechanism of the
sonoluminescence in not known, and this project will obtain information that may
allow a mechanism and theory of the sonoluminescence to be developed. Additional
subprojects deal with helium films adsorbed in porous materials, sound
propagation in these fluids, and a theoretical study of the nature of the
superfluid transition in helium. ***