* 9500046
* A Flexible Approach for the Design and Analysis of Complex  Engineering Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Richard Balling, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1999
* USD 255,921.00

9500046 Balling The focus of this project is on improving the efficiency and
effectiveness of engineering design of complex engineering systems. The design
of modern engineering systems requires the participation of engineers and others
from a wide range of disciplines. Normally, these individuals are not well
trained to work together as a multi-disciplinary design team. The purpose of
this project is to develop algorithms for efficiently approaching system
analysis and design. Specifically, a method is sought whereby a system can be
decomposed into disciplinary elements such that design and analysis may proceed
within each discipline, independent of the other involved disciplines, and the
disciplinary designs then combined and iterated into an optimal or satisfying
system design. The approach is to introduce coupling functions, which couple the
analyses and designs contributed from the disparate disciplines. Iteration to
achieve convergence on the coupling functions is expected to provide an
optimally designed system. Research will include the search for robust
application methods for the proposed approach and simplification to enable
treatment of disciplinary large and complex engineering systems. This research
could provide a method for efficiently and effectively engaging disciplinary
experts in the process of design. If successful, it could provide an approach to
design that leads to more optimal designs in less time than the conventional
methods.