* 9500544
* Research Equipment Grant:  A Graphics Supercomputer for a   Virtual Reality Conceptual Design System
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Mark Henderson, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/1996
* USD 83,327.00

9500544 Henderson This grant provides funding to the Department of Mechanical
and Aerospace Engineering at the Arizona State University for the purchase of
graphics supercomputer equipment that will be dedicated to the support of
research in simulation of steps in Integrated Product and Process Development
(IPPD). This graphics equipment will replace currently outdated research
workstations that are too slow for current research projects. Specifically, the
new workstation will allow complex parts to be displayed and manipulated in real
time while using texture mapping and lighting models. In addition, the
workstation will allow stereo three-dimensional viewing at a 120 Hz refresh
rate, which is required by current stereo viewing equipment. This equipment will
enable real-time display for concurrent engineering, simulation, and data
visualization. Computational speed is important because a metric used in today's
product development is time, in the form of reduced time to market, instant
design feedback, networked display for electronic commerce, and real-time
simulation animation. Several important aspects of engineering design are
supported by this equipment. These include a number of research projects that
are likely to advance the state-of-the-art of engineering design. Research in
engineering design is important to the maintenance of a competitive position in
the design and production of nearly all products.