* 9500232
* REG:  In-situ Joining of Thermoplastics and Their           Composites to Metals in Net-Shape Processes, Hot-Melt,      Filament Winding, Injection Molding, and Shrink Fitting
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9500232 Ramani This is an Engineering Research Equipment Grant to purchase an
injection molding machine and induction heating unit. The equipment will be used
in several projects, including thermoplastic polymer structural bonding, in-situ
joining of thermoplastics and their composites to metals in net-shape processes,
that includes injection molding, filament winding and shrink fitting, and
incorporation of induction heating to increase process speeds. The primary
objective of this research is to develop in-situ processes to join thermoplastic
composites to metals in net-shape processes. The residual stresses will be
modeled as a function of the process parameters. The surface preparation,
contact pressure during consolidation, heating and cooling rates, hold times at
melt and recrystallization temperature, effect of bond line thickness and
uniformity, and anodization to increase durability will be included in the
process development cycle. Induction heating will be used to transiently and
preferentially heat the metal surface for bonding. The results will be applied
to filament winding and injection molding. Known characterization techniques
such as x-ray diffraction (XRD), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), and
scanning electron microscopy (SEM) will be used to evaluate the polymer
morphology and structure at the interface. Cooperative arrangements have been
made with an industrial partner to do scale up testing and mechanical strength
evaluation of the joints between polymer and metal. The results of this research
will be applied to bio-medical, automotive and aerospace industries. It is
anticipated that this innovative joining between plastics and metals will lead
to major reductions in production cycle time which can reduce the total cost.
Further new design features can be incorporated taking into account in-situ
joining capabilities.