* 9500009
* GOALI/IUCRP: Development of a Methodology for Optimal ModelDesign to Minimize Warpage and Weldline in Injection Molded Parts
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Byung Kim, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/1998
* USD 172,218.00

9500009 Kim Automated design methodology research in injection molding will be
conducted on an actual production part provided by the industrial partner. Prior
research has demonstrated the predictive capability of neural network learning
algorithm applied to injection molded parts. Building on that experience, this
research will optimize the location of weldline and minimize warpage using
statistical methods, combining both Box complex and Tagnchi experimental
designs. The design space will cover part, mold, machine set up and resin. The
simulation will be carried out at the University and actual injection molding
will be conducted at the site of the industrial partner. This is a case study
approach with a specific practical, high volume part. Such a demonstration
enables industrial production to replace the trial and error process
optimization with an automated design. Injection molding is a widely applied
process for the manufacturing of numerous plastic parts. Process parameters are
often setup by trial and error. Successful completion of this project has the
potential to improve the consistency and quality of injection molded products.
By integrating product design with process simulation, products can be designed
for manufacture thus reducing the developmental time. As a result of cooperative
research between the University and industry, manufacturing research relevance
to the real world scenario will be maintained as a result of the cooperative
research.