* 9500878
* Mathematical Sciences: Computability and Mathematical       Definability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Theodore Slaman, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Beverly Diamond
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9500878 Slaman Slaman intends to study computability and mathematical
definability. This research will contribute to developing a complete
understanding of the degree-theoretic structures associated with relative
definability, such as the global structures of the Turing degrees D and the
Turing degrees of the recursively enumerable sets R. Missing ingredients
necessary to this understanding include determining whether the universal-
existential theory of R is decidable, characterizing when a relation on R or D
is definable within that structure, and calculating the automorphism groups of
these structures. Secondly, Slaman plans contributions to the proof-theoretic
understanding of second-order arithmetic. In that context, one considers formal
axiom systems which postulate that the universe (of sets or of reals) is closed
under definable operations. For example, one considers the collection of axioms
that states that the reals are closed under relative computation of arithmetic
definability. Slaman plans systematically to study the combinatorial set-
theoretic properties of the continuum in this context. He is particularly
interested in conservation questions: When do closure properties of the
continuum have nontrivial consequences for first-order number theory? The
algebraic structure of definability is well represented by the Turing degrees, a
classification of sets of integers in which two sets that can be computed from
each other are considered equivalent. Slaman will study the Turing degrees in
several settings, to address fundamental questions about their critical
features. The necessity of noneffective means, such as the existence of sets
which are not computable, can also be demonstrated proof-theoretically; this
motivates Slaman's program for the systematic investigation of the combinatorial
set-theoretic properties of the continuum (i.e., of an infinite set of size
equal to that of all real numbers). He is particularl y interested in questions
which relate the set theory of the continuum to other important sets. When do
certain properties of the continuum have bearing on elementary properties of the
integers? ***