* 9500018
* U.S.-Sweden Cooperative Research:  Long-term Historical     Research Record of Cyanobacterial Blooms in the Baltic Sea
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Thomas Bianchi, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 12/31/1997
* USD 12,948.00

This two-year award will support U.S.-Sweden cooperative research on the
history of cyanobacterial blooms in the Baltic Sea between Thomas S. Bianchi of
Tulane University and Ragnar Elmgren of Stockholm University. The objective of
their research is to determine through paleoecological methods, the long-term
record of cyanobacterial blooms in the Baltic Sea. They will use marker pigments
from fossils, siliceous microfossils and biogenic amorphous silica to determine
past phytoplankton assemblages. Petrogenic components and radionuclides will be
used to determine sedimentation rates and resuspension events. Dr. Bianchi
brings to this collaboration expertise in biomarkers as tracers of carbon. This
is complemented by Swedish expertise in eutrophical studies in the Baltic and in
geochemical assessment of sediments. Increased nutrient loading over the past
four decades in the Baltic Sea has resulted in significant eutrophication
problems. While there has been a concerted effort in recent years to control
nutrient inputs, many problems still exist. For example, cyanobacterial blooms
proliferate in the summer and the causes of these blooms remain largely unknown.
The project will advance our understanding of why these blooms occur and whether
they are a natural phenomena of the Baltic Sea that are not necessarily
associated with anthropogenic inputs. Information about the origins of
cyanobacterial blooms and the effects on long-term nutrient limitations will
contribute to the development of an environmental management plan for the Baltic
Sea.