* 9500088
* Decentralized Inventory Control Strategies for Fleet and    Crew Allocation in the Less-Than-Truckload Motor Carrier    Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Randolph Hall, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/1998
* USD 140,000.00

9500088 Hall The objective of this research is to develop models and algorithms
that can be used by individual trucking terminals for the purpose of fleet and
crew assignment. The models will specify the control levels, analogous to 're-
order levels' in inventory theory for the purpose of 1) releasing equipment and
crews to other terminals, 2) requesting equipment and crews from other
terminals, and 3) allocating crews/equipment to or from a specified terminal.
The allocation would be performed in a decentralized manner with the objective
of minimizing system-wide costs. Other objectives of the research include 1) the
development of simulation and analytical models to optimize on control rules
and, 2) compare alternative strategies for fleet and crew management, and
evaluate the control rules through pilot testing in an actual industrial setting
to determine how to adapt the strategies to work within the organizational
structure of a motor carrier enterprise. The problem addressed in this research
is very important to the trucking industry. This research has the potential to
advance the theory of transportation networks by building from an important
application. The problem of equipment and crew management has a significant
economic impact on the trucking industry. Major economic benefits can be gained
if techniques for better management of these resources are developed.