* 9500730
* Dissertation Research: Cultural Context of Health Behavior  of Puerto Rican Adolescents
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Janet McGrath, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1997
* USD 8,580.00

The home power movement in the United States now counts over 100,000 homes whose
owners have implemented their own photovoltaic (solar cell), wind and micro-
hydroelectric power systems. The object of this research is to examine this
movement as a rare instance of direct democratic decisionmaking in the area of
technology design and development. Linking the home power experience with
elements of democratic theory and the science and technology studies literature,
the investigator will develop a new model of public participation in science and
technology decisionmaking and compare and contrast it with other, more familiar
institutional structures and practices in which such decisions get made.
Empirical data gathering on the home power movement will involve interviews with
major national figures and other activists, and participant observation in the
community around Amherst, Wisconsin, that produces the annual Midwest Renewable
Energy Fair. Research will examine the unique nature of popular interactions in
shaping a knowledge base; the nature of participation in the movement and the
effects of participation on the participants themselves; the distinctive
perception and handling of expertise in the movement; and any links that may
exist between particular attributes of the technologies involved and the
directness of individual participation. To help to refine the model and gauge
its applicability, the investigator will consider whether relationships exist
between home power developments and citizens' concerns about toxic waste
disposal, or the emergence of `participatory research` efforts in the U.S. and
abroad. The model to be developed will be responsive to recently expressed
concerns about technology decision making in a democracy and contribute to
ongoing re-examinations of relationships between government and science and
technology in light of post-Cold War changes in social and economic
circumstances. In this climate, new patterns of decisionmaking and their impacts
are worthy of consideration. Findings will be presented at conferences and
meetings and in articles for both academic and popular audiences; a book may
also result.