* 9500392
* Analytical Application of Infrared Nonlinear Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,03/31/1999
* John Wright, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 03/31/1999
* USD 334,000.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
involves the extension of nonlinear multiresonant four wave mixing (MFWM)
spectroscopy to the selected excitation of multiple vibrational transitions in
the infrared spectral range. Professor John C. Wright and his students at the
University of Wisconsin at Madison will use multiple infrared lasers to target
selected transitions within a molecule and induce unique excitation responses
reflective of the sum or difference of individual resonances. The unparalleled
selectivity afforded by this technique is attributed to the wealth of infrared
vibrational resonances that are coupled to chemical functional group
interactions, and the concomitant capability for elimination of matrix, spectral
and/or solvent interferences using the four-wave mixing approach. In addition,
the inherent sharpness of vibrational transitions will allow the generation of
well resolved spectra at room temperatures. Professor Wright will also extend
this technique to the fingerprint region of the infrared which will allow a more
detailed assessment of analyte molecular structure. Multiresonant four wave
mixing nonlinear spectroscopy involves the use of multiple infrared lasers to
enable the judicious selection of excitation wavelengths related to specific
components in complex mixtures, chemical functionalities in biological and
polymeric macromolecules, and/or conformational distinctions in well ordered
systems. This technique allows both qualitative and quantitative chemical
differentiation with unparalleled selectivity. This project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is at a stage where its success will
require the interdisciplinary efforts of physical and analytical
spectroscopists, and its mature development will benefit the characterization of
advanced materials and biomacromolecules.