* 9500646
* Combinatorics, Special Functions, and Computer Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Doron Zeilberger, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Murray M. Schacher
* 06/30/1998
* USD 120,000.00

This award supports the research of Professor Doron Zeilberger in the areas of
algebraic combinatorics, the theory of special functions, and computer algebra.
One direction of this project is a continuation of his research program on the
use of computer algebra for computerized proofs of identities in combinatorics
and the theory of special functions. Other goals of this project include the
development of a general theory of permutation statistics, the study of
holonomic aspects of combinatorial statistical mechanics, and the extension of
methods developed in the principal investigator's recent proof of the
alternating sign matrix conjecture to other, still open, problems in this area.
Because both special functions and combinatorics are so prevalent in the natural
sciences, this research has many potential applications to both science and
technology, as well as to pure mathematics. This research is in the general area
of combinatorics. Combinatorics attempts to find efficient methods to study how
discrete collections of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete
systems is extremely important to modern communications. For example, the design
of large networks, such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design
of algorithms in computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this
makes use of combinatorial research.