* 9500737
* Novel Molar Design Concept for Low Molar Mass Glass-Forming Liquid Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Shaw Chen, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/1998
* USD 170,002.00

ABSTRACT Proposal NO. CTS-9500737 University of Rochester Shaw H. Chen Liquid
crystals have found potential applications to various optical and optelectronic
technologies. With the exception of active components based on the change in
molecular orientation in response to an applied field, practical applications of
liquid crystals are limited by the intrinsic fluid nature and tendency to
crystallize. To provide mesophase stability and environmental durability, liquid
crystalline polymers have been explored as an alternative in view of the
potential for vitrification with a glass transition temperature above the
ambient. However, polymeric materials are inherently difficult to process into
uniform films because of a generally high melt viscosity. It is most desirable
to combine the attributes of these two classes of materials, i.e., ease of
material processing and ability to preserve a high degree of mesomorphic
ordering in a glassy environment. To achieve this ultimate goal, a two-year
program is proposed for research on low molar mass glass-forming liquid
crystals. In principle, all liquids should vitrify given a sufficiently rapid
cooling rate. Nevertheless, the question of why some materials are more prone to
glass formation than others has remained unanswered to date. Since theoretical
or computational approaches do not appear to promise a rational molecular design
tool in the foreseeable future, it is proposed that a molecular design concept
be pursued from an empirical standpoint. In essence, low molar mass liquid
crystals represent a subtle balance between two seemingly opposing factors: one
to encourage liquid crystal mesomorphism and the other to discourage
crystallization. It is proposed that two diametrically different structural
features, mesogenic moiety and excluded-volume core, be chemically bonded to
each other via a flexible spacer. The idea is to enable the chemically combined
system to form and optically anisotropic, morphologically stable glass, even
though both mesogenic moiety and excluded-volume core may crystallize on their
own. Our technical approach consists of molecular design, chemical synthesis,
and relevant characterizations including morphology, theology, and the kinetics
of thermally activated phase transformation. In addition, characterizations with
a direct bearing on practical applications will also be performed. Results from
the proposed research will furnish new insight into vitrification, liquid
crystallinity, morphology and processing of low molar mass compounds. In
addition, through judicious molecular design, multifunctional materials capable
of optical and optoelectronic applications are expected to come forth. Specific
examples may include light polarization, nonlinear optical activity,
photochromizm, and electroluminescence, which constitute a broad base for
emerging display, imaging, and communications technologies.