* 9500062
* Mathematical Sciences:  Conference on Multiple Decision     Theory and Related Topics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* James Berger, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 04/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

Re: DMS 95-00061, "Conference on Multiple Decision Theory and Related Topics"
PI: James Berger Abstract: During June 8-12, 1995, a conference on Multiple
Decision Theory and related topics will be held at Purdue University. The
conference will consist of two parts, a traditional conference of invited and
contributed talks in multiple decision theory, and an intensive workshop on the
recent approach to multiple model selection called "intrinsic Bayes factors."
The traditional part of the conference will consist of 27 invited talks by
leaders in the field, including talks aimed at assessing the current status of
research in the area and assessing future needs. The workshop phase will involve
approximately 20 active researchers in development of intrinsic Bayes factors, a
very recent and promising methodology which is applicable to virtually any model
selection problem, nested or nonnested, without requiring asymptotics. The
workshop phase will adopt a non-traditional framework that encourages discussion
of unsolved problems, rather than solely emphasizing presentation of recent
research. Multiple decision theory is concerned with situations in which there
are two or more populations, and it is desired to select the "better"
populations, rank order the populations, or make other decisions involving the
comparison of populations. This type of scenario is common to a huge variety of
applied problems in virtually all areas of statistical application. The area has
seen a great deal of activity in recent years, and a conference on the subject
involving the leaders in the field is very timely. The workshop phase of the
conference will bring together a smaller group of researchers to study optimal
ways to select among multiple statistical models. Model selection is typically
the most important phase of a statistical analysis, and the new methodology that
is to be discussed is extremely promising in terms of its ability to
automatically select the best models. Level of Effort: The level of effort in
the conference is being increased, by inclusion of the intensive workshop on
intrinsic Bayes factors. The possibility of adding this workshop arose when it
was realized that many of the active researchers on intrinsic Bayes factors
would be at the Multiple Decision Theory conference; extending the conference
for two days to incorporate this workshop thus seemed scientifically and
financially wise. Budget Explanation: The request for $10,000 from NSF is not
being changed. Approximately $5000 will, however, be used for the expenses of
those attending the intensive workshop. (These individuals will, of course, also
be participating in the earlier portion of the conference.) Additional expenses
incurred by the increased level of effort will be met by Purdue University.