* 9500258
* Near-Field Optics of Fractals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Vladimir Shalaev, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1998
* USD 195,995.00

9500258 Shalaev Theoretical research will be conducted on optical processes in
fractal aggregates and in self-affine thin films. These objects exhibit
fascinating optical phenomena including huge enhancements of Raman scattering
and optical phase conjugation signals. Optical modes in fractal objects appear
to be strongly localized within ranges which are significantly less than the
wavelength. The research will study these localized modes and the near-field
structures associated with them. The localization of the optical excitations in
fractals results in regions of high local fields leading to an enhancement of a
number of optical processes. Because the nonlinear optical efficiency is so
greatly enhanced in fractal aggregates of nano-particles and on self-affine
surfaces, there is significant interest in developing them as a new class of
optical and optoelectronic materialq. The research brings together two evolving
fields, the optics of nano-composites and near-field optical microscopy. These
fields are inherently connected in the case of fractals. %%% Theoretical
research will be conducted on the nonlinear optical properties of aggregates of
metallic particles and on rough thin films which are characterized by fractal
dimensions - that is dimensions which are other than the usual two-and three-
dimension which we are accustomed to. Besides looking at the fundamental
behavior of these novel materials, potential device applications will be
explored. ***