* 9500527
* Block Travel Grant to Attend the 1995 North American Power  Symposium, to be held in Bozeman Montana, October 2-3, 1995.
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Hashem Nehrir, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Chanan Singh
* 11/30/1995
* USD 13,000.00

9500527 Nehrir This proposal request travel support for a number of electrical
students (with a major in power engineering) across the United States to attend
the 27th annual North American Power Symposium (NAPS) to be held on October
2,3,1995 at Montana State University-Bozeman (MSU) in Bozeman, Montana. Travel
expenses could deterrent for graduate students planning to attend this
conference, in particular travel cost to Bozeman, Montana. NAPS is an annual
conference, sponsored by the Institute of Electrical &amp; Electronics Engineers
(IEEE) and the university on the North American Continent. At this conference,
university professors and students are encouraged to present the results of
their research among colleagues at a very early stage in their work. NAPS
participants are from the electrical engineering departments of major
universities in the country with research interests in different areas of power
engineering, some from universities abroad, and some from industry. NAPS authors
are required to attend the conference and present their papers. This proposal
discusses the justification for travel support, requested from the National
Science Foundation, for student authors attending the symposium. It also
discusses coverage and criteria for selection of student authors, activities
planned for the symposium, and the impact of the proposed travel grant. ***