* 9500863
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Brain Organization in    Primitive Mammals
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Jon Kaas, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1998
* USD 87,766.00

9500863 Kaas This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports travel
expenses, expendable research supplies and services, related to the visits of
Drs. J. Kaas, the P.I. and his co-P.I.s, all from Vanderbilt University,
Tennessee, to the lab of Dr. C. E. Rocha Miranda, Univ. Federal de Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil. The purpose of the research is to develop a model of how
simple, primitive mammalian brains are organized, in terms of functionally
significant areas, nuclei and modules that are interconnected within cooperative
systems. This model can be compared to those based on complex, advanced brains,
such as those of higher primates, to determine changes associated with
complexity and enhanced performance. The model will be based on data obtained
from experimental studies on North and South American opossums. The brains of
these Metatherian mammals have changed little in external appearance, judging
from the brain endocasts of early mammals, since the major radiation of mammals
some 65 mya, and they provide the clear advantage of availability near both the
U.S.A. and Brazilian laboratories. Previous comparative studies provide direct
evidence that the basic brain organization of opossums is less complex and more
primitive than that of most extant mammals, and that further studies using a
powerful range of modern techniques could provide valuable additional insights.
The research will involve studies of the visual, auditory and somatosensory
systems that involve the majority of neurons in neocortex, and address critical
issues of motor system organization, where Metatherian mammals may be less
complex than Eutherian mammals. Microelectrode recordings will be used to
identify systematic representations of sensory surfaces in the brain and
microstimulation methods will reveal movement centers. Brain subdivisions,
identified with microelectrodes, will be further examined for histochemical,
architectonic, and molecular distinctions, intern al microorder and patterns of
connection with other systems. The research plan takes advantage of the
extensive previous experience of researchers in the Brazilian laboratory in
studies of the brains of opossums, and their unique experience in characterizing
the response properties of neurons in sensory systems of opossums. The
researchers in the U.S.A. laboratory also have relevant experience in brain
studies in opossums, as well as an extensive background in comparative studies
of brain organization. Investigators in the two laboratories have both
overlapping and complementary experience with research procedures and
techniques, and a joint interest in understanding brain organization in
opossums. A merger of efforts will allow for greater progress in the field. ***