* 9501598
* Controlling and Probing the Microscopic Structure and       Dynamics of Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2001
* John Fourkas, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/2001
* USD 423,010.00

In this Faculty Early Career Development Award funded by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, John Fourkas of Boston
College will use ultrafast nonlinear optical techniques to probe intermolecular
interactions in pure liquids and solutions subjected to confinement in
microporous glasses or maintained in a non-equilibrium state of sustained
tension. Transient Grating Optical Kerr Effect studies will probe the
reorientational diffusion rates in these systems, providing information on the
local structure of the liquid. This structure will be sensitive to attractive
forces such as hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic forces such as those caused by
ionic solutes. These forces are involved in a wide variety of processes
including protein folding and bubble coalescence. The educational component of
this program involves designing an outreach program to provide science
demonstrations at schools and seminars for grade school teachers, designing
undergraduate chemistry experiments involving contemporary research problems,
and developing courses in communications skills in the graduate curriculum. The
local organization of molecules in liquids, water in particular, is responsible
for many solution phase properties. Forces such as hydrogen bonding have a large
impact on the way molecules behave when dissolved in water. Professor Fourkas
will study the nature of these forces and the effects that dissolved molecules
have on this local order. These studies will provide information which can be
applied to areas such as understanding protein folding and the binding of
molecules to enzymes.