* 9501589
* Theory and Design of Filter Banks and Wavelets with         Applications in Signal Conversion, Adaptation, Detection    and Classification
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Truong Nguyen, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1998
* USD 120,219.00

The proposed project is focused on the theory, structure and design methods for
the perfect-reconstruction (PR) /ncar-perfect- reconstruction (NPR) filter banks
and their applications in signal conversion, detection and adaptation. High
performance filter banks with high attenuation are needed in many applications
such as audio compression algorithms, high-bandwith high-resolution A/D
converters, wideband signal detection systems and adaptive filtering algorithms.
The design of these filter banks are very difficult because of the nonlinear
relations between the parameters and the objective function. New structures and
design methods will be investigated. They will open up new classes of filter
banks, some of which are addressed in the project. They are the biorthogonal
cosine-modulated filter bank, the infinite-impulse- response (IIR) cosine-
modulated filter bank, and the nonuniform filter bank. These filter banks will
be used in several applications such as high-performance A/D converter,
nondestructive evaluation, echo cancellation and adaptive noise cancellation
systems. The education part consists of writing an undergraduate textbook on the
theory and design methods of filter bank wavelets, establishing an internet site
for the storage of design programs and coefficients of filter banks and
developing a new course on time- frequency and time-scale analysis.