* 9501419
* High Precision Landau Quantum Oscillation Measurements in   the Normal and Mixed States of High-Temperature             Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Roy Goodrich, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 260,000.00

9501419 Goodrich In this project, measurements of Landau quantum oscillations
are made on high temperature superconductors in both the normal and the
superconducting mixed states. Both epitaxial films of yttrium barium copper
oxide and bismuth strontium rare-earth copper oxide, and bulk single crystals of
other superconductors are studied. The physics investigated includes Fermi
surface topologies, effective masses, and scattering rates for electrons in the
normal state; the interaction of normal electrons with flux vortices in the
mixed state; and the behavior of superconducting properties of high temperature
superconducting materials in the presence of a strongly Landau- quantized
normal-state background. The Fermi surface measurements in the normal state will
give values for parameters that are crucial to theories of the mechanism of
superconductivity in these materials. The mixed state results will lead to a
much improved description of electron-electron and electron-flux vortex
interactions. %%% One of the problems limiting the development of materials that
exhibit truly high-temperature superconductivity (above the temperature of
liquid nitrogen, -196 deg C) is that the basic mechanism responsible for high-
temperature superconductivity remains unknown. The present work is directed
toward gaining information about this mechanism in a variety of high-temperature
superconductors by measuring fundamental properties of the electrons that
participate in superconductivity, in both the super-conducting and normal
(resistive) condition. By using strong magnetic fields and measuring the
quantized magnetism of the electrons, precise values are obtained for parameters
that are crucial to theories of superconductivity. This information can then be
used to evaluate and test quantitatively these theories. The measurements are
made using specialized facilities at the National High Magnetic Field Labo
ratory, at Louisiana State University, and at Oak Ridge National Laboratory. ***