* 9501532
* Ensemble Forecasting of Convective Weather Events Using     a Mesoscale Model
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Jian-Wen Bao, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1999
* USD 261,000.00

9501532 Warner Due to nonlinearities in the physics of the atmosphere,
deterministic predictions of the atmosphere have their limitations. A technique
known as ensemble forecasting is believed to provide a mechanism for improving
forecasts of the atmosphere. Ensemble forecasting involves running a series of
numerical predictions by changing, within reason, model initial conditions or
model physics. The objective is to provide forecasts that define the range of
possible solutions. These techniques have shown promise for forecast
improvement. A joint project between the Cooperative Institute for Mesoscale
Meteorological Studies and the University of Colorado is proposed with the
objective to develop and test ensemble forecasting techniques for mesoscale
models. The proposed research will focus upon the difficulties involved in
accurately predicting mesoscale convective weather events. Three specific
objectives of the research are: 1) to develop a technique to modify the
mesoscale model initial conditions to define the ensemble group that maximizes
the span of model solutions across the predictability phase space using a
minimum number of simulations, while requiring that the ensemble initial
conditions remain constrained to the error characteristics of the available
observations; 2) to explore the results of this technique for both strongly and
weakly forced large-scale environments; 3) to determine the applicability of
using varying model physics in ensemble forecasting methods.. Knowledge gained
from this study will provide necessary information on how to efficiently produce
an ensemble forecast using a mesoscale model. It is anticipated that the model
results also will provide some guidance on predicting the model skill for given
convective weather events. ***