* 9501507
* Mathematical Sciences: Preconditioned Parallel Methods for  Large Symmetric Eigenproblems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Andrew Knyazev, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9501507 Knyazev This project will study preconditioned iterative methods for
computing several extreme eigenpairs of generalized eigenvalue problems, with
very large symmetric matrices. Such problems are of major importance in many
grand challenge scientific and engineering applications: structural dynamics and
buckling, ocean modeling, quantum chemistry, and magnetohydrodynamics. They
arise typically from the discretization of continuous models, described by
systems of partial differential equations. Matrices may be so large that the
standard numerical methods become unsatisfactory and cannot be implemented even
on the most powerful modern supercomputers as they are too slow or require too
much memory. Preconditioned iterative methods were specially designed for
problems of that kind and now they are well understood for solving large ill-
conditioned linear algebraic systems of equations. For eigenproblems the theory
is still poor, and these methods are rarely used. Ideally, the methods would
compute well-separated clusters of eigenvalues and corresponding eigenspaces at
the same order of computational cost as that for solution of the corresponding
linear algebraic system. Such processes can be effective and parallelizable.
Domain decomposition and iterative substructuring methods are particularly
promising. The ultimate goal of the research is to develop a complete theory of
the preconditioned methods now known for symmetric eigenproblems and to find new
fast, accurate, and robust iterative methods. This would provide a basis for the
development of advanced software and algorithms on high performance parallel
computing systems. It is expected that a research monograph on preconditioned
iterative methods for large symmetric eigenvalue problems will be prepared to
summarize the results of the project.