* 9501112
* Development of a Sampling Strategy for the Verification of  Global Transport Models Using Airborne Radon Measurements
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Mark Kritz, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 09/30/1996
* USD 60,075.00

Abstract ATM-9501112 Kritz, Mark A. State University of New York at Albany
Title: Development of a Sampling Strategy for the Verification of Global
Transport Models Using Airborne Radon Measurement Although the verification of
global transport models using airborne radon measurementq has received attention
at two major workshops, the observations available thus far for intercomparsion
with model predictions are fragmentary and were not always obtained using a
sampling strategy designed with such intercomparsions in mind. In this project
we will work closely with two prominent global modeling groups on the
development of such a strategy, with emphasis on designing a measurement program
which will permit the evaluation of competing computational schemes for
parameterizing vertical convective transport in 3-D models. In this effort the
global circulation and assimilation wind models under development at the Global
Climate Dynamics Program at NCAR and at the Data Assimilation Office at the NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center will be used to stimulate free tropospheric radon
distributions over North America using a variety of convective
parameterizations. Working with researchers in these organizations, the PI will
examine these distributions and simulate the radon concentrations which would be
encountered and sampled by instrumentation on an aircraft following various
flight paths through such distributions in order to develop flight plans and
sampling strategies which would allow an efficient evaluation of model
performance. In this effort the PI will also use the radon vertical profiles
acquired by his group in the summer of 1994. (The 1994 data set will also be
made available to the modeling community on the internet.) This research is
important because it attempts to develop an observational basis for testing and
improving the way GCMs simulation vertical transports.