* 9501943
* CAREER PROGRAM                                              ATDCC:  A Language for Communicating Reactive Process
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Radhakrishnan Jagadeesan, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1998
* USD 94,442.00

The focus of this CAREER research proposal is the design, semantics, and
implementation of ATDCC, a language for a network of asynchronously
communicating reactive programs. Reactive systems are tightly coupled, event-
driven systems that react continuously with their environment at a rate
controlled by the environment. Asynchronous systems are those in which processes
are loosely coupled and communication can take arbitrary amount of time. Complex
applications, arising commonly in practice, typically require the combination of
both these ideas, thus motivating ATDCC. ATDCC is expected to have the following
advantages: (1) support for hierarchical construction of
programs/specifications; (2) good foundational properties; (3) efficient
implementation as a network of asynchronously communicating automata; (4)
verification of safety properties, including real time constraints. This
research is aims towards the creation of a complete programming environment for
modeling and analyzing complex electro-mechanical systems. This CAREER project
includes active involvement in education, in conjunction with the research
program. The research program itself involves the participation of students, who
will benefit from the exposure to industrial experience. The education plan
includes course and curriculum development, for both graduate and undergraduate
students, incorporating current research in the general area of interest in the
project. An undergraduate parallel programming laboratory is planned to
collaborate, disseminate and share resources with institutions in the Chicago
area. The laboratory and curriculum development are intended to lead to
undergraduate participation in research.