* 9501157
* Investigation of Plasma Deposition Mechanisms for Silicon   Dioxide and Silicon Nitride Films
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Ellen Ellen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 04/30/1999
* USD 247,994.00

In this Faculty Early Career Development Award funded by the Advanced Materials
Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Ellen R. Fisher of Colorado State
University will investigate plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition of thin
films of silicon dioxide and hydrogenated amorphous silicon nitride films
(alpha-SiNx:H). Critical reactions between gas-phase radical species and the
surface being processed by an rf plasma will be studied using a modified IRIS
(Imaging of Radicals Interacting with Surfaces) method which combines spatially-
resolved laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) detection with molecular beam
techniques. Radical reactivities will be measured in real time during thin film
deposition. IRIS will enable radicals to be studied which desorb from a surface
but are not in the incident molecular beam, yielding information about volatile
products produced by surface reactions. Alkoxysilane plasma systems as well as
SiX4/NH3 and SiX4/N2 plasmas will be examined. The reactivity of intermediates
will be measured as a function of rf input power, radical rotational state, and
substrate temperature. Silicon dioxide and silicon nitride films are widely used
as gate oxides, passivation layers, and interlevel dielectrics for integrated
circuits. Since the mechanisms for plasma deposition of these films is still
unknown, further progress to improve film quality will be enhanced by
understanding the underlying chemical processes involved, such as provided in
this project.