* 9501122
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Differential Equations     and Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Qing Han, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 65,001.00

ABSTRACT OF PROJECT Qing Han will continue his work on the differential
equations and the geometric measure theory and their applications. These include
regularities of solutions to variational problems, local structure and unique
continuation of solutions to differential equations. One of the central problems
he will continue to work on is the variational problem with free interfaces. It
is closely related to the general regularity theory of minimal surfaces. The
functional under the consideration consists of the modified Dirichlet integral
and surface area. The difficulty arises as the two terms in the functional have
different scaling factors. Behaviors of solutions under such scalings would be
investigated. He will also study the structure of the singular sets of solutions
to elliptic and parabolic differential equations. This is one of the fundamental
problems in the theory of differential equations. He will investigate the effect
of the smoothness of coefficients on the structure of singular sets. Such
problems are related to the unique continuation of solutions. Another related
problem is the size of the singular sets. It is expected that the appropriate
Hausdorff dimension of such sets should be controlled by the frequency of
solutions. The problems of free interfaces and the singular sets originate from
the material science and the control theory. In reality it is impossible to
eliminate the singular sets, the so-called "bad sets." Hence one of the central
tasks is to investigate under what condition the singular sets can be controlled
and under what condition such sets are small. Another application involves the
high-performance computing, in particular image processing. One problem is to
recover the image from a distorted copy and the difference is measured exactly
by the free interfaces and their singular sets. It is expected that such sets
should be small enough to be neglected. The problems mentioned abo ve in the
project are simplified mathematical models. It is expected that the discussion
of these mathematical problems will improve the methods to control the singular
sets in various applications.