* 9501654
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Developing Engineering   Criteria for the Inclusion of Disabled Employees (DECIDE)   in the Workplace
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Lesia Crumpton-Young, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 07/31/2000
* USD 258,930.00

9501654 The goal of this research is to develop engineering design criteria that
will assist in modifying industrial tasks and environments to allow the
inclusion of persons with disabilities. Specifically, the following objectives
are pursued: (1) develop engineering criteria for designing occupational tasks
and environment to accommodate persons with disability, (2) cmntribute to
research efforts aimed at designing occupational environments to accommodate
disabled persons, (3) assist in increasing the number of qualified engineers
available to transfer and implement the findings from the research in industrial
settings or work places. The research will identify various strategies, survey
tools, and analysis techniques that can be readily used in an industrial
setting. These parameters will then be evaluated and validated in an industrial
setting for possible inclusion in the design methodology. One of the tangible
outcomes of the research is the development of an intelligent computer based
system to assist in making decisions associated with designing and retrofitting
work tasks and work places to accommodate disabled persons. Paraplegic and the
visually impaired constitute the core group on which the research is targeted.
Several benefits can be ascribed to this research if it becomes successful. The
impact on the national economy can be significant as many more people with
physical disabilities can enter the workforce and contribute to the productivity
of the country. Many people with disabilities will experience economic gains,
and gains in the sense of security from workplace hazards and injuries resulting
from very poor systems design. The research outcome can advance the state-of-
knowledge in accommodating the needs of the disabled. This will lead to the
production of design standards for tools and workplaces that will not only
benefit disabled persons but also the entire general population.