* 9501966
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Survey of Woodlark   Island
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Stephen Plog, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1997
* USD 11,990.00

Damon Under the direction of Drs. Frederick Damon and Stephen Plog, Mr. Simon
Bickler will collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an
archaeological survey and excavation on Woodland Island in the Milne Bay
Province of Papua New Guinea. A systematic survey will be carried out to develop
a model of prehistoric settlement on Woodlark, focusing initially along the
coastlines of a central strip of the island. Particular areas of interest,
including a prehistoric stone axe quarry and archaeological features such as
stone megaliths and trenches will be examined in particular detail. Surface
collections of pottery and other artifacts will provide a rough chronological
sequence for the settlement of the island. In addition, clay and stone sources
will be sampled to provide the basis for a petrographic and chemical
characterization program to model larger interisland trade. Melanesia, which
includes Woodland Island is well known to anthropologists because of the "Kula"
exchange system which developed there. People who speak different languages and
live on widely separated islands engage in a complex ritual exchange system in
which items of symbolic value are traded among specific interlocking sets of
groups in very tightly defined ways. Because of its unique nature and the role
it serves to bind widely separated groups into a common social network, it has
been the object of intense anthropological study. However it is not known when
or how this system developed and it has not been possible to study how this
system developed. The goal of Mr. Bickler's work is to provide such information.
This work is important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to
many archaeologists and social anthropologists. It will shed light on social
organization of people who live in traditional societies and will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist. ***