* 9501452
* CAREER:  Networking and Communication Techniques for        Wireless Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Andrea Goldsmith, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 05/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

NCR-9501452 Goldsmith, Andrea The broad goal of this research is to address
fundamental issues in the design, analysis, and implementation of wireless
networks. Issues treated will cross traditional boundaries between signal
processing, communications, and networking. The work will first develop a
networking, architecture and protocol suite to support the internetworking of
wireless subnetworks. A hierarchical network infrastructure will be considered
that exploits the broadcast capability and power control of radio channels.
Optimum location of multimode gateways and hierarchical databases to aid in
mobility management and routing within this infrastructure will be determined.
Optimization techniques for efficient allocation of spectrum will be studied
using techniques from dynamic programming. Formal methods for obtaining and
analyzing channel policies will be developed and applied to analysis and design
issues. Joint source/channel coding techniques to minimize end to end distortion
will be examined. Emerging wireless applications will be considered and a global
networking infrastructure to support these applications will be sought. The
education component will develop innovative and dynamic course programs at the
undergraduate and graduate level in wireless communications, networks, and
dynamic programming. These activities will encourage industrial collaborations.