* 9501036
* Mathematical Sciences:  Exchange Program with St.           Petersburg State University; Harmonic Analysis and Control  of Linear Partial Differential Eq'ns
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* David Russell, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 20,000.00

9501036 Russell This project will support a joint exchange program involving
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, University of Maryland,
Baltimore County and St. Petersburg State University in Russia. The purpose of
this exchange program is to allow the participants to explore deep
interconnections between theoretical developments in nonharmonic Fourier series
and potential applications in the control, estimation and identification theory
of distributed parameter systems. The fact that most recent advances in the
theory of nonharmonic Fourier series have taken place in Russia and the former
Soviet Union, while applications have enjoyed dramatic advances in the United
States, makes this exchange program particularly timely. The program envisages
five separate visits, two on the part of United States participants to Russia
and three involving Russian visitors to the United States. The use of
nonharmonic Fourier series methods in control, estimation and identification of
distributed parameter systems, which dates back at least to 1963, is now of
increasing importance because of sophisticated non- invasive state estimation
techniques required for newly sophisticated advanced materials production and
processing. Nonharmonic Fourier series techniques allow estimates of the
interior state of a process to be generated from externally collected data on
temperatures, concentrations, etc., without the need for invasive internal
probing potentially interfering with the process.