* 9501529
* Interactions and Coherence in Lanthanide Metallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Zachary Fisk, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9501529 Fisk Technical Abstract: This project investigates a new intermetallic
compound of ytterbium, indium, and copper, with physical properties which
display a complex character and whose understanding would have major impact on
the field of condensed matter physics. The compound has a first-order phase
transition where the lattice constant and valence change discontinuously with no
change in symmetry. Additional, novel thermodynamic properties are encountered
in the series of compounds obtained by substitution of silver for indium. The
principal investigators have succeeded in the difficult task of growing single
crystals of these materials which will exhaustively characterized via
resistivity, susceptibility, thermal expansion, elastic constants and neutron
scattering as a function of temperature, pressure and magnetic field. The
equation of state will be determined in an effort to understand the basis for
the phase transition in terms of electronic and magnetic properties of these
highly correlated electron, or "heavy fermion", materials. %%% Non-Technical
Abstract: A small number of metals exhibit a property analogous to the
condensation of a gas to a liquid: as the temperature is lowered below a
critical temperature, the density changes discontinuously, with no change in
crystal symmetry. There is an accompanying decrease in the strength of the
magnetism of the metal. The investigators in this project have recently learned
how to grow large crystals of a new intermetallic compound displaying the
condensation behavior. The project involves a thorough investigation of the
structure, magnetism, and electronic behavior of the compound and its alloys.
The goal is to understand the nature of the interactions between electrons which
drive the condensation, in particular there seems to be subtle interplay between
the magnetism of the material and its cohesi ve energy. Such studies will
improve our understanding of the conditions under which electrons in solids help
to coherently bond the atoms in the crystalline state. The results may provide
important information for the entire field of metal physics and magnetism.