* 9501925
* CAREER: Optically-Pumped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Study   of Two-Dimensional Electron Systems in Strong Magnetic      Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Sean Barrett, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9501925 Barrett The proposed research utilizes a new experimental technique,
"Optically Pumped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance", to study the fundamental quantum
mechanics of the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG) in strong magnetic fields.
Optical pumping of interband transitions in a quantum-well structure with
circularly-polarized laser light incident along the applied magnetic field
direction results in non-equilibrium spin polarization of electrons in the well.
Nuclei in the materials that form the well, e.g., GaAs, are dynamically
polarized via their hyperfine coupling to the electron spins, and their NMR
signals monitor the electron spin state in the well. The research objectives are
to map out (1) the spin configuration of the many-particle ground state, and (2)
the elementary excitations and their energy splitting from the ground state.
OPNMR experiments will also search for evidence of occurrence of the Wigner
crystal phase. %%% The proposed research will employ a new experimental
technique, "Optically Pumped Nuclear Magnetic Resonance" (OPNMR), to study the
fundamental quantum mechanics of the two-dimensional electron gas (2DEG)
confined in quantum-well nanostructures fabricated from compound semiconductors
such as gallium arsenide. Optical pumping of interband electronic transitions
using circularly- polarized laser light applied along the direction of an
applied magnetic field results in non-equilibrium polarization of the spins of
electrons in the well. Nuclei in the semiconductor material from which the well
is fabricated are consequently dynamically polarized through their interactions
with the electrons, and their nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) signals serve to
monitor the state of the electron spins in the well. The research objectives are
to map out (1) the spin configuration of the collective (many-particle) lowest
energy state of the electrons in the well as a function of the number of
electrons, and (2) the so-called elementary excita tions of the electronic
system and their energy splittings from the lowest energy state. OPNMR
experiments will also be used to search for evidence of the so-called electron
(Wigner) crystal, an exotic organization of electrons onto a two-dimensional
lattice within a heterostructure layer, which is believed to exist under certain
experimental conditions. ***