* 9501223
* Mathematical Sciences:Stabilization and Approximation of    Infinite Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Raimund Ober, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 90,407.00

9304696 Ober This project is directed towards the study of infinite dimensional
balanced realizations, both from the point of view of improving the basic
understanding of these realizations and of providing further tools for model
reductions of infinite dimensional systems. The project will focus on the
specific questions of asymptotic and exponential stability of the balanced
systems and the boundedness properties of the system operators. A further
important point which will be addressed is the issue of whether general Trotter-
Kato type convergence results can be proved for the balanced approximation
scheme. Many engineering systems, such as highly flexible mechanical systems,
inherently contain infinitely many degrees of freedom and therefore any accurate
mathematical description of such a system must necessarily be infinite
dimensional. This project is concerned with so-called balanced realizations for
infinite dimensional linear systems. One of the important uses of balanced
realizations of linear systems is as a tool in achieving model reductions of
complex systems, which is a very important consideration at a practical and
computational level. There already exists an extensive, elegant and important
(from the point of view of applications) body of results concerning balanced
realizations and their role in model reduction for finite dimensional systems.
However, extensions of existing theory to infinite dimensional systems is
extremely complex at both the conceptual and technical levels. The aim of this
project is to develop the mathematical and computational tools that are of
similar power to those available for systems of finite complexity. *** ??