* 9501898
* GEM:  Applications of a Modular Open Magnetosphere Model
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Thomas Hill, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* kile baker
* 07/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

The proposed work would apply an existing modular model of the open
magnetosphere to three problems that are critical to the NSF Geospace Modeling
Program. The objectives of the proposed work are to develop a predictive
understanding of (1) injection of solar- wind plasma through the dayside
magnetospheric cusp, (2) externally or internally imposed time variations of the
polar cap configuration, and (3) reverse convection driven by a nearly northward
interplanetary magnetic field (IMF). The proposed method combines physical-
numerical modeling with spacecraft data analysis. The model, developed over the
past decade with partial support of the GEM program, describes the quantitative
mapping of the solar wind electric field from the magnetopause to the polar
ionosphere along interconnected magnetic field lines. A machine-potable, user-
friendly version of this model for steady-state applications has recently been
made available to the GEM research community. A recent extension of this model
permits relaxation of the steady- state assumption for time-dependent
applications. The first application, modeling of cusp ion injection, involves an
ongoing collaboration with T. Onsager to couple his Liouville mapping procedure
with the modular open magnetosphere model to produce quantitatively realistic
simulations of cusp ion distributions for comparison with real spacecraft data
for a general range of input solar-wind/IMF conditions. This study is intended
to elucidate the mechanism(s) if injection of solar-wind plasma at the dayside
magnetopause to form the cusp and adjacent boundary features. The second
application will explore two types of quasi-static time evolution of the polar
cap, those driven externally by solar- wind/IMF variations and those driven
internally by magnetotail dynamics as communicated to the ionosphere by the
electric field mapped from the tail merging line. This study will exploit the
unique properties of the polar cap not only as an obs ervation site but also as
a reference frame for theoretical-numerical modeling. The third application will
continue a collaboration with N.U. Crooker to develop a quantitative model of
the overdraped lobe configuration proposed by her to explain the otherwise
enigmatic observation of sunward convection on putatively open lobe field lines
connected to the solar wind during intervals of nearly northward IMF. This and
related northward-IMF phenomena represent perhaps the widest gap in present
theoretical understanding of solar-wind-magnetosphere coupling.