* 9501256
* The Effective Numerical Solution of Elliptic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Seymour Parter, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1997
* USD 61,000.00

9501256 Parter The major efforts of this research project are twofold: (1) The
study of preconditioning strategies for the Chebyshev spectral collocation
method for elliptic boundary-value problems, and (2) the study of first order
least squares methods for equations of practical import. The equations of linear
elasticity are of special importance and interest. The significance of a-
posteriori error estimates for these problems is balanced by the need for deeper
a-priori error estimates. The difficulty in obtaining a-priori error estimates
stems from the explicit appearance of the divergence operator in these problems.
Similar difficulties appear in the study of numerical methods for the Stokes
equations. There are many important practical problems which arise in fluid flow
and elasticity which lead to problems which must be solved on the computer. The
solutions of these problems are then approximations to solutions of elliptic
boundary value problems. Most of the research in this area has emphasized
finding a computer problem whose solution is indeed a very good approximation to
the solution of the elliptic problem. Having done that, one must still find
efficient and relatively cheap methods to solve the computer problem. This last,
very practical problem, is the focus of the research in this project.