* 9501785
* CAREER:  The Development of Group-III Nitride LED's and     Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Luke Lester, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 06/30/1999
* USD 242,290.00

9501785 Lester In close collaboration with the University of New Mexico's (UNM)1
established group-III nitride (III-N) MOCVD growth effort, a study of innovative
processes to improve the fabrication technology for III-N optoelectronic devices
is proposed. A contact metallization will be developed that will improve dopant
activation and contact resistance by actively scavenging the hydrogen that
causes compensation in MOCVD grown III-Ns. Compared to other methods of
extracting hydrogen, such as thermal annealing, this approach will have the
advantage of preventing surface dissociation that is detrimental to contact
formation. This new contact scheme will also be used in conjunction with
hydrogen-based reactive ion etching (RIE) to develop novel, low-damage etch
processes for pre- metallization surface preparation. A dry-etching process will
also be developed for the fabrication of laser mirrors to replace the difficult
task of cleaving III-Ns grown on sapphire. With these better processes, III-N
LEDs and diode lasers will be fabricated to characterize by optical and
electrical pumping the radiative processes found in III-N materials and to
determine the effect of dislocations on device operation. The ultimate goal of
the research effort--the development of a reliable, blue diode laser-- would be
a major technological innovation and is critical towards improving the storage
capacity and affordability of high-density optical media and the quality of
optical displays. In the educational field, emphasis will be placed on teaching
students the scientific and communications skills that will make them more
competitive in the job market and better able to interact with and motivate
their fellow scientists and engineers. Educational activities will focus on new
course development in the area of II-V semiconductor device fabrication and
testing, undergraduate and graduate research advising, outreach activities to
local high schools to promote the study of engineeri ng in college, the
involvement of traditionally underrepresented groups in research, and the
mentoring of graduate students in industry through summer job employment. ***