* 9501048
* Mathematical Scienaes:  Computational Modeling of Swimming  Organisms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Lisa Fauci, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 01/31/1999
* USD 90,000.00

Fauci The investigator develops and implements computational methods for
modeling the fluid dynamics problems of aquatic animal locomotion across a wide
range of animal sizes. Of interest are both the dynamics of a single organism
and the relationship of its morphology to its motility properties, and the
collective hydrodynamic interactions of groups of swimmers with each other and
their environment. Applications studied include bacterial chemotaxis in
micropores, spermatozoa motility in the reproductive tract, and the coupling of
active and passive tissue properties to the external swimming mechanics of a
leech. Bacterial chemotaxis in micropores is of special interest, because the
transport behavior of microorganisms through porous media is important in
studying the contamination of groundwater supplies. Although bioremediation, the
process by which microbes degrade contaminants, has field scale implications,
the detailed study of pore-level behavior of the coupled fluid-contaminant-
microbial system is essential. The project's computational model includes the
detailed analysis of hydrodynamics, contaminant reaction, diffusion and
convection, and the chemotactic responses of the swimming microbes. This allows
the systematic study of the influence of different parameters, such as swimming
speed, diffusion rates, microbial uptake rates, as well as stochastic parameters
relating to the likelihood with which microbes change their swimming direction
in response to the evolving contaminant field. This is difficult, if not
impossible, to examine in a laboratory environment. The project studies the way
organisms swim, using computational models. The organisms studied vary in size
from bacteria to leeches. Of paramount importance in the study of bacterial
transport in micropores is the growth of biofilms. Under certain physical and
chemical conditions, microbes adhere to each other and the local pore structure.
This biofilm growth affects and is affe cted by the local flow characteristics
and contaminant transport. The computational model has the ability to model
complex, dynamic fluid-structure interactions. Agglomeration is modeled by
exerting appropriate binding stresses between discrete representations of
organisms, that may hold them together, or, if fluid stresses are large, may
yield and release the organisms. The model is a powerful tool for understanding
biofilm processes at a micropore level. This has important consequences for
environmental problems.