* 9501903
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Multivariate Process     Monitoring with Correlated Data
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,01/31/2002
* Christina Mastrangelo, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 01/31/2002
* USD 290,000.00

9501903 This research is focused on the quality control problem of understanding
processes whose behaviors are affected by multiple, autocorrelated variables.
Traditional statistical process control (SPC) is based on a single variable and
the assumption of normality, independence, and homogeneous variance. This
research capitalizes on the inappropriateness of these assumptions and the use
of a single variable as a basis to understand and control a process when indeed
in today's industrial environment there could be multiple, autocorrelated
variables. The objective of the research is to systematically explore the
behavior, sensitivity, and consistency of several multivariate quality control
methods when autocorrelated multivariate data is present. These methods include
the multivariate EWMA, principal component analysis, and multiple time series.
The research was motivated by the lack of sufficient analytical tools to handle
statistical process control situations in which multiple correlated factors
influence the behavior of a process. The research plans to pursue the use of
different forms of models to address the problem. The educational component of
the research presents the investigator's teaching philosophy, methods of
tracking teaching performance, and students understanding and involvement in the
materials being taught. The investigator will deploy and integrate the research
outcome into classroom by developing a new combined course in statistics and
quality control with emphasis on the use of these techniques to solving
industry-relevant problems in statistical process control. In addition, the
techniques investigated in the research for the purpose of improving processes
will be used to improve teaching effectiveness. The potential for the research
is good. The outcome of the research can advance the body of knowledge in the
broad area of multivariate process control. This will lead to a better
understanding of process behavior and method of control. Improved control has a
positive relationship to productivity and consequently, on competitiveness. By
disseminating the research outcome through classroom instructions, students will
gain an understanding of how process behavior is affected by process control
parameters. They will also gain valuable experience on how to monitor and
control processes in actual industrial settings.