* 9501646
* CAREER:  In-situ Adhesive-less Joining of Thermoplastics and Their Composites to Metals in Net-Shape Processes and an   Integrated Design and Processing Education Plan
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Karthik Ramani, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 07/31/1999
* USD 310,000.00

9501646 Ramani The primary objective of this research is to develop in-situ
processes to join thermoplastic composites to metals in net-shape processes. A
hot-melt process and compression molding process will be used as model
environments. The surface preparation, contact pressure during consolidation,
heating and cooling rates, hold times at melt and recrystallization temperature,
effect of bond line thickness and uniformity, and anodization to increase
durability will be included in the process development cycle. The residual
stresses will be modeled as a function of the process parameters, validated, and
then used to improve the process. Known characterization techniques x-ray
diffraction (XRD), digital scanning calorimetry (DSC) and scanning electron
microscopy (SEM), will be used to evaluate the polymer crystallinity and
structure of the interface. The mechanical properties of the joint will be
determined. The results will then be applied to filament winding and injection
molding and optimized using the models concurrently with experimental
characterization. The effects incorporating fibers on the residual stresses and
performance of the joint will be determined. Preliminary experimental and
modeling results are encouraging. Induction heating will be incorporated to
increase the process speeds, reduce polymer residence time at melt, and make the
process attractive for applications. At the teaching front, a new curriculum
that integrates design and processing will be developed. A synergistic
combination of engineering fundamentals, hands-on, modeling, multi-media, inter-
disciplinary experiences and industrial perspective will be used. A dual purpose
composites processing laboratory will be developed further. The laboratory
component of the dual-level composites processing course will be enhanced
through the use of interdisciplinary experiences and completed research. A
hands-on broad-based materials and manufacturing processes course will be
developed with a colleague. The features that distinguish this teaching proposal
are development of a new dual-level technical elective in "Design for
Processing" (DFP) in conjunction with a "Virtual Processing Lab" (VPL). The DFP
course will make strong linkages between design and processing by providing
virtual process experiences. This course will integrate demonstrations, process
models, and computer tools to provide unique experiences to impact a greater
number of students than hands-on courses. The undergraduate teaching plan,
research experiences, and training of highly qualified graduate students in the
laboratory will have a broad impact and serve future needs of industry. Student
research and training will be enhanced through summer employment in the
participating industries which will also ease technology transfer. The combined
research and teaching programs in design and processing will offer unique
experiences to students. By selecting three diverse non-competitive
collaborating industries, namely bio-medical, automotive and aerospace major
reduction in assembly, tooling and processing costs by reducing the times and
steps to manufacture may be seen in applications such as bio-medical implants,
suspension linkages, airframe structures, and metal bearing sleeves.