* 9501266
* CAREER:  Research and Development of Advanced Visual        Information Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Shih-Fu Chang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1998
* USD 135,000.00

This research investigates an integrated approach to the design of advanced
visual information systems (VIS). The approach explores the maximum synergy
among various important VIS design issues - visual data indexing, compression,
manipulation, and storage. An integrated feature map combining multiple image
features such as texture, color, and shape is used to detect and index image
content, and provide useful methods for content-based image query. Compressed-
domain techniques are explored for extracting low-level image features. A
modified quad-tree data structure is proposed to be used in feature-based
segmentation and heterogeneous feature integration. Based on the prior work,
efficient image manipulation algorithms (e.g., image filtering and template
matching) are also being developed directly in the compressed domain, in order
to seek the minimum implementation complexity. Strategies for storing multi-
resolution encoded visual data in real-time hierarchical storage systems are
also studied. All research results will be incorporated into an large-scale
integrated VIS testbed at the Advanced Imag e Lab of Columbia University. On the
educational front, new courses and curriculum in the area of visual signal
processing and multimedia technology are being developed. An advanced multimedia
testbed is also being developed for supporting research and educational
activities.