* 9501395
* Mathematical Sciences:  Investigations into Development     of Microstructure, Ginzburg-Landau Vortices, and Travelling Waves on Lattics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* J.Bryce McLeod, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 81,000.00

DMS-9501395 McLeod The project is to study three physically important problems
in the area of nonlinear ordinary and partial differential equations. The first
problem is the dynamics of pattern formation for an evolution equation recently
proposed as a model for the formation of microstructures in various crystalline
solids, and the object is to give an analytical study and explanation of the
evolution, and link this to various numerical results which have been obtained.
The second problem is the study of vortices associated with the Ginzburg-Landau
equation in superconductivity, i.e. minimizers of the Ginzburg-Landau functional
which becomes degenerate as a certain parameter becomes small; McLeod will study
the behavior of the minimizers as the parameter tends to zero. Finally, he will
study the existence and properties of traveling waves on lattices with nearest-
neighbor interactions. Each of these problems has its own significance. The
first has relevance for a variety of crystalline solids where microstructures
are observed to appear or disappear in response to imposed stresses, changes of
temperature or applied electric or magnetic fields. An understanding of the
formation of these microstructures is therefore crucial for the industrial use
of these materials. The second problem is relevant to phase transitions in the
highly important area of superconductivity, and attempts to marry the
mathematical theory to physical experiment and observation.