* 9501497
* Gloval Bifurcation & Asymptotics Behavior in Nonlinear      Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* James Ward, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,000.00

501497 Ward Systems of ordinary or parabolic partial differential equations
serve in modeling many physical systems. The differential equations typically
contain parameters whose values correspond to physical properties of the system.
Such a system generates a dynamical system in an appropriate phase space. To
understand a dynamical system we should determine its compact invariant sets,
which contain the non-transient solutions such as equilibria, periodic
solutions, or ones of greater complexity. It is important also to determine the
behavior of the transient solutions with respect to the non-transients. Finally,
one should know how all of this depends upon the parameters. For example, a
parameter change may induce a stable or hyperbolic equilibrium state to
bifurcate into one or more time-periodic solutions, or ones with a more complex
time structure. The Conley homotopy index theory contains concepts and methods
that can be used to prove existence, and determine the properties, of compact
isolated invariant sets in a dynamical system. Like topological degree the index
is locally constant, and if the index changes as a parameter crosses a value, a
bifurcation is implied. A major part of this project is the application of
Conley homotopy index methods to study bifurcation in systems of reaction-
diffusion equations. The investigators will: (I) Continue investigations of
continua of full bounded solutions bifurcating from trivial solutions in
infinite dimensional dynamical systems, especially in nonlinear reaction-
diffusion systems. Using Conley homotopy index methods Ward recently
demonstrated conditions for the existence of such bifurcating continua. Two of
the main goals of this project are to fully describe the global aspects of these
continua, and to apply the results to the study of global bifurcation of
equilibria in gradient systems. (II) Study bifurcation and persistence in
reaction-diffusion models arising in population biology an d chemistry.
Physically meaningful solutions must have non-negative components. In this
connection the investigators propose the development of a homotopy index
bifurcation theory for nonlinear ordinary and parabolic partial differential
systems which have an invariant non-negative cone. (III) Build on their earlier
work on nonautonomous differential equations. In particular, they will continue
the development of a homotopy index based theory for nonlinear time-dependent
ordinary and parabolic partial differential systems. In this case a dynamical
system is not generated in the space of initial values, but one can associate a
skew-product flow and use the Conley theory to study its invariant sets. From
this one can derive information regarding the original system. The investigators
will focus on existence, dynamics, and bifurcation phenomena. (IV) Study related
problems for semilinear parabolic partial differential equations with nonlinear
boundary conditions, such the existence and asymptotic stability of periodic
solutions, and the effect of interactions between the spectrum of the linear
part of such equations with the nonlinearities. %%% Differential equations model
physical phenomena such as mechanical systems, chemical reactions, and the
spread of disease. An initial state (e.g., initial number of infected
individuals) then evolves over time according to the laws of the system
expressed by its equations. This constitutes a dynamical system. A goal of
dynamical systems theory is to describe how the states of the system evolve.
Thus, the number of fish of a given species in a lake might tend toward a
steady, fixed population, while the number of individuals infected at any given
time with a transmittable disease, such as chicken pox, may exhibit a periodic
behavior, peaking every six or seven years. To understand a complex dynamical
system one should determine the non-transient or long-term phenomena such as
equilibria, time-periodic regimes, and others perhaps of a more complex nature,
the relation between the transient solutions and the non-transients, and how
this all depends on system parameters. Mathematical models depend upon certain
parameters fom the physical system, such as the volume of a lake in a study of
its fish population or diffusion rates in a chemical reaction. The nature of the
long-term behavior of a system may depend upon its parameter values. If the
parameters change, the number or structure of the non-transient solutions can
change. Such a parameter dependent change is a bifurcation. Another kind of
bifurcation occurs when the behavior of the transients changes, as when an
equilibrium point (a non-transient) loses stablity with a parameter change. Non-
transient solutions correspond to invariant sets in the dynamical system. The
homotopy index theory was developed by Charles Conley and others to analyze the
existence and properties of isolated invariant sets in dynamical systems. It
also can be used to show that bifurcations must take place at certain parameter
values. A main part of this project involves the application of Conley homotopy
index methods to bifurcation phenomena in systems of reaction-diffusion
equations. Reaction-diffusion systems of partial differential equations relate
diffusion phenomena, such as diffusion of a chemical in a medium, with reaction
rates, as in a chemical reaction. They serve as the mathematical models of a
great many phenomena, including chemical reactions, population densities, and
climate. The investigators will: (I) Continue investigations of continua
(families of solutions joined together) of bounded solutions bifurcating from
equilibrium solutions in nonlinear reaction-diffusion systems. By using Conley
homotopy index methods Ward recently found conditions for the existence of such
bifurcating continua. Two of the main goals of this project are to fully
describe the global aspects of these families of bifurcat ing solutions, and to
apply these results to study global bifurcation of equilibria in gradient
systems (systems which, in the long run, will reach an equilibrium state). (II)
Study bifurcation and persistence in reaction-diffusion models arising in
population biology and chemistry. (III) Build on their earlier work on time-
varying systems of differential equations. Such systems exhibit phenomena
different from the time-independent systems discussed above. The investigators
will continue to develop a homotopy index based theory for nonlinear time-
dependent ordinary and parabolic partial differential systems. ***