* 9501827
* Solid-State Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic        Investigations of the Structure of Silicate Glasses
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Philip Grandinetti, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 01/31/1999
* USD 220,500.00

In this Faculty Early Career Development Award funded by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Phillip Grandinetti of
Ohio State University will apply recently developed two dimensional NMR
techniques and Dynamic Angle Spinning to characterize structures in silicate
glasses. Structural distributions in alkali and alkaline network modified
silicate glasses will also be studied to quantify changes in angle
distributions, non-bridging oxygen environments, and silicate species
distributions as functions of composition. This information will be used to
refine potential functions used in molecular dynamics simulation studies of the
structure and dynamics of glasses. The educational component of this program
will focus on improving faculty-student contact in the general chemistry course,
using a database to help instructors identify students with difficulties and
implement strategies for improvement, and developing new courses in NMR and Data
Acquisition and Analysis. The design and preparation of glasses is made
difficult by the lack of sound theoretical models relating composition and
structure to properties. Professor Grandinetti will use NMR techniques to
provide experimental structural data which can confirm the basis of theoretical
models and improve their predictive capabilities. Such information will also be
of value in NMR studies of related systems such as ceramics, catalysts, and
biopolymers.