* 9501446
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Industry-University      Partnership in Logistics -- Dynamic Thinking in Research and Education
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Raymond Cheung, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 220,000.00

9501446 This research is focused on the issue of building an industry-university
partnership to support the development of new algorithms and methods for real-
time decision making in logistics. In a typical logistics system, there is a
regular need for real-time decision making in vehicle routing, scheduling of
vessels, management of vehicle inventories, and design of service offerings
using constantly changing information. New technologies such as the combination
of satellites with high-speed data networks are making real-time data available
to decision makers. These new technologies have motivated the development of new
stochastic, dynamic models for more accurate decision making. This research
presents a set of models for problems ranging from real-time vehicle routing to
dynamic service network design. A common mathematical foundation is presented
that focuses on stochastic optimization and dynamic network modeling. New
decision models will be developed subject to various sources of randomness in
demand level, travel times, service breakdowns, and resource availability. The
use of graphical visualization for validating models and communicating results
to model users will be pursued. The establishment of an industry-university
partnership is not only to support the research and advise on the relevancy of
the models to be developed but also to influence the educational curriculum in
logistics. Establishing a strong industry-university partnership in research and
education requires a substantial effort in reforming the curriculum. The goals
of the educational component of this work are: (1) to increase industry
participation in university education, (2) develop new training programs for
industry partners, (3) develop a laboratory for computational logistics, (4)
increase internship and co-op opportunities for students in the logistics
industry, and (5) improve the technical skills of students in modeling and
solving problems in the field of logistics. The impact of the resear ch to stu
dents and industrial workers will be significant. The research has direct
industrial application and if successful, will improve the economic
competitiveness of the logistics and distribution industries.