* 9501345
* CAREER:  Data Transmission Techniques:  Trellis-Decoding    and Beyond
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Alexander Vardy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 54,000.00

NCR-9501345 Alexander Vardy The first focus of this research is on decoding of
trellis codes. The work will attempt to establish new lower bounds on the
trellis complexity of linear codes, to investigate the asymptotic trellis
complexity of linear codes, to find the optimal sectionalization of a given
trellis, to tabulate bounds on the trellis complexity for all of the best-known
linear codes, and to extrapolate the results to lattices and sphere packings.
The second activity is the development of novel data transmission techniques
suited to specific channels of practical importance and extending beyond the
classical error control approach. Guided by the general principle that the
channel structure should be taken into account in a well-designed communication
system, the following channels will be considered: bursty intersymbol
interference channels, such as present day digital voice transmission, both
twisted pair and wireless, and emerging digital subscriber loops; maximum a
posteriori likelihood channels characterized by a nonuniform a priori
distribution on the set of possible messages, arising in fixed rate quantization
without entropy coding; channels characterized by an arbitrary specified set of
most likely error patterns, such as those arising in concatenated coding, logic
networks, and man-made noise environments; and channels characterized by
subjective distortion criteria, rather than the overall system BER, such as
those arising in speech and image coding. NCR-9502582 Konstantopoulos, Takis
This is a proposal about the development of a rigorous approach toward network
management and performance analysis for high-speed networks considering local
and global aspects of a network management system. Local aspects include the
design of flow controllers at the edges of the network that take into account
the provision of quality of service and the interaction between users in a
network switch. The investigator will extend recently develop ed techniques that
are based on the so-called reflection mapping, develop testing techniques and
simulations, and compare these to existing schemes. The investigator will also
study traffic modeling. He will develop rigorous methods for validating self-
similar traffic processes arising from the operation of an integrated services
high-speed networks and use such models in establishing performance analysis
methods. Studying the global aspects of a management system involves using a
macroscopic picture of the network currently being developed by the
investigator. The picture strips out the minutiae of the operation of the
network, while retaining its dynamic character (it is not static). The
investigator proposes the use of such a picture by a network management system
in order to predict, prevent, and correct undesirable behavior that might lead
to degradation of services across the network.