* 9501353
* CAREER:  Broadcast Disks:  Technique for Data in Management in Asymmetric Communication  Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Michael Franklin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 06/30/1999
* USD 135,000.00

Many emerging networked applications have the property that communication among
nodes is asymmetric. Typically, servers can and/or must send much more data to
clients than clients send back to the servers. Examples include wireless
networks with mobile clients, cable and direct satellite broadcast TV systems,
information dispersal and information retrieval applications. Broadcast Disks
technique exploits the characteristics of such environments, by treating a
broadcast stream of data that are repeatedly and cyclicly transmitted as a
storage device. The essence of this approach is to superimpose multiple
broadcast programs (or `disks`) spinning at different speeds on a single
broadcast channel; in effect, creating an arbitrarily fine-grained memory
hierarchy. The technique also integrates the use of client storage resources for
caching and prefetching data that is delivered over the broadcast. The Broadcast
Disks approach provides improved performance for non-uniformly accessed data and
increased availability of important data. The challenges being addressed in this
project include: broadcast program generation, caching and prefetching
strategies, and adapting to volatile data, changing client needs, and
communication errors. The results of this research will be techniques, analyses,
and prototype implementations of this novel approach, which has the potential to
significantly improve the performance and availability of future distributed
computing systems. The education portion of this project aims to develop new
courses, software tools and laboratories that will provide students at all
levels with more direct, hands-on experience in building database systems and
applications.