* 9501857
* Faculty Early Career Development: Integrating Process into  Design-for-Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Kevin Otto, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1999
* USD 309,897.00

9501857 Otto A guiding fundamental theory and implementation methodology is
proposed for leading a manufacturing enterprise in developing a virtual
prototype of existing production systems. A design team can then engineer a new
concept and virtually simulate its manufacture using design modeling tools that
are factory-calibrated for the actual production facility. As a central part of
the research, a new methodology will be created for applying statistical tools
to provide confidence measures in the predictive capability of the system. This
work will integrate factory-floor manufacturing process metrics into the product
development process. The work will address three phases of a design and
manufacturing enterprise: manufacturing operation modeling, product modeling,
and product-process integration. The development of a new undergraduate
engineering course is proposed in which students will learn to reverse engineer
mechanical products by creating physical models of them and then using these
models to optimize their configurations. This will teach design teams to
optimize real products. Conventional modeling and optimization methodologies
will be included in the course, but the course will be structured into a
coherent reverse engineering methodology, and will include a design project to
further develop students' understanding of product concepts, uncertainty,
discovery of unforeseen physics, and real human interaction in design. Creating
production system design models using these manufacturing process data
collection systems will permit quantitative evaluation of ease-of-manufacturing,
assist in tolerance allocation, and help predict manufacturing difficulties
early in the design phase. This work aims to produce results that can
significantly increase the productivity and competitiveness of firms that use it
for their design and manufacturing processes.