* 9501380
* Continuing Operation of a Magnetometer Array on the         Greenland Ice Cap (MAGIC) to Investigate Propagating Ionospheric Current Systems for Geospace Environment Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Vladimir Papitashvili, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/1999
* USD 390,000.00

This proposal is directed toward the continued operation of an array of
unattended, automatic magnetic data collection platforms on the Greenland ice
cap and the reduction, distribution and analysis of these data. The MAGIC array
complements the magnetic stations on the coasts of Greenland. The MAGIC magnetic
stations form a two dimensional array with station separation of about 150 Km.
The scientific objective of these magnetic measurements is to investigate, in
conjunction with the coastal stations, small-scale propagating magnetic
disturbances which appear to result from moving filamentary field-aligned
currents interacting with the ionosphere. Different classes of these systems
have now been identified and the origin of the field-aligned currents appears to
be near the dayside magnetopause within the magnetospheric boundary layer. It is
particularly important to have a dense two- dimensional array in order to
resolve the motion and structural evolution of these current systems. The
Greenland stations in combination with the other GEM funded stations deployed in
Canada, permit us to observe these phenomena over a sufficient region as to
identify their generation location and resolve their motion and spatial
evolution as the propagate. These data and the proposed research are important
to understanding the physics of the processes which couple energy and momentum
from the solar wind to the magnetosphere and ionosphere, the physics of the
magnetospheric boundary layer and the mapping of boundary layer phenomena to the
high-latitude ionosphere.