* 9501760
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Virtual Design and       Virtual Prototyping for Near Net Shape Manufactured Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Rajit Gadh, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9501760 Gadh This grant provides funding for a Career award for research in
computer aided design. Its goal is to provide a framework for creating shape
designs in a virtual environment and analysis of manufacturability and die shape
analysis in a virtual prototyping environment. The principal domain to which
this approach is applied is near net-shape manufactured parts using processes
such as injection molding or die casting. There are three significant components
to this research. The first focuses on creation of concept geometric designs in
a virtual environment, and the second and third focus on bringing downstream
analysis upstream to the virtual design stage. The approach will be to use a set
of non-uniform B-splines to represent the surface model of an object, using an
energy based approach that utilizes springs connecting the control points of the
surface, thus ensuring smooth modification of the surfaces. Feature extraction
will be defined in terms of chains of higher level entities called loops.
Automated die design will be performed in two steps. In the first step, the
orientation of the part with respect to the die-open direction will be
determined. In the second step, a parting line is extracted using a variation of
the differential depth filter that extracts the silhouette of the part. Virtual
design allows concepts that reside in the designer's mind to be input into a
computer with natural human gestures. This procedure should speed design time
and make the process of design more intuitive.