* 9501033
* Mathematical Sciences:  Scattering Theory for N-particle    Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* James Ralston, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

DMS-9501033 PI: Ralston Scattering theory for N-particle systems The subject of
the proposed research is scattering theory for N-particle Schrodinger operators
with constant magnetic fields. In contrast to the case when no magnetic field is
present (which is now well understood), very little was previously known about
it despite its mathematical and physical significance. The main task will be to
prove asymptotic completeness for such operators, i.e., to give a complete
classification of all solutions of the corresponding time-dependent Schrodinger
equation according to their large-time asymptotic behaviour. Recently C. Gerard
and the author proved asymptotic completeness for N-body systems containing no
proper neutral subsystems (this class includes atoms and positive ions). The aim
of the proposed research is to extend these results to the case of general
N-body systems, including negative ions and molecules. The main problem here
will be to analyze the dispersive behaviour of the neutral subsystems. Their
dynamics depends on their internal structure and therefore may be very unstable
under perturbations. A deeper understanding of the geometrical structures
related to the magnetic field will also be required. This research deals with
fundamental questions about how the structure matter is affected by the presence
of a magnetic field. Almost all of the earlier results on this subject were
obtained under the simplifying assumption that the motion of the nuclei is
negligible; mathematically, this means studying an approximation where nuclei
have infinite mass. However, this simplified model is not always appropriate in
physics, especially since our research has shown that there are important
qualitative differences between the properties of this model and a more
realistic one with finite nuclear masses. Furthermore, although this problem is
of considerable interest in physics and astrophysics (for example, strong
magnetic fields are ex pected to exist on the surfaces of neutron stars), no
predictions could be made on the basis of experiments. The reason for this is
that the magnetic fields that can be generated in the labolatories are not
strong enough for their effect on the systems in question to be detected. One
thus has to rely on a theoretical analysis of the problem.