* 9501073
* Nonlinear Wave Interactions & Singular Behavior
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Esteban Tabak, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 80,000.00

9501073 Tabak The proposed work concentrates on open problems in wave
propagation arising in the natural sciences. The first problem addresses the
diffraction of weak shock waves, where an apparent contradiction, known as the
von Neumann paradox, has been puzzling physicists and mathematicians for almost
five decades. The paradox concerns the ubiquitous occurrence of three-shock
intersections in a regime where, in principle, they are not allowed. It is
proposed to study this problem within the context of a simplified asymptotic
model. The results so far suggest that the solution to the paradox may involve
an additional singularity arising at the triple-point. The second problem
regards the long-scale behavior of winds, concentrating on the formation of
fronts between warm and cold air masses in the atmosphere. The mathematical
structure of this problem is surprisingly similar to the one associated with the
question of formation of singularities in three-dimensional incompressible
fluids. Both problems involve a combination of physical modeling, asymptotic
analysis and analytical and numerical solution of partial differential
equations. Both proposed problems have practical as well as theoretical
significance. Shock diffraction occurs in a variety of scenarios, such as
supersonic flight, flood waves and even medical applications, when focusing
sound waves are used to destroy kidney stones. A better understanding of the
diffraction process would therefore impact not only our knowledge of waves in
nature, but also our capacity for predicting wave intensity amplification due to
focusing and reflection in engineering devices. The formation of sharp fronts
between air masses in the atmosphere, on the other hand, is an important and
ubiquitous phenomenon. Understanding its mechanics would enhance our ability to
predict weather and climate changes. The surprising relationship between this
problem and the question of singularity for mation in incompressible fluids, on
the other hand, provides a promising alternative way to study a mechanism which
may play a fundamental role in turbulent intermittency.