* 9501046
* Mathematical Sciences:  Partial Differential Equations      and Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Francois Treves, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 81,000.00

DMS-9501046 PI: Treves Treves will continue his investigation of analysis on
manifolds equipped with locally integrable structures which allow holomorphic
extension in appropriate complexifications (hypo-analytic structures). He will
look at global aspects, especially for elliptic structures (which generalize
both the Dolbeault and the De Rham structures), as well as microlocal aspects
based on variants of the Fourier and Radon transforms. He also intends to
investigate boundary values of holomorphic objects (functions, cohomology,
classes) and their interpretation as hyperfunctions. In particular he will try
to expand the use of the FBI transform and the wave front set to characterize
the extensions. Another question which Treves will continue to investigate is
the possibility or impossibility of solving the associated systems of partial
differential equations. Treves investigates the possibility of solving
differential equations when there are more equations than unkowns. Some of these
equations occur naturally in certain geometric and physical processes. One
fundamental question to answer is whether some of these solutions can be
reconstructed from their values along rays, like in X-ray tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging. This is quite unclear when dealing with highly sophisticated
types of solutions, and some deep understanding of what is going on is needed,
an sought.