* 9501443
* Non-Fouling Ceramic Membranes for Treatment of Metastable   Oil/Water Emulsions
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Richard Higgins, CeraMem Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** Higgins 9501443 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
aimed towards the development of improved methods of treating poorly stabilized
(metastable) oil/water emulsions via ceramic crossflow filtration with membranes
that are highly resistant to fouling and that have relatively low associated
costs. The overall objectives of this program include: (a) development of a more
comprehensive and fundamental understanding of membrane fouling processes
inherent to crossflow filtration of produced waters and similar feed streams,
and their dependence on creamic membrane properties, and (b) development of
membranes on low-cost ceramic modules that are highly fouling-resistant.
Experimental work will encompass modification and optimization of membrane
fabrication approaches scouted in Phase I work, long-term crossflow process
testing of membranes on both live and simulated oil/water emulsion streams, and
thorough physical and chemical characterization of as-fabricated membranes,
fouled membranes, and predominant foulant species. It is anticipated that useful
knowledge related to membrane fouling mechanisms and their relationship with
ceramic membrane characteristics will result from this program, in addition to
commercially viable ceramic membranes that are highly fouling-resistant during
metastable oil/water emulsion processing. The highly fouling-resistant membranes
to be developed in this program will be readily scalable to industrial-scale
low-cost ceramic modules, and should provide significant benefits in both the
economy and effectiveness of metastable oil/water emulsion separations. These
separations ecompass a wide range of very high volume wastewaters such as
produced water from oil wells, desalter bottoms from crude oil washing,
shipboard bilge and tank cleaning wastes, vehicle washwaters, and others.
Keywords: ceramic membranes, oil/water emulsions, fouling-resistant membranes
*** p:/sbir/yhashimi/9501443a.doc