* 9501156
* Development of a Low Temperature, High-field, Ultra-high    Vacuum Scanning Tunneling Microscope
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Alex Zettl, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 07/31/1998
* USD 580,000.00

9501156 Zettl The invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) has had
tremendous impact on condensed matter physics and other disciplines. Although
the STM was used originally only as a high-resolution, low-speed electronic
imaging device, recent generation STM's have seen a wider variety of
applications, including the picosecond resolution of tunneling and excitation
processes and the control of nonlinear optical processes such as frequency
mixing and harmonic generation. One long-time goal has been the ability to use
the STM to construct and characterize new nanoscale structures, formed atom-by-
atom or molecule-by-molecule. Although elusive, this capability promises the
investigation of quantum size effects, atomic interactions, and novel electronic
circuit elements. This award will find the construction of the next-generation
STM, designed specifically to assemble and characterize nanoscale structures
with unusual electronic properties. This machine will uniquely combine materials
synthesis, manipulation, and high-resolution characterization capabilities,
including operation at low temperature in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) under high
magnetic field, with atomic resolution and with unsurpassed high-speed data
processing. Several outstanding problems in condensed matter physics necessitate
such a machine and provide the initial motivation for its construction: (1)
studies of metallic and superconducting clusters; (2) spectroscopy of one-and
two-dimensional materials; and (3) fabrication of networks and quantum confined
structures. ***