* 9501226
* Dynamical Systems with Infinitely Many Degrees of Freedom   in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Clarence Wayne, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9501226 Wayne Professor Wayne's research will focus on a variety of partial
differential equations which arise in mathematical physics. He will attempt to
use ideas from dynamical systems theory to understand the geometrical structure
of the phase space of these systems, and how this structure influences the
solutions of these equations. He will study two main classes of equations --
Hamiltonian partial differential equations, and dissipative equations. In the
first context, he will be concerned with extending the applications of tools
like the Kolmogorov-Arnold-Moser theory which have proven useful in the context
of finite dimensional Hamiltonian dynamical systems to this infinite dimensional
context and also in understanding the stability of the resulting solutions. In
the context of dissipative equations he will apply both invariant manifold
theorems and the renormalization group to study the long-time asymptotics of
such equations, particularly in cases in which the linearized equation has
continuous spectrum. %%% Wayne's research will focus on the behavior of
solutions of differential equations which arise in mathematical physics. These
equations have solutions which may behave in a very complicated fashion, and
Professor Wayne will develop new techniques for understanding their behavior. In
simpler examples the key to this understanding has often been the elucidation of
certain key geometrical structures related to the solutions of these equations,
and Professor Wayne's research will concentrate on discovering whether analogues
of these structures exist in the more complicated, infinite dimensional contexts
that arise in his applications. The sorts of equations which he will study arise
in the propagation of waves on the surface of a fluid, the vibrations of
crystals, and chemical reactions. ***