* 9501773
* Near-Field Optical Spectroscopic Studies of Thin Film Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Steven Buratto, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 03/31/1999
* USD 216,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the lateral structural
characterization of organic and inorganic layers in the nanometer length domain.
During the tenure of this three- year continuing grant, Professor Buratto and
his students at the University of California - Santa Barbara will utilize near-
field scanning optical microscopy (NSOM) in conjunction with established
spectroscopic techniques to probe the local structure and dynamics of thin-film
optical and opto-electronic materials with nanometer resolution and single
molecule sensitivity. Component clustering, conformational analysis, molecular
ordering, and environment fluctuations of self-assembled monolayer and
multilayer films, conducting and semiconducting polymer films, and inorganic
semiconductor quantum structures will be examined. Charge carrier transport,
diffusion, and trapping in these systems will also be characterized. These
studies should provide useful insights into the role of localized chemistry and
physics in the performance of these materials. Also during this grant period,
Professor Buratto will pursue an educational development plan that includes the
broad introduction of laser spectroscopy in undergraduate physical and
analytical chemistry courses, and the development of new courses in nonlinear
optics and microscopy for advanced undergraduate and graduate students. The
ability to characterize optical and opto-electronic materials in the nanoscale
regime is essential to understanding the structure-performance relationships of
these technologically important systems. Through application of near-field
scanning optical microscopy and other complementary optical spectroscopic
techniques, this CAREER research project will lead to a fundamental
understanding of the local chemistry and physics of these thin-film organic and
inorganic materials, as well as insights into relationships between local ord
er/disorder and materials performance. The educational development aspects of
this CAREER project will enrich the physical and analytical chemistry curriculum
available to undergraduate and graduate students at the University of California
- Santa Barbara.