* 9501366
* Research in Galois Theory and Integrating Technology in     Undergraduate Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* John Swallow, Davidson College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 08/31/1999
* USD 41,675.00

This CAREER award supports the research and professional development of
Professor John Swallow. This project has two primary goals: to find new
constructive methods to realize groups as Galois groups, and to advance the use
of technology in the undergraduate mathematics classroom. For the first goal,
the study will focus on obstructions to central embedding problems. The project
will provide new insights into the role of Galois cohomology and computation in
exhibiting explicit polynomials with given Galois groups over the field of
rational numbers. One specific aim of the educational plan is to write an
undergraduate textbook on Galois Theory which will employ modern algebraic
computation to present examples efficiently and will replace ruler-and-compass
constructions with recent research in the area of explicit construction of
fields as an underlying theme. The research component of this project is in the
general area of number theory. Number theory has its historical roots in the
study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing with the
divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest branches of
mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic reasons.
However, within the last half century it has become an indispensable tool in
diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing, and
communication systems.