* 9501079
* U.S.-Hungary Workshop on Dynamics and Control: to be held   Sopron, Hungary, July 24-26, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Firdaus Udwadia, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 03/31/1996
* USD 17,400.00

9501079 Udwadia This US-Hungary workshop on "Dynamics and Control" will take
place on July 24-26, 1995, in Sopron, Hungary, with combined sponsorship of the
National Science Foundation, the Hungarian Academy of Sciences, and the
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). The organizers are
Dr. Firdaus Udwadia of the University of Southern California, Dr. Miklos Farkos
of the Technical University of Budapest, and Dr. Arkadii Kryazhimskii,
representing IIASA. Researchers attending this workshop will deliver
presentations and discuss topics concerning the use of advanced methods in: 1)
analytical dynamics and control, and 2) control of nonlinear uncertain systems.
Their overall objective is to derive improved mathematical models with more
realistic predictions and determine methods for engineering control actions that
can be more robust under uncertainties. It is anticipated that this effort to
bring together scientists, engineers, and industrial technology experts from the
U.S. and Europe will yield ideas for longer-term research projects that may lead
to increased precision in mathematical modeling of relevant phenomena so that
newer models can be made more realistic and more readily applicable to areas
such as environmental and biomechanical systems, where uncertainties
predominate. ***