* 9501856
* CAREER:  Configurational Defect Arrangements in Multi-      Component Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Gerbrand Ceder, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9501856 Ceder This CAREER proposal contains both educational and research
components. The educational part involves the development of a Computing
Initiative in the Materials Science and Engineering department at MIT. The
investigator is contributing towards the integration of the teaching of
modelling and computation in materials into both the undergraduate and graduate
curricula. He is working with software and hardware vendors to support this
initiative and is setting up a support structure for the instructors of the core
materials classes. He is developing a new graduate course on computational
materials science. The research component develops methods used to predict phase
diagrams and defect arrangements in multi-component oxides. This approach makes
it possible to predict defect arrangements in oxides. Two applications on which
attention is being focused are stabilized zirconias and order-disorder in the
pyrochlore-forming oxides. %%% As part of NSF's new CAREER program geared toward
academically young investigators, this project involves both educational and
research components. The educational part supports the development of a
Computing Initiative in the Materials Science and Engineering department at MIT.
The investigator is contributing towards the integration of the teaching of
modelling and computation in materials into both the undergraduate and graduate
curricula. He is working with software and hardware vendors to support this
initiative and is setting up a support structure for the instructors of the core
materials classes. He is developing a new graduate course on computational
materials science. The research component develops methods used to predict phase
diagrams and defect arrangements in multi-component oxides, which are both of
scientific and technological interest. This approach makes it possible to
predict defect arrangements in oxides. Such work leads to a better understanding
of the relation between composition, the rmal treatment, and properties of a
system, and therefore ultimately to better materials. ***