* 9501716
* CAREER:  Micro/Nano-Fabrication of Conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,11/30/2000
* David Collard, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/30/2000
* USD 312,500.00

9501716 Collard Demand for smaller, more versatile electronic and opto-
electronic devices continues to grow in order to increase packing density,
efficiency and operational speed. The search for smaller and smaller devices has
now reached the final frontier, the molecular scale. Further reduction in device
size must occur at a level which addresses ensembles of molecules, or, more
intriguing, discrete molecules. Through the use of scanning probe microscopic
techniques and with novel molecular building blocks of pi-conjugated polymers
that have already been synthesized, we propose to create defined, robust, and
functional nanostructures which will test the limits of ultraminiaturization.
This approach relies on the modification of substrates with monolayers of
monomers that serve as templates for polymer deposition. The research program
will provide insight into approaches for integration and nanofabrication of
various electronic materials and will furnish materials and methods that provide
precise control over the interfacial behavior of composite systems relevant to
the electronics industry. %%% In the long term, organic nano-architectures
promise great flexibility in the design of microcircuitry elements and quantum
wave devices. The key issues to be addressed in this research include: What
materials can be used to fabricate micro- and nanostructures; how can nanoscale
features be produced; what are the limits of feature dimensions, and what are
the stability and properties of these features? We are currently involved in a
number of programs at Georgia Tech and in the Atlanta area to increase the
involvement of students in technical education, including programs for
minorities, women, and precollege students. Through an undergraduate outreach
program to science museums we are developing illustrative interactive chemistry
exhibits, and a vibrant demonstrat ion and workshop program. Curriculum
development activities include development of an advanced organic chemistry
course based almost entirely on problem solving, introduction of a polymer
chemistry course, and development of interdisciplinary laboratory experiments.
***