* 9501547
* Support for the Annual Meteoritical Society Meeting,        Smithsonian Institution, Washington DC, September 11-15,    1995
* O/D,OPP
* 12/15/1994,11/30/1995
* Glenn MacPherson, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 11/30/1995
* USD 12,862.00

This award provides support for the 58th annual meeting of the Metoritical
Society which will be held in Washington, DC in September, 1995. Additional
support is provided by NASA, the Carnegie Institution of Washington, The
Barringer Foundation, JEOL USA Inc., and the Smithsonian Institution. Funding
from the National Science Foundation will be used for travel grants for students
and for scientists from the former Soviet Bloc countries. This meeting is a
valuable forum for presentation of new scientific results, exchange of
scientific ideas, and stimulation of potential collaborative work. Meteoritical
Society meetings are technical conferences with wide international
participation. Meeting venues generally alternate between Europe and the United
States, reflecting the sub-equal membership in the Society from the two
continents. These meetings typically draw scientists from Australia, Austria,
Belgium, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, India, Japan, the Netherlands,
Russia, Switzerland, the UK, and the United States. As many as 400 participants
are expected at the Washington meeting. Technical sessions are dominated by
mineralogical, isotopic and chemical studies of meteorites, theoretical studies
of early solar system processes, and field and theoretical studies of impact
phenomena. The overall scientific theme is learning about the formation and
evolution of our solar system and its components, and solar systems in general.
Recent topics of interest have included the nature and origin of interstellar
grains found in chondrite meteorites, the distribution of short-lived radio-
nuclides and their role in early planetary melting, the nature of volatiles in
Martian SNC meteorites and their implications for the volatile budget on Mars,
the origin of isotopically-anomalous material in the early solar system, and the
possible secular variations in the meteorite population bombarding Earth over
the past several tens of thousands of years. A special session at the 1995 meet
ing will be devoted to the formation and evolution of the asteroid belt and the
relation between the meteorite population and the asteroid population. A plenary
session is planned to address the state of planetary sciences in general
together with an overview of science learned from meteorites collected through
the highly successful Antarctic Search for Meteorites program. A public lecture
at the National Air and Space Museum addressing a topic of popular interest is
also planned for one evening.