* 9501262
* Ab Initio High Resolution Spectroscopy and Atmospheric Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Kirk Peterson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 05/31/1999
* USD 232,961.00

In this Faculty Early Career Development Award funded by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program at NSF, Kirk Peterson at the Chemistry
Department of Washington State University will study gas phase processes that
involve halogenated molecules which are found in the upper atmosphere. The focus
of the work is on reactive species which contain chlorine and, in particular,
bromine atoms. Highly accurate ab initio electronic wavefunctions and energies
are to be used to characterize the thermodynamics, spectroscopy, and
photochemistry of these molecules. The wavefunctions are computed using coupled
cluster theory and multireference configuration interaction methods. Since the
discovery of the seasonal drop in Antarctic ozone levels, accurate ab initio
theoretical work has contributed to the understanding of the atmospheric
chemistry relevant to ozone depletion. However, nearly all this work has focused
on fluorine and chlorine compounds and bromine compounds have been neglected.
Yet, stratospheric bromine chemistry is important because bromine species may
account for 25% or more of the Arctic and Antarctic ozone loss. Further, the
concentration of bromine molecules is expected to increase in the future. The
work being supported by this award is leading to a better understanding of these
important bromine reactions, a necessary precursor for their control.