* 9501997
* Career:  Probabilistic Methods and Algorithms to Solve      Protein Folding Problems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Bonnie Berger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1999
* USD 124,582.00

The project is in the area of computational molecular biology; specifically it
addresses problems in protein folding and the self-assembly of virus shells. The
`grand challenge` problem associated with protein folding is to determine how a
protein will fold in 3-dimensions when given only its amino acid sequence. An
important first step in tackling the protein folding problem is a solution to
the motif recognition problem (i.e., given a known 3D structure, or motif,
determining whether this motif occurs in an unknown amino acid sequence). The
goal of this effort is to develop new algorithms, based solely on the right
pairwise correlation probabilities, which out perform existing motif recognition
algorithms. An implementation of these algorithms, is being programmed. In fact,
the package is aiding in the discovery of the coiled-coil motif in such viruses
as Mollney murine leukemia, influenza hemagglutinin, and HIV. The coiled-coil
motif is thought to be the mechanism by which proteins fuse with or bind to the
cell membrane. This continuing research deals with recognizing motifs when less
data is available, predicting inter-strand interactions in motifs, and finding
new insights into the 3-dimensional structure of proteins. The second part of
the project involves studying the self-assembly of virus shells. In particular,
by computationally modeling how these shells are built, it is hopefully possible
to suggest ways of interfering with the growth of these viruses and of causing
their deformity. The Educational Component of this CAREER Grant includes: (a)
Development of interdisciplinary (computer science, mathematics, and biology)
undergraduate and graduate courses and curriculum in computational molecular
biology, discrete mathematics and the theory of (biological) algorithms; (b)
Development of both undergraduate and graduate seminars in computational
molecular biology. Participation of undergraduate students in developing the
extended system project and the Virus Shell Assembly project. (This is part of
the Research Experiences for Undergraduates Program at NSF and Undergraduate
Research Opportunities Program of MIT.)