* 9501866
* Mechanism and Inhibitor Design for Sialyltransferases and   Education in Biochemistry
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Nicole Horenstein, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/2000
* USD 454,250.00

; R o o t E n t r y F l > @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t ! O b j e c
t P o o l l > l > 4 @ F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ;
Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen Rhonda Young @ @J 9 @
e = e ! C v x x x & ! T k! * v v b 9501866 Horenstein Significant efforts are
being made by the PI to help develop a new biochemistry curriculum at the
undergraduate and graduate levels, and to develop an interdisciplinary research
program which includes undergraduate participation. The PI has instituted and is
further developing a new graduate level course entitled "Enzymes and Enzyme
Mechanisms". Over the period of the CAREER award, the PI will use this course
and pedagogies as a laboratory for dhe creation of a new textbook on the same
topic. Additional planned course development and teaching activities include
teaching a special topics course concerned with the use of isotopes in
biochemical research, and teaching the senior level Biochemistry course. In
relationship to this latter course, the Biochemistry Division is currently
investigating the creation of an electronic study guide in Biochemistry,
operating over the internet with a local World Wide Web client. The study guide
would enable students to access a vast amount of material that could not be
presented in traditional printed format. The PI is a co-investigator in his
departments renewal application of its previous and highly successful NSF-REU
award. His laboratory has sponsored an NSF-REU fellow among odher undergraduate
researchers. The PI's undergraduate research commitment is strong. In the first
year of his appointment, a total of four undergraduates have worked on original
and interdisciplinary research projects. Two have chosen to continue on, and
three of the four have represented women and minorities. Undergraduate
participation in the PI's research program is and will remain a priority. The
research component of this proposal presents a plan for the mechanistic
characterization of rat-liver sialyltransferases utilizing steady-state kinetics
and multiple kinetic isotope effect experiments. Sialyltransferases (ST's)
catalyze the transfer of N acetylneuraminic acid(NeuAc), (or sialic acid), as
its cytidine monophosphate conjugate(CMP-NeuAc), to an acceptor hydroxyl group
typically at the terminus of an oligosaccharide chain of a glycoprotein or
glycolipid. The resultant sialoglycoconjugates are recognition elements in a
variety of processes including viral replication, inflammatory responses, and
adhesion of metastatic tumor cells. Sialyltransferases have not yet been
characterized in mechanistic detail, nor have selective inhibitors been
reported. These compounds will further illuminate the mechanism of
sialyltransferases. The ST substrate CMP-NeuAc is an unusual one for a
glycosyltransferase because it is a sugar-mononucleotide and the anomeric carbon
of N-acetylneuraminic acid has an adjacent carboxyl residue. The interplay of
these groups in glycosyl transfer is unkno wn and will be investigated in the
course of the mechanistic investigation. Steady-state kinetic techniques,
kinetic isotope effect experiments, and computational approaches will be used to
define the kinetic mechanisms and transition state structure for rat liver
a(2~6) and a(2~3) sialyl transferases. Parallel to the above investigations,
ST's will be cloned, and overexpressed in yeast.. Current understanding of the
mechanisms of glycosyltransferases, and especially sialyltransferases is
limited. The availability of transition state analogue inhibitors for
sialyltransferases would facilitate mechanistic studies, and perhaps allow for
manipulation of glycosylation patterns in vivo. %%% The research program will
involve determination of the chemical mechanism of enzymes called
sialyltransferases. Sialyltransferases link a type of sugar, sialic acid, to
carbohydrate chains of glycoproteins, often found on cell surfaces. In the
longer term, the mechanistic information obtained will be used to design and
synthesize inhibitors of these enzymes. Sialyltransferase inhibitors may be
useful tools to elucidate the biological functions of sialic acid-containing
glycoproteins, which are involved in inflammation and metastasis. The education
component involves the development of a biochemistry curriculum in the Chemistry
Department at the University of Florida. One new course at the undergraduate
level is "Biochemistry Laboratory", in which students learn how to create and
analyze recombinant DNA molecules using state-of-the-art techniques. Students
then use the recombinant DNA to produce a human enzyme, which will be purified
and analyzed. Undergraduate students are also involved in research in the
Principal Investigators laboratory, providing them with actual research
training. New graduate level courses include "Enzymes and Enzyme Mechanisms" in
which the fundamentals of enzyme m