* 9501217
* Quality Technology for Variation Reduction
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Vijayan Nair, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 09/30/1999
* USD 143,412.00

9501217 Nair This research is concerned with the development of efficient
methods for parameter design, an approach for variation reduction introduced by
Taguchi. In parameter design, the goal is to achieve robustness by reducing the
sensitivity of the product or process to uncontrollable disturbances (noise
variables). The research will exploit the structure inherent in parameter design
experiments to obtain efficient techniques. Both static problems with fixed
target as well as situations with dynamic characteristics will be studied. The
applicability of parameter design will also be broadened by developing methods
for more complex split-plot experiments and for studies where the noise
variables cannot be controlled, as in on-line investigations. Models and methods
for analyzing non-standard data, such as count or categorical responses or data
from mixture models, will be developed. Finally, the case of multiple quality
characteristics will be considered and a systematic data analysis strategy will
be developed. Software will be developed to facilitate the application of the
models and the analysis techniques provided. The importance of quality
improvement methods in today's competitive market cannot be over emphasized.
Industrial experiments are expensive and time consuming to conduct. Therefore,
it is important that efficient methods of design and analysis are used to
maximize the quality of information from such studies. The outcome of this
research will enable product and process engineers to conduct parameter design
studies more efficiently, especially in dynamic systems. If successful, the
methods developed as part of this research will broaden the scope of engineering
applications to include more complex experimental situations, on-line studies,
and the analysis of different types of data. The research will also yield a
comprehensive, systematic strategy for analyzing multiple quality
characteristics as commonly found in practice.