* 9501255
* Singular Perturbation & Riemann Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 11/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Xiao-Biao Lin, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 101,252.00

9501255 Schecter and Lin The investigators propose to continue their research on
composite wave-front solutions for singularly perturbed partial differential
equations and on Riemann problems for systems of conservation laws. Lin proposes
to extend his earlier work on the construction of asymptotic expansions for
composite wave-front solutions of reaction-diffusion equations, and on a
shadowing lemma approach to proving that there is a true solution near such an
expansion, to more general singularly perturbed partial differential equations
and to partially singularly perturbed systems. He also proposes to extend to
higher dimensional systems the SLEP method for studying the stability of such
solutions in a special case. Schecter proposes to build on earlier work that
characterized structurally stable strictly hyperbolic Riemann solutions for
systems of two conservation laws in one space dimension. He proposes in
particular to extend this work to the non-strictly-hyperbolic case, to find all
codimension one Riemann solutions by examining the violation of each of the
conditions for structural stability, and to study each codimension one
bifurcation in detail. Schecter and Lin together propose to look at whether
Lin's approach to singular perturbation problems will enable one to regard a
Riemann problem solution as the start of an asymptotic expansion of a solution
to an associated parabolic problem. %%% Sharp wave fronts occur in many areas of
science. From the mathematical viewpoint, they arise as solutions of partial
differential equations that model various physical situations. The investigators
propose to continue their research on wave fronts. For one type of partial
differential equation, reaction-diffusion equations, Lin has developed a method
of calculating formal solutions in which several sharp fronts separate more
slowly changing portions of the solution. He has also developed a rigorous
method, modeled on the "shadowing lemma " of dynamical systems theory, of
showing that there is a true solution near the calculated formal solution. He
proposes to extend this work to more general partial differential equations. He
also proposes to use his approach to extend a technique that has been used in a
special case to study the stability of such solutions. For another type of
partial differential equation, systems of two conservation laws in one space
dimension, Schecter has studied solutions in which jump discontinuities separate
slowly changing portions. These arise as solutions of Riemann problems, in which
the initial state of the system consists of two constant values separated by a
single jump. Schecter has characterized the Riemann solutions that are
structurally stable, in the sense that the basic character of the solution does
not change when the initial states are varied slightly. He proposes to extend
this work in a number of directions, for example, by identifying the simplest
ways in which structural stability can break down. Schecter and Lin together
propose to look at whether Lin's approach to calculating formal solutions with
sharp wave fronts will enable one to a regard a Riemann solution as the start of
such a formal solution to a more realistic partial differential equation. ***