* 9501304
* Mathematical Sciences: Krein Space Operator theory and      Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Michael Dritschel, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 89,998.00

9501304 Rovnyak An approach to Krein space operator theory will be developed
based on factorization and extension properties of operators. Continuous Krein
space operators have natural isometric and unitary extensions, allowing a
reduction of the study of general operators to a more tractable case. New tools
in the form of index formulas give conditions for the existence of
factorizations. A new form of the Krein space commutant lifting theorem is
sought which has applications similar to the Hilbert space case. A related
prmblem is to develop a unified algebraic and analytic theory of the Krein space
Schur class of operator-valued holomorphic functions. This part is in
collaboration with several European colleagues and features colligations to
study indefinite kernels and reproducing kernel Krein spaces. Examples from
interpolation theory and univalent functions will be considered. Factorization
properties of selfadjoint operators on Krein spaces will be applied to the study
of hyperinvariant subspaces. Other areas of application include compact
perturbations of selfadjoint operators and a search for a Weyl-von Neumann
theorem in Krein spaces. Numerical techniques will be used in combination with
recent decompositions for finite matrices in an effort to obtain information on
the general form of numerical range for finite-dimensional spaces. Interpolation
problems and linear systems have long been important in pure and applied
mathematics, as well as in technology. It is only recently that mathematicians
have been looking into the possibility of generalizations to new settings such
as indefinite inner product spaces. Preliminary results indicate that this line
of investigation could turn out to be as fruitful as the classical theory has
been. The problems naturally raise new questions about other areas of operator
theory on indefinite inner product spaces. These have to do with structural
properties of operators such a s invariant subspaces and numerical ranges.
Connections with related areas of mathematics such as coefficient problems in
classical complex analysis will also be explored. ***