* 9501239
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Geometric Methods and Their        Applications for Multi-Dimensional Resonant Dynamical       Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* George Haller, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9501239 Haller Resonances are regions in the phase space of a dynamical system
in which the frequencies of some angular variables become nearly commensurate.
This proposal is aimed toward the development and application of new geometric
methods for the study of complicated dynamics near resonances. The main goal is
to capture invariant structures in the phase space with a strong impact on the
general evolution of the system. Ideal candidates for such structures are
hyperbolic partially slow manifolds that arise in many resonance problems and
carry physically important motions with different time scales. A subtle
combination of regular and singular perturbation techniques can describe this
effect in detail by detecting remarkable families of solutions connecting
neighborhoods of these manifolds. Such solutions describe repeated, complicated
transitions between physically distinguished motions Many evolutionary processes
in nature as solutions of sets of differential equations. Sets of these
solutions can be visualized as surfaces in some higher dimensional phase space
and irregular transitions between different states of the evolutionary system
appear as chaotic orbits connecting these surfaces. This proposal deals with the
detection of such transitions in the important and frequent case when the
solution surfaces are composed of solutions with several different time scales.
The proposed mathematical techniques can be used to study yet unexplained
details of molecular vibrations, patterns of surface waves in ocean dynamics,
gravitational interactions of planetary systems, and chaotic oscillations of
engineering structures.