* 9501433
* Mathematical Sciences:Interfaces with Structure:  Kinetics, Nucleation, Microstructures, Topological Transactions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Lev Truskinovsky, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 60,146.00

DMS-9501433 Truskinovsky For solid materials undergoing martensitic phase
transformations, the system of conservation laws is of the mixed type. It has
recently become clear that additional constitutive information is required to
close this system of equations and to describe phenomena like nucleation,
kinetics of phase boundaries, reconnection of phase boundaries and formation of
finite scale microstructures. We propose three alternative ways to regularize
the classical elastodynamics for materials supporting seteral phases in order to
derive rather than postulate the missing conditions. The regularization involves
high derivatives, additional variables and/ or consideration of discrete system.
Large strains observed in smart materials are produced by the coordinated
migration of the glissile interfaces in processes such as martensitic phase
transformations, deformation twinning or electromagnetic domain switching. A
knowledge of the evolution of the mobile microstructure, and the way in which it
can influence macroscopic properties, forms the basis of any attempt to control
mechanical properties through materials selection and metallurgical processing.
We address the foremost open problem which concerns the history and rate
sensitivity in the constitutive structure for smart materials through the
description of the internal structure of the dissipative phase boundaries.