* 9501438
* Electron Transport in Quantum Dots
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Robert Westervelt, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9501438 Westervelt Coupled two and three quantum dots, artificial molecules,
including chains and rings of dots will be fabricated on gallium-
arsenide/aluminum-gallium-arsenide heterostructures from UCSB. Such structures
on semiconductors will enable the PI to compensate for the effect of impurities
and defects on the energy of the electrons and the dot to dot coupling. Coulomb
blockade and dot capacitance at ultra-low temperatures will be used as
spectroscopic tools for electron states in single and couple quantum dots.
Additional probes such as localized microwave excitation via miniaturized
striplines, and spatially resolved scanning probe measurements currently under
development will be used to characterize electron states and transport in single
and coupled dots. The objective is to elucidate the nature of electron states in
coupled dots and to search for possible collective quantum phenomena. The
behavior of electrons inside these structures is of great current interest, both
for practical and for fundamental reasons. The controlled motion of single
electrons through coupled quantum dots is the basis for new approaches to
electronics and computation. %%% This project investigates semiconductor
"quantum dot", structures which are so small that they are also referred to as
artificial atoms and molecules. Their fabrication is complex and involves
collaboration between workers at Harvard and UC Santa Barbara. The behavior of
electrons inside these structures is of great current interest, both for
practical and for fundamental reasons. The controlled motion of single electrons
through coupled quantum dots is the basis for new approaches to electronics and
computation. For example, a goal is to develop single electron devices in which
each bit is represented by a single electron, whose state may be optically
switched. Unlike "real" molecules, the size and cou pling between the quantum
dots can be varied by fabrication methods to produce new phenomena not normally
found in molecules. Measurements of the Coulomb blockade and dot capacitance at
ultra-low temperatures will be used as spectroscopic tools for electron states
in single and coupled quantum dots. ***