* 9501009
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Social Composition     of Occupations
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Joseph McPherson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/1996
* USD 3,563.00

This research is concerned with describing and accounting for changes in the
social compositon of occupations. It uses a model based on an ecological theory
of competition. Niche overlap--shared sociodemographic characteristics among
occupations--is expected to create competitive pressures that lead to changes in
an occupation's basic niche. The model is tested using data from the Current
Population Survey Annual Demographic Files. %%% This research will contribute to
sociological understanding of why occupations vary in composition according to
age, gender, race, and similar characteristics and why occupations change their
compositon over time. This information should be of help to policy makers
concerned with efforts to encourage occupational diversity. In addition to the
scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially
assist a highly promising student in completing research for the Ph.D.
dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the
nation and the thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.
This research is concerned with describing and accounting for changes in the
social compositon of occupations. It uses a model based on an ecological theory
of competition. Niche overlap--shared sociodemographic characteristics among
occupations--is expected to create competitive pressures that lead to changes in
an occupation's basic niche. The model is tested using data from the Current
Population Survey Annual Demographic Files. %%% This research will contribute to
sociological understanding of why occupations vary in composition according to
age, gender, race, and similar characteristics and why occupations change their
compositon over time. This information should be of help to policy makers
concerned with efforts to encourage occupational diversity. In addition to the
scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially
assist a highly promising student in completing resear ch for the Ph.D.
dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the
nation and the thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.