* 9501368
* CAREER:  Nonlinear Output Feedback Control of Constrained   Multivariable Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Michael Henson, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 06/30/2000
* USD 285,000.00

Henson 9502327 This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant which
includes both a research as well as an educational component. Research: The PI's
research focuses on the development of nonlinear output feedback control
strategies for constrained multivariable processes. More effective estimation
and control techniques are needed for chemical processes as a result of
increased demands on productivity and product quality. In order to provide
satisfactory performance, industrial control systems must account for multiple
inputs and outputs, nonlinear dynamic behavior, process constraints, and lack of
on-line measurements. The objective of this research is to develop a
computationally efficient control strategy for chemical processes that exhibit
these characteristics. The control system has three distinct components: (1) a
nonlinear closed-loop observer which provides on-line estimates of unmeasured
state variables; (2) a multivariable input-output linearizing controller which
accounts for process nonlinearities; and (3) a multivariable linear model
predictive controller which compensates for process constraints. The control
strategy will be analyzed theoretically and evaluated via simulation using
representative chemical and polymerization reactor models. A collaborative
arrangement with DuPont will allow the control scheme to be applied to an
industrial polymerization process. This test will facilitate technology transfer
to industry. Education: The teaching plan is designed to enhance the educational
opportunities available in the Louisiana State University Chemical Engineering
Department. The specific goals of the plan are to: (1) improve the department's
computer facilities; (2) revise the curriculum for the department's process
control courses; (3) computerize experiments in the department's undergraduate
laboratories; (4) revitalize the department's undergraduate research program;
(5) establish a minority student program in the department; and (6) participa te
in the department's graduate student recruitment program.