* 9501025
* Mathematical Sciences:  Microstructure and its Influence on Composite Material Properties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Graeme Milton, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 132,001.00

DMS-9501025 Milton This proposal aims to investigate microstructures which have
novel or extremal elastic behavior, develop new variational principles as a tool
for analysis, derive bounds on the complex shear modulus of viscoelastic
composites, obtain exact relations between plane elasticity anti-plane
elasticity and piezoelectricity, seek a more general link between coupled
equations and uncoupled equations, and numerically solve coupled field problems
through the use of integral equation methods. Composite and polycrystalline
materials are ubiquitous in nature and amongst engineered materials. Their
technological importance stretches from applications in earthquake prediction
(many rocks are polycrystalline),in the oil industry (rocks containing oil), the
aerospace industry (lightweight composites), to understanding sea ice, a
composite of brine and ice (important to climate modelling), colloids (a
composite of suspended particles in a fluid),to shape memory materials (a
composite of different variants of a metallic phase), to hydrophones (composites
of piezoelectric materials), to biological applications (bones, shells, tendons
are all examples of composite structures). This proposal will enhance our
knowledge of composite and polycrystalline materials in ways that will
facillitate the development of new materials, and improve procedures for
estimating the properties of composites.