* 9501820
* CAREER:  Fabrication of Two- and Three-Dimensional Photonic Crystals
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Theresa Mayer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 07/31/2000
* USD 340,000.00

9501820 Mayer The primary objective of this project is to stimulate and motivate
learning at every level (undergraduate, graduate, post-graduate). In the area of
fundamental research, the author proposes to develop a process to fabricate 2-
and 3- dimensional (2- and 3-D) photonic crystals for optical wavelengths. The
3-D periodic dielectric structure that will be fabricated is a square-rod
structure in the simple-cubic lattice. This scaffold structure has the property
that all of the flat faces are at right angles to one another. Intuitively, this
implies that the fabrication procedure for this square-rod structure will be
much easier than those described for face-centered-cubic lattices. The proposed
process relies on the integration of many techniques that are currently being
used to fabricate III-V optoelectronic devices. In particular, the 3-D structure
will be fabricated from a GaAs/A1As stack grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE).
Following the growth, a submicron cross-hatched pattern is defined on the sample
of the surface using electron-beam lithography. The unprotected areas of the
GaAs/A1As stack are removed using reactive ion beam etching (RIBE). To complete
the photonic crystal, the compositional structure of the A1As supports is
modified and the alternating layers of A1As are removed in a selective etchant.
En route to this 3-D result, a 2-D structure will also be fabricated. Both of
these photonic crystals will be characterized by the transmission method. The
successful demonstration of a 3-D photonic crystal at optical wavelengths would
allow the development of a new class of devices that could be used to reflect,
trap, guide, and switch light. ***