* 9501726
* Research and Education in Integrated Circuit Design for     Communication and Magnetic Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Gregory Uehara, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/1999
* USD 127,779.00

There is an intimate relationship between the algorithms used in communication
and magnetic storage systems, the integrated circuits (ICs) which implement the
algorithms, and the system performance which results. As systems increase in
complexity, trade-offs and innovations need to be made at all levels of a system
design in order to drive system/circuit performance to approach fundamental
limits. This research is pursuing teaching and research plans which have the
goal of developing students into engineers prepared to make significant and
important technical contributions to the development of high performance
communication and magnetic storage systems. On the side of teaching, the goal is
to develop a curriculum which encourages students to make connections between
both the theoretical and practical aspects of electrical engineering. The
curriculum needs formal methods to bring out the synergy that exists between
these two aspects of their field. On the side of research, the fundamental theme
is to examine algorithms and architectures important in communications
applications, identify performance or speed limitations of conventional
implementations of the algorithms and architectures from an IC implementation
perspective, develop ways in which modifications may result in implementation
advantages, and prototype the new approaches in order to demonstrate its
potential advantages. Proposed projects include the development of analog,
digital, and mixed-signal ICs for wireless satellite and infra-red, wired LAN,
and magnetic disk read channel applications.