* 9501941
* CAREER:  Applications of Convex Programming in Combinatorial Optimization:  A Mathematical, Algorithmic and             Computational Study
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Farid Alizadeh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 03/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

The semidefinite programming problem (SDP), including implementation of
numerically stable interior point algorithms, mathematical properties of the
feasible sets, and in particular applications of SDP in combinatorial
optimization are being investigated. First, two versions of the primal-dual
interior point SDP algorithm are being implemented. One version is in MATLAB and
is intended as an easy to use and change software for small to medium size
problems. Another implementation is in FORTRAN 90 and is intended for high
performance parallel and vector/pipelined machines and is meant to solve large
scale problems. In addition feasibility of active set methods for SDP is being
investigated. Next applications of SDP in general 0-1 integer programming
problems are being studied. The feasibility of branch and bound SDP techniques
which solve an SDP problem at each stage but may require far fewer branchings
overall is being investigated. If such an approach is found to be practical,
general purpose programs will be developed. In theoretical investigations, the
following applications of SDP are being studied: parallel computational
complexity of the Lovasz number of graphs, approximation algorithms for the
minimum vertex cover problem, applications to the general matching problem, and
polyhedrality of the feasible sets of SDPs under affine transformations. The
connection of primal--dual method of linear and semidefinite programs to the
problem of quadratically constrained quadratic programming is being
investigated. In addition, those cones are being investiagted whose associated
optimization problem leads to complementarity relations that are bilinear forms;
programming, quadratically constrained quadratic programming and SDP are
examples of such problems. For teaching plans, active participation in helping
RUTCOR establish a masters program is planned. Courses in semidefinite
programming and in computational biology in graduate school, and a course
designed to survey various software available for optimization problems are
being developed. At the undergraduate level teaching of courses in the
affiliated departments of computer science, mathematics and statistics is
expected. Also a textbook on SDP is in preparation.