* 9501680
* Advanced Architectures for Multichannel Active Noise        Control
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Scott Douglas, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 05/31/1999
* USD 125,538.00

Active noise control is the suppression of unwanted noise via destructive
interference using a digital signal processing system with sensors and
actuators. The goal of this research is to achieve significant performance gains
and computational complexity reductions in active noise control technology
through fundamental research in multichannel algorithm design and analysis, to
enable the wider use of this technology in industrial and consumer markets.
These efforts include: 1. the development of computationally-efficient,
gradient- based adaptive controllers employing simplified updating strategies;
2. the application of least-squares and orthogonalization methods for robust and
statistically-efficient filter adaptation; 3. the design of multichannel subband
implementations of active noise controllers using adaptive infinite impulse-
response filters; and 4. analysis and development of multichannel system
identification methods that require a minimum of processing capability and that
provide robust performance in time-varying situations. The research effort
includes both system simulation and hardware development to verify the
underlying principles, performances, and constraints of real-world active noise
control systems. To be most useful, an engineering education must forge a
relationship between the capabilities of various technologies and the needs of
the community at-large. The goal of this effort is to maintain the relevance of
an engineering education by bringing the industrial, societal, and academic
communities closer together through individual and group interaction. Activities
to foster this interaction include: 1. promoting joint university/industry
technical projects through participation in the University of Utah Engineering
Clinic Program; 2. incorporating research activities in active noise control
within the undergraduate and graduate curriculum through individual clas s
projects; 3. developing an integrated electrical engineering curriculum through
departmental committee work; and 4. reaching out to the community through
Engineering Career Days and the advising of prospective transfer students. The
educational effort involves the design of new course projects, committee work at
the Department level, and extensive interaction with students, other educators,
and members of the local community.