* 9501740
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Easily Implementable     Policies for the Design of Spare Parts Inventory Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* Rachel Zhang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 06/30/2001
* USD 213,332.00

9501740 The focus of this research is on the development of easily implementable
(Q,r) inventory policies for multi-echelon spare parts distribution system,
where Q and r stand for order quantity and re-order point respectively. By
easily implementable policies, the investigator implies 1) policies that do not
depend on difficult to estimate or unestimatable parameters, 2) policies that
lead to closed form expressions for stocking parameters that can be computed
using a spreadsheet, and 3) small changes in the list of part numbers being
managed do not require re-running the entire algorithm to adjust the control
parameters. In other words, the system only needs to be updated periodically.
The investigator's justification for the research are 1) lack of actual use of
existing models, 2) the computational requirements involved with existing
approaches, and 3) the difficulty involved in estimating system control
parameters with traditional approaches. The objective of the research is to
extend the existing models to the point where a useful design tool can be
developed. The research also addresses strategies to integrate students in the
study and deploy the results to support student teaching and education. The
outcome of this research has the potential to advance the state-of-the-art in
inventory control systems. The research can lead to improvement in the design
process, both in terms of reducing investment on inventory and increasing
service level. The use of closed form expressions in a dynamic inventory system
can pave the way for a higher use rate of the models in controlling inventory
systems.