* 9501119
* Kinetics of Charge-Density Waves:  Time Resolved X-ray      Scattering Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 255,000.00

9501119 Brock The objective of this research program is to measure the transient
structural response of a charge-density-wave (CDW) to sudden changes in either
the driving electric field or the temperature. These data will be used to test
modern nonequilibrium statistical mechanical theories developed to describe the
growth of materials in the presence of random impurities and defects. A common
theme running through many of these models is the derivation of an equation of
motion for a hydrodynamic variable such as mass density, concentration, or
temperature. The Kardar-Parisi-Zhang equation is an example of such an equation
of motion which has recently received considerable attention in the literature.
Formally, the equations of motion for the various correlation functions of
interest follow directly from the equation of motion for the hydrodynamic
variable. In spite of the well-defined nature of the question, there are very
few direct experimental tests of any of these models. However, x-ray scattering
measurements of the transient structural response of the CDW's are nearly ideal
for such tests. To first order, one can consider CDWs to be nearly sinusoidal
quasi-one-dimensional density waves and x-rays are diffracted by the periodic
structure. Detailed equations of motion describing the local phase of this
density wave have been proposed. This project will test these models by applying
a time- dependent driving electric field, or temperature to the sample and then
measuring the transient structural response of the CDW using synchrotron based,
time-resolved, high-resolution x-ray scattering. Comparison will be made with
previous measurements of transients in the electronic transport by performing
in-situ current-voltage measurements. %%% In recent years, mathematical models
describing the growth of materials have received cons iderable attention because
of technological interests in growing novel materials. From the theoretical,
point of view, this interest is due, in large part, to predictions that
materials growth should exhibit phenomena similar to those exhibited by systems
at phase transitions (e.g., at the critical temperature where a material becomes
superconducting). Consequently, the successful theoretical tools developed in
the 1970's to study phase transitions are being brought to bear on this new
problem. In spite of the large theoretical effort, there are very few direct
experimental tests of any of these models. X-ray scattering measurements of the
evolution of a charge-density-wave (CDW) system are nearly ideal for
experimental tests for some of these growth models. CDWs occur at low
temperatures in certain metals. Although their origin is quantum mechanical, in
the simplest approximation, a CDW can be thought of as a small but repetitive
variation in the average density of atoms. In many cases, when an electric field
is applied to the sample, the CDW responds by "sliding" rigidly through the
crystal. This project will test these models by applying an electric field (or
change in temperature) to the sample and then use x-rays to measure the
structural evolution of the CDW. ***