* 9501166
* Allosteric Supramolecular Assemblies
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 10/31/1998
* USD 190,250.00

U. Notre Dame This CAREER award is made in the Organic Dynamics Program in
support of the research and teaching activities of Dr. Bradley Smith. The theme
of the research is the design and synthesis of allosteric supramolecular
assemblies, i.e systems whose chemical activity is altered by conformational
changes remote to the site of the activity. In each system proposed, the
allosteric mechanism will involve chair-chair interconversion of
cis-1,3-cyclohexanedicarboxylic acids. These switchable moieties will be
incorporated into cyclophanes, polar lipids, and self assembling ion channels.
The allosteric molecular switches will be triggered by pH changes and/or metal
cations. Depending on the design of the supramolecular assembly, triggered-
release of drugs, transport of ions, and signal transduction will be achieved.
Dr. Smith's teaching plan will involve the development of a laboratory manual
for a new Biological Organic Chemistry course for biology majors and the
development of a new course in Organic Structure Elucidation. A workbook will be
prepared for the latter based on modern spectroscopic methods and directed
towards senior undergraduates. This study of allosteric supramolecular
assemblies will lead to the development of useful molecular devices such as
triggered-release liposomes for gene therapy, targeted carriers for drug
delivery and switchable ion channels with antibiotic potential. The involvement
of graduate and undergraduate students in the research will have a significant
educational value.