* 9501859
* Interface Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Hyatt Gibbs, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 270,227.00

9501859 Gibbs A combination of photoluminscence, level anticrossing, Optically
Detected Magnetic Resonance (ODMR), and Raman scattering techniques will be used
to provide a non-invasive study of semiconductor interfaces in technologically
important heterostructures. The studies will be conducted on type II
superlattices of gallium-arsenide/aluminium-arsenide as a function of growth
parameters (growth interruption times, substrate temperature, growth rates,
etc.) and growth techniques (conventional molecular-beam-epitaxy, migration
enhanced epitaxy, and alternate molecular-beam-epitaxy). The results will
elucidate the problem related to the electronic structures at gallium-arsenide-
aluminium-arsenide interfaces. Interfaces play an essential and often poorly
quantified role in many electronic and optoelectronic devices, this work, done
in collaboration with scientists from the Ioffe Physico-Technical Institute,
will provide new experimental information and theoretical interpretation. The
results will have significant impact on optical and optoelectronic technologies.
%%% Interfaces play an essential and often poorly quantified role in many
electronic devices, this research will provide new experimental information and
theoretical interpretation. The project will make use of unique combinations of
non invasive techniques such as photoluminescence, level anti crossing,
optically detected magnetic resonance and resonant Raman scattering, to study
the process of ligh emission at gallium-arsenide/aluminium-arsenide
semiconductor interfaces as a function of growth parameters and growth
techniques. The results will have significant impact on optical and
optoelectronic technologies. ****