* 9501712
* CAREER:  Design and Analysis of Efficient Graph Algorithms
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Monika Henzinger, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 03/31/1996
* USD 37,442.00

This CAREER project focuses on both research and educational goals. The
research component of this project addresses fundamental questions in
interactive systems such as programming environments or on-line access to travel
services. A key factor for the success of interactive systems lies in their
speed and, thus, in efficient algorithms for interactively handling requests.
One powerful paradigm in the design of efficient algorithms is to reduce the
amount of recomputation by storing essential information gathered during earlier
computational steps in a suitable data structure for later use. In interactive
situations an additional difficulty arises: The problem instance changes
incrementally, which requires dynamic data structures. While efficient dynamic
data structures are widely used, efficient dynamic data structures for graphs
are still in the research phase. This project includes the following research
goals: (1) Design of dynamic data structures which exploits recent progress in
using approximation and randomization in the design of graph algorithms; (2)
Applications of dynamic data structures to improve the efficiency of algorithms
for incrementally changing problems. These applications can be used on problems
which do not necessarily fit the dynamic framework. For example, using dynamic
techniques, a faster algorithm for the consensus tree problem is explored. This
algorithm has applications in computational biology and in the theory of
databases; (3) Implementation of dynamic data structures for graphs, which
extends the widely-used Library of Efficient Data Types and Algorithms (LEDA).
The Educational Component of this CAREER Grant includes the goals in
undergraduate and graduate education: (1) At the undergraduate level a basic
goal is to redesign the senior-level algorithms course to teach the use of
efficient advanced data structures by asking for implementations of algorithms
in homework assignments and projects using LEDA; (2) A second basic goal is to
promote the advancement of women engineers by: Counseling and mentoring female
students; Giving presentations to industry and students; Participating in
workshops which are sponsored by Cornell University's outreach program,
Expanding Your Horizons Program, for (female) middle school students.