* 9501730
* Fiber Electroflocking
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Victor Ashford, Energy Science Laboratories Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 02/28/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9501730 Ashford This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will develop electronic diagnostics and novel high-velocity electroflocking for
advanced materials fabrication. Low-velocity electroflocking is a common textile
technology used in the manufacture of pile fabrics such as nylon velour.
Electrostatics are used to position large numbers of short fibers ("flock") on
and partially into surfaces. To be useful in the production of engineered fiber
composite materials, electroflocking must be extended to enable - high packing
fractions - highly oriented flock that is strictly vertical - bulk processing of
fiber and whisker materials made of carbon, ceramic or metal Phase I
demonstrated the feasibility of strobe video diagnostics and higher velocity
electroflocker design. Phase II will continue hardware development, velocity
diagnostics, process modeling, fiber implantation development, and process scale
up. Commercial applications in reinforcements, interface conductance and optical
properties will be pursued. Novel oriented, non-woven fiber composite materials
having tailored thermal, dielectric and mechanical properties will result.
Potential applications exist for: reinforced materials, non-reflective coatings,
microchannel heat exchangers, high conductance ceramics, plasma-facing
materials, radar absorbing materials, and carbon electrodes. ***