* 9501550
* Ultrasonic Study of Hydrogen-Metal and Other Condensed      Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,02/29/2000
* Robert Leisure, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9501550 Leisure Ultrasonic methods will be used to study hydrogen isotope motion
in the rare-earth metals, and possibly other metals as well. The objectives of
these studies will be to elucidate the unusual dynamics of hydrogen in these
materials. Experiments will be performed on scandium, lutetium, and yttrium
single crystals containing hydrogen and/or deuterium. The experimental results
will be used to test modern theories of quantum diffusion in solids. The
movement of hydrogen ions between the lowest vibrational levels of nearby
interstitial sites in a metal may be regarded as a two-level system (TLS). The
usual theory assumes weak coupling of the TLS to the environment, so that the
quantum coherence of the TLS is not destroyed. It has been realized recently
that the usual theory is severely restricted because, in many cases the coupling
of the TLS to electrons in metals, or to phonons at higher temperatures in any
material, destroys the quantum coherence. Modern theories of dissipative quantum
tunneling are not restricted to weak coupling to the electrons or phonons. Novel
ultrasonic techniques will be applied to several other problems. Resonant
ultrasound spectroscopy will be used to measure the complete set of elastic
constants of materials undergoing phase transitions. With the construction of a
10 kbar pressure cell, the complete set of elastic constants of small samples
will be measured under pressure. %%% Sound waves in the frequency range 100 kHz
to 100 Mhz (ultrasound) will be used to study the motion of hydrogen ions in
several rare- earth metals. Hydrogen is highly mobile in these metals and moves
by hopping among the interstitial sites provided by the host metal lattice. The
hydrogen motion is affected by the interactions of the hydrogen ions with the
host metal atoms via tbe thermal vibrations and conduction electrons of th e
host metal. Hydrogen motion affects the speed and energy loss of the ultrasonic
waves which are the measured quantities. Low-temperature hydrogen motion cannot
be understood using classical physics, but requires a quantum-mechanical
description. The hydrogen moves between nearby interstitial sites by quantum-
mechanical tunneling, and the tunneling particle is strongly affected by
interactions with both the lattice thermal vibrations and conduction electrons.
The resulting motion is called dissipative quantum tunneling. It is an open
question as to whether the theory of dissipative quantum tunneling can
quantitatively describe the low temperature motion of hydrogen isotopes in
metals, and it is this question which the proposed study intends to answer. A
second part of the work will involve the use of novel ultrasonic techniques to
measure the elastic properties of materials undergoing a phase change and of
materials under pressure. The ability to measure simultaneously the complete set
of elastic constants at high pressure will be unique. ***