* 9501703
* CAREER:  Optoelectronic Materials and Device                Characterization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Susan Lord, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 06/30/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9501703 Lord The main educational goals of this project are to further the
development of courses in the area of optoelectronic materials and devices. This
includes: 1) Improving the required junior-level Electronics I and II sequence
by encompassing basic concepts of device physics and adding more laboratories on
optoelectronic devices. 2) Continuing the development of the lecture component
of an elective course on Optoelectronic Materials and Devices and adding a
laboratory to it. These courses address such topics as crystal growth, lasers,
photodetectors, and fiber optic systems. 3) Developing a new elective course on
Materials Characterization for electrical engineers and other interested
students. Techniques covered in this course would include atomic force
microscopy (AFM), photoluminescence (PL), and X-ray diffraction. The main
research goal of this project is to explore the growth of lattice mismatched
materials for long wavelength device operation. Low temperature compositionally-
graded buffer layers will be used in the molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) growth
of lattice mismatched materials to produce photodetectors at long wavelengths
such as 2 um where lattice-matched materials are not available. Different
profiles for accomplishing a compositionally-graded buffer layer including
linear composition grading, linear source temperature grading, and small step
grading will be compared. Such materials will be characterized using various
techniques including atomic force microscopy (AFM), photoluminescence (PL),
transmission, photocurrent, and X-ray diffraction. This research will contribute
significantly to the growth of a multitude of technologically interesting
materials on the relatively small number of available high quality substrates.
***