* 9501660
* CAREER:  Structural Properties and Irrelevant Attributes:   Implications for Learning and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Lisa Hellerstein, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 127,050.00

The research component of this project addresses fundamental questions in
computational learning theory and complexity. It also addresses specific
learning problems that are motivated by practical applications. Computational
learning theory provides a framework for the formal study of problems in machine
learning. The first goal of this project is to determine necessary and
sufficient conditions for learning, prove lower bounds, and design learning
algorithms. A focus is on query models of learning, which represent situations
in which a learner can ask questions of a teacher or expert, or perform
experiments. Emphasis is placed on the effect of forbidden projections on the
learnability of investigating Boolean function classes. The project also aims to
determine structural properties of languages, in order to prove complexity
results. It is directed particularly at resolving open questions concerning
automata with powers of both randomness and nondeterminism. Another major goal
of the project is to develop algorithms for learning in the presence of
irrelevant data. A particular problem is to develop PAC (Probably Approximately
Correct) algorithms that are robust in the presence of irrelevant attributes in
the following way: they depending on only a few more attributes then the concept
they are learning. This problem is theoretical but motivated by practical
applications, such as medical diagnosis. In these applications, output
hypotheses are used for future prediction (diagnosis). Determining the value of
an attribute is expensive perhaps involving a clinical test, and therefore it is
desirable to limit the number of attributes whose values must be determined. The
educational component of this project includes goals in both undergraduate and
graduate education. At the undergraduate level a basic goal is to make
theoretical courses accessible and intellectually exciting to a wide range of
students. Methods for achieving this goal include the following: preparing
handouts, introducing historical and biographical material, presenting
algorithms to students using algorithm animation, and using computer lab
`algorithm experiments.` At the graduate level, the project includes teaching a
graduate course in computational complexity theory with a significant research
component. In addition, a reading group in computational learning theory,
started last year, will be continued.