* 9501265
* Mathematical Sciences: Singular Continuous Spectum and      Localization Type Effects if Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Svetlana Jitomirskaya, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1997
* USD 40,000.00

9501265 Jitomirskaya This research involves Schrodinger operators with singular
continuous spectrum, localization type effects for Sahrodinger operators and for
quantum spin systems, percolation and contact processes in disordered
environments. The main objective of the research related to the singular
continuous spectrum is to study the relation between the spectral properties and
longtime behavior of the generalized eigenfunctions, in particular between
certain growth properties of generalized eigenfunctions, the Hausdorff dimension
of the spectral measure, and stability or instability of singular continuous
spectrum with respect to rank one perturbations. Another goal of the proposed
research is to study singular continuous spectrum for models where singular
spectrum may appear for the critical values (intervals) of the parameters,
serving as a transition from absolutely continuous to pure point spectrum. The
main objective of the research related to localization is to develop methods of
proving localization for ergodic families of operators (disordered systems) with
deterministic disorder. Also general uniformity properties of localization and
relation to quantum dynamics will be studied. The proposed research is centered
around the fundamental properties of disordered and singular systems that are
used in modeling of many micro and macro effects: from quantum localization to
earthquake theory. The proposed topics include studying properties of highly
disordered systems of Quantum ald Statistical Mechanics and of systems at
critical levels of disorder, that demonstrate highly unstable behavior. ***