* 9501504
* The Normal State and the Metal-Insulator Transition of      High Critical Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Peter Lindenfeld, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/29/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9501504 Lindenfeld The proposed research addresses the question to what extent
and in what manner the occurrence and properties of the superconducting state of
high-Tc materials are influenced by the continuing presence of properties
related to the magnetic order of the insulating state. The compounds may be
transformed from one state to the other by changes in the concentration of their
constituent elements, by the addition of other elements, or by the application
of high magnetic fields. Each of these paths will be followed, and a a variety
of properties will be measured, with emphasis on the magnetoresistance over a
wide range of temperatures. Aligned thin films of high-Tc materials will be
prepared at Rutgers by pulsed laser deposition. Initial emphasis will be placed
on lanthanum strontium copper oxide material that has led to the production of
thin films with transition temperatures and other properties that are of
particularly high quality. %%% The proposed research investigates the extent and
manner in which the occurrence and properties of the low-temperature
superconductivity of so-called "high-Tc" materials are influenced by the
presence of properties related to the magnetic characteristics of the insulating
form of the material. These compounds may be changed from insulator to
superconductor by changes in the concentration of their constituent elements, by
the addition of other elements, or by the application of strong magnetic fields.
Each of these approaches will be investigated, and a variety of properties will
be measured, with emphasis on the electrical resistance in the presence of an
applied magnetic field (magnetoresistance). Thin films of high-Tc compounds
prepared at Rutgers by pulsed laser deposition techniques will be studied, with
initial emphasis on lanthanum strontium copper oxide, a material whose
superconducting transition temperature and other propertie s are of particularly
high quality. ***