* 9501160
* Disorder and Correlations in Novel Two-Dimensional Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Philip Adams, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 191,000.00

9501160 Adams Experiments are proposed to study the transport properties of two
very different disordered two-dimensional systems. The first area of study is
the superconductor-insulator (S-I) transition in granular aluminum films by the
application of a parallel magnetic field to drive the transition. This
technique, which avoids complications associated with flux flow resistance, has
proven to be very useful in determining the relative roles of disorder,
Josephson coupling, and Coulomb blockade in the generic characteristics of
granular film S-I transitions. These studies are ultimately aimed at developing
a superconducting field- effect transistor in a granular system. In addition,
studies of the effects of disorder and electron-electron interactions in the
transport properties of electrons sprayed onto solid hydrogen are being made.
This is a model system from which one can obtain valuable insights into the
transport properties of more conventional disordered semiconducting systems. %%%
Experiments are proposed to study the electrical properties of two very
different disordered two-dimensional types of material. The first area of study
concerns the mechanisms involved in the destruction of superconductivity in very
thin aluminum films. This work will attempt to determine the relative roles of
disorder, superconductivity, and single electron charging effects in the generic
electrical characteristics of granular aluminum films at low temperatures. The
ultimate goal of these studies is the development of a superconducting field-
effect transistor using granular materials. In addition, studies of the effects
of disorder and electron-electron interactions in the electric transport
properties of electrons sprayed onto solid hydrogen are being made. This
material serves as a model from which one can obtain valuable insights into the
transport properties of more conventional semic onducting materials, such as
those used in the microelectronics industry. ***