* 9501761
* Scalable Static Techniques for Exhaustive and Incremental   Analyses of C Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1999
* Barbara Ryder, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/1999
* USD 356,869.00

In software systems, tools such as compilers, testers, and debuggers require
static semantic information, both to insure their correctness and to enhance
performance. Incremental update algorithms, which only calculate data flow
information affected by the program changes, avoiding total recalculation,
efficiently provide consistent documentation for a large evolving software
system. Previously, incremental techniques for Fortran-like languages and
exhaustive analyses for C programs have been developed. When these analyses of C
systems produce solutions, they are inexpensive and high quality; however, often
the analyses exhaust available resources without yielding a complete solution,
especially for larger programs (over 5,000-10,000 lines of code). This research
aims at expanding the applicability of exhaustive techniques to handle a wider
class of programs and developing incremental techniques for C systems. The work
is performed by an academic and industrial team, focusing on the development of
new analysis techniques and their testing on research industrial applications.
Goals are to: (i) scale the existing prototype to handle programs with 10,000 to
100,000 lines of code, (ii) develop techniques for analyzing modules without
analyzing the entire program (i.e., a separate compilation mode of
analysis),(iii) develop incremental techniques for interesting interprocedural
static analyses for languages with general purpose pointers, and (iv) enhance
the theoretical infrastructure for semantic analysis of modern programming
languages (i.e., C, C++, and Fortran 90). The research explores techniques for
varying the precision of alias information by designing new, flow-insensitive
methods, to augment our current flow-sensitive ones. Partitioning the program
variables allows for an aliasing solution with varying degrees of precision for
different sets of variables. Experiments are conducted varying the value of k
for these different sets, using k-limiting to handle dereferencing in recursive
structures. A hybrid incremental analysis algorithm is used as a basis for
incrementalizing side effect analysis of C programs.