* 9501032
* Microcalorimetric, Kinetic, and Spectroscopic Studies of    Multi-component Catalysts for Dehydrogenation of Light      Paraffins
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* James Dumesic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 02/28/1998
* USD 291,000.00

James Dumesic Abstract This study is an extension of an ongoing effort that has
shown that platinum and tin supported in potassium-exchanged zeolite-L exhibits
high activity and high selectivity for dehydrogenation of isobutane as well as
gmod stability under reaction conditions. This finding is examined to elucidate
the effects of alkali modification and support properties using reaction
kinetics studies, adsorptive microcalorimetric studies, and spectroscopic
studies. New catalysts formulated from the following four components will be
studied to define the effects involved: (1) a transition metal active as a
dehydrogenation catalyst (nickel and palladium will be tried as well as
platinum); (2) a modifying post-transition metal (germanium and lead as well as
tin); (3) an alkali-metal promotor (sodium, rubidium, and cesium as well as
potassium), and (4) a neutral microporous support. Microcalorimetric studies are
used to investigate the effects of catalyst modifiers on the interaction of
probe molecules with these multicomponent catalysts. Infrared, Mossbauer, and
nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic studies are conducted to illuminate the
chemical states of the catalyst components, to determine their dispersions, and
to probe the nature of adsorbates. Selective catalytic dehydrogenation of light
paraffins is the key enabling process for the production of the oxygenates
needed for the reformulation of gasoline as mandated by the Clean Air Act, and
is also important for the production of light olefins such as ethylene and
propylene. ***