* 9501494
* Approximation Algorithms in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Subhash Suri, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1999
* USD 105,300.00

This project investigates the topic of approximation algorithms in
computational geometry, with focus on the two problems: polyhedral surface
modeling and Euclidean shortest paths. In surface modeling, one tries to
construct a polyhedral model of a complex surface, based on a set of unordered
sample points. The complexity of constructing and manipulating the model depends
on its number of vertices and faces, and therefore a natural optimization goal
is to minimize these features in the model without exceeding a pre-specified
error tolerance. The project studies various surface-modeling problems within
the formal framework of computational geometry, and analyzes the issues of
computational complexity. The problem of computing shortest paths is central to
robotics and autonomous navigation. The research investigates approximation
algorithms for shortest path problems in two and three dimensions. In two
dimensions, the query version of the shortest path problem is studied:
preprocess a set of polygonal obstacles so that given two points p and q, the
distance between them can be determined in polylogarithmic time. In three
dimensions, the goal is to design simpler and more practical alternatives to the
exact algorithms for shortest paths among polyhedral solids or on a polyhedral
surface.