* 9501463
* GEM:  Data-Based Models of the Geospace Magnetic Field for  the GEM Project
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Nikolai Tsyganenko, Raytheon Technical Services Company
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 01/31/1999
* USD 171,409.00

It is proposed to develop a new data-based model of the Earth's magnetospheric
magnetic field. Modeling the geospace plasma environment is the essence of the
GEM project, and one of its special tasks is an accurate representation of the
distant geomagnetic configuration. The model will be specifically designed to
meet the needs of the Geospace Circulation Model providing the community with
flexible tools to handle magnetospheric current systems and quantitatively
represent their contributions to the total field. The proposed study will be
based on magnetometer data from many spacecraft, accumulated over tens of years,
and will use sophisticated mathematical methods, allowing a flexible
representation of the observed fields. The new model will provide a realistic
quantitative description of the geomagnetic field for a wide range of distances,
as a continuous analytical function of the position, Earth's dipole tilt angle,
solar wind characteristics, the polar cap area, and appropriate geomagnetic
disturbance indices. One of the principal goalq of this project will be to
represent not just the average magnetospheric configurations, but also its
large- scale time variations. Specifically, it is intended to quantitatively
model such phenomena as (i) compression/expansion of the magnetopause in
response to solar wind gusts, (ii) gradual re-distribution of the magnetic flux
during the substorm growth phase, induced by the interplanetary magnetic field,
and (iii) formation of the substorm electric current system leading to the
collapse of the previously stretched configuration. The main product of this
effort will be computer codes for deriving the time-varying model magnetic
field.