* 9502661
* CAREER: Efficient Communication Primatives and Realistic Models for Modern Multiprocessors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Klaus Schauser, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 06/30/1998
* USD 140,000.00

Efficient communication is central to parallel computing. Modern multiprocessors
obtain high bandwidth, low latency user-level communication through special
hardware support, often implemented as a dedicated communications co-processor.
Future parallel machines, including high performance networks of workstations,
will be built using communications co-processors. The goal of this research is
to study how the presence of a dedicated co-processor affects the performance of
interprocesor communication in modern parallel machines. In particular, the
project focuses on two aspects. First, it studies the impact of communications
co-processors on the performance of various communication primitives and
determines the architectural requirements for implementing efficiently many-to-
one communication such as active messages. Second, it studies how the
communications so-processor can be captured by a theoretical performance model.
The goal is to derive a performance model that is realistic enough to
characterize machines and accurately predict performance, but still simple
enough to be used in designing and analyzing parallel algorithms. To study these
questions, the project takes a vertical approach, spanning theory, applications,
languages, systems software, and architecture. The project constructs a complete
system which allows taking an in-depth look at how efficient communication
affects all of these layers. The project leverages off the work on active
messages, the parallel languages Split-C, and the LogP performance model,
developed at UC Berkeley. The main experimental platform is a 64-processor Meiko
CS-2, which the UCSB Computer Science Department acquired through an NSF CISE
infrastructure grant. The CS-2 reflects, a modern high- performance network of
workstation enthronement equipped with communications co-pocessors, making it
extremely well suited for the study. The principal investigator has already
implemented active mess ages and Split-C on the CS-2. The project develops a
realistic model for parallel computation which captures the capabilities of
communication co-processors. To create a framework to characterize communication
and measure its performance, the project implements a simulator based on this
model as well as a Split-C profiler. This framework is used to fine-tune
applications and for architectural studies. Besides answering these important
research questions, the work also provides infrastructure which is used for
teaching purposes as well as by other researchers. The principal investigator
ismstriving for a well balanced career as a professor in computer science,
combining teaching and research. His areas of interest are parallel computing,
computer architecture, languages, and compilers. His educational objective is to
teach students in these fields, to get them excited about computer science and
engineering, and to prepare them for a successful professional career.