* 9502488
* SBIR Phase II: A Multi-Point Array Laser Doppler Velocimeter
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* John Smith, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1997
* USD 299,933.00

AGRAWAL 9502488 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase-II project is
directed at the completion of a research/commercial prototype multi-point laser
velocimeter for use in laboratories and also for use unattended in the ocean.
Measurements of velocity at a single point are seldom sufficient in nature; when
only single-point velocimeters are available, profiling is employed to obtain
information regarding structures of a flow-field. Profile information has
invariably been derived by mechanical traversing of a sensor 'head'. Not only is
synopticity sacrificed in this manner, causing loss of order in structure data,
but also all information on spatial structures, coherent motions, and space-time
scales is lost. Driven by needs in his research, the P.I. has devised a multi-
point velocimetry system which forms several sample volumes in the flow field
simultaneously. Signals from these sample volumes are separately carried to
photo-detectors. A multi-signal processor is then required to convert the signal
to simultaneous- multi-point velocity data, retaining information on order
inherent in the flow, and all information for deriving space-time scales of
fluid structures. In Phase-I, we have successfully demonstrated the principle of
the method by constructing a single-velocity- component multi-point velocimeter,
as first explained in the Phase- I proposal. In Phase-II, we shall expand
capabilities to a 2-axis multi-point velocimeter, with direction discrimination
optics and a complete multi-signal processor. The instrument will be tested in
the laboratory and the field.