* 9502540
* CAREER: Geometric Methods for Numerical Computing: Graph    Partitioning, Mesh Generation and Parallel Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/1995,11/03/1998
* Shanghua Teng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 11/03/1998
* USD 129,935.00

This research focuses on the development of geometric methods and their
numerical applications. The project involves the design of efficient algorithms
for a variety of fundamental problems in parallel geometric and numerical
computing and the implementation of these algorithms on both modern
supercomputers and workstation clusters. The research has two principal
directions. Geometric Methods for Unstructured Mesh Partitioning and Generation:
The main theoretical and software question is how to make use of underlying
geometric structures and numerical conditions to generate an unstructured finite
element mesh and partition it for subsequent parallel numerical simulations.
Parallel Numerical and Applications: The primary goal is to apply geometric mesh
techniques to the parallel solution of large sparse linear systems, to adaptive
and hierarchical computations, to distributed COSMOS circuit simulation, and to
dynamic load balancing for parallel N-body simulations. The companion education
plan is to design and teach courses in computer science, in the newly introduced
Scientific Computation Program at the University of Minnesota, and in the areas
that bridge the two. It involves the development of research programs and
projects for graduate and undergraduate students who are interested in
interdisciplinary research. It also involves the development of summer
professional programs for professionals from industry companies, government
research labs, and other universities, to initiate the collaboration between
universities and industry.