* 9502413
* CAREER: Low Energy Ion Beam Modification of Magnetic Film Structures
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Carlos Gutierrez, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9502413 Gutierrez This CAREER project will explore the influence of impinging
low-energy ion beams (down to ~50 electron-volts) on various polycrystalline and
single-crystalline transition metal magnetic film structures (iron, cobalt,
nickel and their various alloys and nitrides) deposited on silicon and gallium-
arsenide substrates. Different ion beam sputtering parameters such as substrate
temperature, processing gas environment, ion beam angle of incidence, and ion
beam energy will be varied in an effort to determine their influences on
magnetic film characteristics. The physics of the ion beam-induced property
modifications will be investigated, and this knowledge will be applied towards
the controlled modification of technologically important magnetic properties
such as saturation magnetization, coercivity, anisotropy, and magnetoresistance
in more complicated layered magnetic film structures. The research program
includes relevant collaborative efforts with Southwest Research Institute, the
Naval Research Laboratory, the University of Texas at Austin, and the University
of Missouri (Neutron Reactor Facility), and Commonwealth Scientific, Inc. %%%
Magnetic film materials are lucrative structures for device implementation in
the magnetic sensor, microwave/fiber-optic communication and magnetic storage
industries. These materials have helped spur the rapid growth of the magnetic
technology industry to its present ~$80 billion market. This CAREER research
project will explore the influence of impinging low-energy ion beams on various
transition metal ferromagnetic materials (iron, cobalt, nickel and their various
alloys and nitrides) during film deposition. In particular, the ion beam-
controlled modification of film saturation magnetization, magnetic anisotropy,
coercivity, and giant magnetoresistance will be investigated. All film materi
als will be processed on semiconductor substrates (silicon and gallium arsenide)
to promote their possible implementation in devices. This research project will
be operated in close cooperation with the innovative Materials Physics
undergraduate curriculum program at Southwest Texas State University. ***