* 9502034
* CAREER:  Research on input-output methods for nonlinear     control design; Education into the next century
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Andrew Teel, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1999
* USD 170,000.00

9502034 Teel The research objective of this proposal is to further the
understanding of the dynamics and control of highly nonlinear systems. The
mathematical methods emphasized will be those that seek to characterize
nonlinear systems in terms of their input- output behavior. This viewpoint is
flexible and can accommodate real world uncertainties and complicated nonlinear
behavior. Recent breakthroughs regarding control of systems with hard limits on
the magnitude and permissible rates of control signals have developed by taking
this view. Part of the research plan is to show that the algorithms which have
been developed for the control saturation problem are applicable to a wide
variety of problems. The significance of the control algorithms will be enhanced
by investigating optimization strategies and rapprochement with more standard
control algorithms. Indeed, these algorithms may provide a link between standard
control and more recent "intelligent" control. The second part of the research
plan seeks to develop both conceptual insight into and computational algorithms
for nonlinear control by taking a general input-output point of view. It is
believed that this will lead to results analogous to many fundamental results
that are known for linear systems: a parameterization of stabilizing
compensators, optimization over such parameters, simultaneous stabilization,
etc. Software development will be a means of transporting the research
developments of this proposal to the industrial sector. The educational
objective of this research is to facilitate a learning environment which is
tailored to the unique aspects of today's engineering student. The premise is
that today's students are very different from those that preceded them, with
regard to perspectives, values and expectation. Accordingly, changes in teaching
styles and perspectives must be investigated. The educational plan calls for
critical self-and outside- examination of teachin g styles and methods.
Partially, this will occur within the structure of a faculty development program
at the University. In addition, the plan calls for a thorough re- examination of
laboratory teaching methods, especially in the subfield of control. A
consideration of visualization techniques as a teaching tool is emphasized.
Finally, a teaching approach that motivates the student through the history of
and vision for electrical engineering and control is recommended. In this
regard, mentoring is seen to be a crucial part of the education process. ***