* 9502431
* CAREER:  Property Tailoring and Reliability in Ferroic      Film Actuators
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,03/31/2001
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 03/31/2001
* USD 381,500.00

9502431 Trolier-McKinstry This research addresses unresolved fundamental issues
in the behavior of ferroic films, including the manner in which domain walls
contribute to film properties, correlation between microstructure and
electromechanical anisotropy, the role of thin film stress states, and the
reliability of actuator devices. Laser ablation will be utilized to prepare
modified lead zirconate and lead titanium zirconate films in the range of 0.1 -
10 micrometer thickness. Initial emphasis will be placed on developing
deposition conditions for thick films on planar and non-planar substrates. Of
especial interest in the research is the development of understanding how film
microstructure and stress distribution modulate the electromechanical anisotropy
of ferroelectric films. The influence on the material properties of temperature,
bias electric field, film stress, and stress in the underlying electrode
material will be evaluated and utilized to develop a model for the way in which
ferroelastic domains interact with two-dimensional stresses. These studies will
be coupled with a determination of the principal degradation and failure
mechanisms in thin and thick film actuators. Special emphasis will be placed on
determining the role of device geometry in stress concentration and crack
generation. Finite element modeling will be used to calculate the stresses
present in several different actuator structures. Guidelines for acceptable
stress concentrations in film-based actuators will be developed. As a subsidiary
component of this research, functionally graded films will be investigated. %%%
The understanding of fundamental features of thin film ferroelectric materials
will be of scientific and technological significance. Additionally, there is a
strong educational segment to this project which stresses development of new
courses and a focus on mentoring graduate, undergraduate, and pre-college
students. The principal investigator will develop two new courses in ''Optical
Propert ies and Optical Characterization of Materials" and ''Properties of
Electronic and Photonic Materials." The cornerstone of the proposed mentoring
program for undergraduate and pre-college students is integration of
participants into ongoing research projects. The educational activities planned
also include course materials development for faculty at four year colleges
currently without materials science courses. ***