* 9502790
* CAREER: Development of Probabilistic Approaches for Security Assessment in Operating Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* James McCalley, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* James Momoh
* 06/30/2001
* USD 290,000.00

9502790 McCalley The research objective of this project is to develop a risk-
based approach to security assessment in electric power systems operations. This
objective is motivated by a perception that today's deterministic approach to
security assessment often results in costly operating restrictions that are not
justified by the corresponding low level of risk. Use of a risk-based approach
to security assessment is therefore attractive because it offers the potential
to allow operating practices that more equitable balance the tradeoff between
cost and security, resulting in substantial savings from use of less costly
energy resources. Development of this risk-based approach is particularly
attractive in today's competitive environment because, unlike the traditional
environment of the regulated, fixed rate of return, vertically integrated
utility, the competitive environment creates incentives for the multiplicity of
players to take risks in order to maximize their profits. Unmanaged risk-taking
may very well lead to degradation of security levels; therefore a carefully
framed risk-based security assessment approach would allow more structured risk
management. The focus of the work will be to create countours of maximum risk in
the space of critical predisturbance parameters used to characterize system
performance following a contingency. Particular emphasis will be placed on
security constraints associated with dynamic system performance. This work will
be carried out in a close cooperation with engineers from industry. ***