* 9502470
* Concrete - Encased Steel Joist Composite Structures for     Seismic Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Subhash Goel, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/1999
* USD 188,292.00

9502470 Goel The primary objective of this project is to develop an innovative
composite structural system utilizing open web steel joists encased in advanced
fiber reinforced concrete materials for improved economy and performance for
seismic resistance. Analysis and practical design procedures will be formulated.
It is widely recognized that innovative uses of two or more different materials
generally leads to more efficient systems for resisting seismic forces. Recent
studies show that structural systems consisting of composite members made of
open web steel joists encased in fiber reinforced concrete hold great promise,
especially for seismic resistance. In such members composite action is achieved
through interlocking effect between concrete and open web steel joists without
shear connectors, and the use of fiber reinforced concrete eliminates the need
for conventional reinforcement which is quite labor intensive. Connections are
made through steel plates sticking out of the encasing concrete. Therefore, this
system can be suitable for cast-in-place as well as precast concrete. The
research will begin by testing half to one-third scale beam-column specimens
under combined axial load and reversed cyclic bending. The test results will be
used to develop analytical models for the member behavior. This work will be
followed by analytical studies of the selected theme structure. The last phase
will include testing and analytical work on critical subassemblages taken from
the theme structure. The focus will be on study of beam-to-column connections
behavior and development of recommendations for connection details in order to
achieve desired performance. This is a project supported under the year 1
program of the Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS) solicitation NSF 94-154. ***