* 9502671
* Development of Techniques for Neural Network Transfer, as   Applied to Hazardous Waste Characterization
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Lorien Pratt, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 07/31/1996
* USD 57,098.00

IRI-9502671 Pratt, Lorien Colorado School of Mines CAREER: Development of
Techniques for Neural Network Transfer, as Applied to Hazardous Waste
Characterization. In recent years, neural network systems have been used to
provide solutions to a variety of problems, from speech recognition and
manufacturing control to forensic hair analysis and medical diagnosis. This
project uses an application to a problem of national interest -- remediation of
hazardous waste sites -- as the focus of a program of research with broader
implications. Networks built as part of this project are being used to aid in
the interpretation of data supplied by noninvasive sensors such as magnetic
devices and ground penetrating radar, in order to characterize the location and
nature of buried waste before it is dug up or treated in situ. Students at both
the undergraduate and graduate levels are involved in this project, which serves
both educational and research purposes. Within the work on waste remediation,
research is being undertaken on transfer of knowledge. Neural networks are
automatically constructed ("trained") from a set of data representing desired
system input and output, and neural network transfer addresses the question of
how a network trained for one task can be used to aid in training a network for
a new but related task. Without transfer, training times for a new task can be
lengthy, and a large amount of training data can be required. With transfer,
both of these factors can be reduced. Transfer applied to the hazardous waste
remediation problem addresses important practical concerns in that type of
application. For example, a network trained to interpret sensors at one site can
be used to facilitate training for a network with different geophysical
characteristics. Also, a network trained on data generated from a synthetic
sensor model can be used to facilitate training on field data.