* 9502563
* Two-Level Failure Recovery Schemes for Multicomputers and   Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Nitin Vaidya, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 85,978.00

The thrust of this proposal is on backward recovery schemes for multicomputer
and distributed systems. The proposed research is based on a two-level approach
that uses a low overhead recovery scheme to tolerate more probable failures,
while the less probable failures may be tolerated with a higher overhead. By
minimizing the overhead for the more frequently occurring failure scenarios, the
proposed two-level approach will achieve lower average performance overheads as
compared to existing recovery schemes. Objectives of the proposed research are
1) the design of efficient two-level recovery schemes, 2) the development of
optimization techniques for two-level recovery schemes to determine various
parameters (e.g., checkpointing frequency) that willminimize the average
performance overhead fo the recovery scheme, 3) the implementation of two level
recovery schemes on a 64 processor nCUBE-2 multicomputer and on a network of
workstations, and 4) the experimental evaluation of two-level recovery schemes
to demonstrate their ability to achieve better performance than the existing
recovery schemes. The goal of the proposed education activities is to
incorporate the results of recent research into undergraduate and graduate
curriculum. specific objectives fo the education plan are 1) the development of
an undergraduate introductory course on fault tolerance and a graduate course on
fault tolerance techniques for parallel and distrubuted systems, 2) the
development of an associated undergraduate research effort, and 3) the
development of a software toolkit to facilitate experimetns in the proposed
courses.