* 9502268
* The Distribution of Optically-Obscured Galaxies, and        Asymmetric Isolated Galaxies
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Patricia Henning, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* Susan M. Simkin
* 09/30/2000
* USD 184,378.00

ABSTRACT 9502268 Henning, Patricia This award is made under the auspices of the
NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program. As a CAREER awardee the
investigator is expected to pursue an active education plan in addition to her
scientific research project. About one quarter of the extragalactic sky is
blocked by the dust and high star density of our Galaxy, the Milky Way. Several
superclusters of galaxies disappear into this so-called Zone of Avoidance (ZOA),
so their true sizes and possible connections with visible structures are not
known. Dr. Henning will conduct a survey of the galaxies in the northern ZOA
using the Dwingeloo telescope in the Netherlands to observe the 21-cm wavelength
spectral line of neutral atomic hydrogen. This line is not affected by the
foreground dust, and the distribution of the galaxies can be determined. The
results of the survey will be used as a tracer of large-scale structure in the
Universe, to investigate the space density of dwarf type galaxies, and to
constrain models of their formation. In the southern hemisphere, specifically
selected galaxies will be observed, also at 21-cm wavelength, using the Parkes
telescope in Australia. In her education component, Dr. Henning will design
innovative educational programs in conjunction with the Astronomy Science Center
being formed by a consortium led by the University of New Mexico, with the goal
of true combination of education and research. *** ??