* 9502920
* Scanning Tunneling Microscopy and Ultralow Temperature      Transport Measurements on Quench Condensed Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,02/28/1999
* James Valles, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 275,000.00

9502920 Valles This experimental project involves low temperature scanning
tunneling microscopy and electron magneto-transport and tunneling measurements
on strongly disordered ultrathin films. The experiments will investigate the
physical effects behind the profound and sometimes spectacular changes (e.g.,the
superconductor to insulator transition) that occur in electronic systems in the
strongly disordered limit in two dimensions. The ultra-thin metal films are
fabricated in situ by thermal evaporation of the constituent metals onto
substrates held at temperatures near 4 K. Experiments with the scanning
tunneling microscope will measure the atomic surface structure as well as
variations in their local tunneling density of states. The experiments are of
interest from fundamental viewpoints, as well as technical viewpoints, as the
results will increase our understanding of electronic conduction processes in
metals. %%% This experimental project involves low temperature scanning
tunneling microscopy and electron magneto-transport and tunneling measurements
on strongly disordered ultrathin films. The experiments will investigate the
physical effects behind the profound and sometimes spectacular changes (e.g.,
the superconductor to insulator transition) that occur in electronic systems in
the strongly disordered limit in two dimensions. The ultra-thin metal films are
fabricated in situ by thermal evaporation of the constituent metals onto
substrates held at temperatures near 4 K. Experiments with the scanning
tunneling microscope will measure the atomic surface structure as well as
variations in their local tunneling density of states. The experiments are of
interest from fundamental viewpoints, as well as technical viewpoints, as the
results will increase our understanding of electronic conduction processes in
metals. ***