* 9502885
* Theory and Application of Dispersive Multirate Filterbacks  and Wavelets
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Gregory Wornell, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 12/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

The research component of this faculty early career development proposal is
aimed at developing a large, important, and fundamentally new class of multirate
filter banks, systems and wavelets. Traditional developments of this topic
within the signal processing community have been strongly motivated by
applications involving signal analysis. In strong contrast, the research in this
proposal is motivated by some important contemporary applications involving
signal synthesis. In particular, multirate filterbank theory, wavelet theory
have a potentially important and largely unexplored role to play in the
synthesis of waveforms for a wide variety of broadband communications and remove
sensing applications. In these applications, fundamentally different types of
design criteria and constraints come into play in developing suitable multirate
structures. Foremost among the important differences is that while for most
applications involving signal analysis strong localization in time and frequency
is emphasized, the kinds of applications that will be the focus of this work
will require filterbanks and wavelets whose energy is widely dispersed in both
time and frequency. We propose to explore several classes of orthogonal and
biorthogonal dispersive, "pseudorandom" filterbanks and wavelet bases. Several
specific application areas are to be pursued under the proposed research. One
that will be emphasized will be digital wireless communications. Here dispersive
filterbanks and wavelets are expected to lead to new code-division multiplexing
systems that more efficiently combat fading, jamming, and other forms of
multiple-access interference. Furthermore, we plan to implement the new wireless
modems we develop in a DSP-based, real-time 900 Mz indoor wireless system
testbed recently developed by the principal investigator as part of his wireless
communications laboratory. The educational component of the proposal encompasses
significant curriculum development at b oth the undergraduate and graduate
levels, and a strong investment in the mentoring of graduate students. One
teaching initiative involves the development of a recently introduced unified
new undergraduate subject. This subject introduces undergraduate students, for
the first time, to the fundamentals of communications, control and signal
processing from a common perspective and which builds on a foundation of basic
signals, systems, and probability. The second major teaching initiative involves
the re-engineering of the fundamental graduate subject on stochastic processes,
detection and estimation at MIT. In this subject, the object is to redevelop a
syllabus, course notes, Matlab computer exercises, and homework problems that
emphasize modern, unified perspective to random and deterministic signals and
the associated signal processing algorithms. These curricular changes will also
allow a number of advanced topics, including multiscale and nonlinear signal
processing, to be incorporated. A final component of the education plan involves
continued active mentoring of a diverse group of graduate students and nurturing
their intellectual, professional, and personal growth. Ultimately, of course,
this interaction is one of the most gratifying and important aspects of a
academic career.