* 9502239
* CAREER:  Improvement, Simplification, and Clustering        in Polygonal Datasets for Virtual Reality Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Amitabh Varshney, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,493.00

The objective of the research being done if to devise a set of techniques and
tools that will allow improvement, simplification, and clustering of polygonal
datasets within a unified framework. This is an important first step towards the
long-term objective of formulating techniques to enable interactive
visualization of complex virtual environments. The techniques being used to
solve the above problems are al based on the notion of `rolling a sphere`,
formalized by the concept of a-hulls. For improving the existing polygonal
datasets that have cracks and small missing polygons the intuitive idea is to
roll a sphere that will fill-up these minor holes.Such flaws are common in
present-day datasets and no general techniques are currently known that will
handle them in a unified manner. Simplification of polygonal objects will be
achieved through simplifying the genus of the objects. This provides a natural
extension to, and is orthogonal to, the existing techniques for creating
topology-preserving multiresolution hierarchies. The research being done will
remove topological features that are less than a user-specificable size.
Clustering of polygonal datasets is of considerable use in devising efficient
methods for solving global illumination and visibility preprocessing for
interactive walkthroughs of synthetic environments. This research will
accomplish clustering of polygons in a dataset by using sufficiently large
rolling spheres. The goal of the educational activities being done is to expand
the current entertainment-oriented view of virtual reality by presenting it as a
useful tool for serious tasks in engineering, science, and medicine. The
activities include attempts to reach out to the high-school students,
undergraduates, and the community at large through slide-and-video shows and
hands-on demonstrations of the scientific applications of virtual environments.
The activities also include the creation and development of a new graduate-level
course on virtual environments. The tools and techniques developed for the
research component of this project will be used to impart a hands-on education
to inculcate a feel for application-oriented research and development work in
virtual environments.