* 9502614
* CAREER:  Wireless Access Control for Optimal Spectral       Efficiency
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,05/31/2002
* Leandros Tassiulas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Venugopal V. Veeravalli
* 05/31/2002
* USD 140,000.00

NCR-9502614 Leandros Tassiulas Wireless will be a method of choice for
accessing the future broadband integrated services network. In wireless access
the main problem is to utilize efficiently the limited spectrum capacity in
order to accommodate the large traffic demands that will be generated by
Personal Communication Services (PCS). In the digital network there will be
enhanced flexibility in signaling and control to support sophisticated schemes.
Dynamic resource allocation methods should be employed for network control in
order to achieve maximum utilization of the system. The fundamental problem of
joint base-station assignment, power control and channel allocation will be
investigated here. Such a problem arises during hand-off, when the configuration
of the system changes, as well as at the time of a new connection. Furthermore
it should be solved in a dynamic fashion during the operation of the system and
for system configurations that change randomly. The problem is formulated as an
optimization problem that involves continuous and discrete components. The
traffic capacity is defined as a quantity that reflects the maximum number of
mobiles per channel if the optimal allocation algorithm is employed. Preliminary
results for two base stations are reported. The study of the general problem
with multiple base stations is proposed. Several approaches are briefly
discussed including deterministic models for the limiting traffic capacity,
randomized search algorithms including simulated annealing and genetic
algorithms, and reuse partitioning. ******* Darleen Fisher Program Manager
Networking and Communications Research Program (703) 306-1949 (703) 306-0621
(FAX)