* 9502757
* The Role of Polymeric Adhesive Films in Corrosion Processes at the Solid/Solution Interface: A Surface Plasmon Resonance Study
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Rosina Georgiadis, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 05/31/1997
* USD 208,500.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, addresses the role of adhesive
exopolymer films in biocorrosion processes at metal/solution interfaces. During
the tenure of this three-year continuing grant, Professor Georgiadis and her
students at the George Washington University will apply a suite of surface
plasmon assisted spectroscopies and complementary optical spectroscopic and
electrochemical techniques to the characterization of the adsorption and surface
reactions of model species relevant to the initial stages of exopolymer mediated
corrosion of metals, particularly copper, under ecologically relevant
conditions. This research is designed to address three broad goals: (1) to
understand the physics and chemistry of the metal/solution interface in the
initial stages of biocorrosion; (2) to describe the mechanisms of the surface
corrosion reactions; and (3) to explore the role of surface energy, surface
composition, and surface roughness on exopolymer adsorption, exopolymer
adhesion, and metal corrosion rate. Also during this grant period, Professor
Georgiadis will implement an interdisciplinary educational development plan that
includes relevant new and revised course offerings, an increased role for
research in undergraduate education, and a focus on increased broad awareness of
the central importance of chemistry and chemical concepts. An understanding of
the molecular basis of biocorrosion of metals is critical to technologically
important areas such as materials, manufacturing, and civil infrastructure. In
this CAREER research project, surface plasmon assisted spectroscopies and
complementary experimental techniques will be used to gain molecular level
insights into this scientifically complex and economically important area. The
education development aspects of this CAREER project should enrich and broaden
significantly the chemistry educational experience of George Washington Un
iversity undergraduate and graduate students.