* 9502090
* CAREER: Environmentally Benign Chemical Processing: A Theme for the Future of Chemical Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Julie d'Itri, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 05/31/1999
* USD 330,000.00

ABSTRACT Julie d'Itri The focus of the research is the development of new
processes for conversion of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) to environmentally more
benign hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) by catalytic hydrodechlorination. The initial
model under investigation is the hydrodechlorination of 1,1-
dichlorotetrafluoroethane catalyzed by palladium supported on various materials.
Emphasis is placed on elucidating the factors that dictate selectivity towards
1,1,1,2- tetrafluoroethane. Quantitative rate measurements provide fundamental
kinetics parameters such as heat of adsorption, activation energy, and intrinsic
rate constant. The influences of metal particle size, metal-support
interactions, and support acidity on each of these parameters are determined.
The mechanism and transition state are examined using isotopic transient
experiments and linear free energy relationships. The results of this research
are important for the destruction of chlorofluorocarbons in industrial wastes,
for control of CFC emissions, and for the production of substitute refrigerants,
cleaning agents, blowing agents, and propellants that are more tolerable
environmentally. Curricular materials in the forms of both classroom courses and
laboratory experiments are developed in tandem with this research. Students at
both undergraduate and graduate levels are exposed the concepts and goals of
environmentally benign chemical processing. The intent is to instill new
standards of engineering practice that include recognition of environmental
concerns and needs.