* 9502335
* Faculty Early Career Development:  SiC-Al-Si Composites by  Rapid and Pressureless Infiltration in Air
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Xiao Yang, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Toney
* 07/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9502335 Yang Silicon Carbide (SiC)-reinforced Aluminum (Al) alloys are
attracting considerable attentions from many industries including automotive and
electronic industries. However, their widespread applications are limited by
their high cost. The objective of this proposed research is to study a
potentially low-cost fabrication method recently invented in the Principal
Investigator's (PI) laboratory. Using this method, a near-net-shape composite of
SiC-Al-Si can be produced by simply dipping a porous SiC preform into an Al-Si
alloy in an open-air atmosphere, without needing vacuum or external pressure. To
understand the infiltration mechanism, a systematic study of the infiltration
conditions will be conducted. These conditions include the infiltration
temperature, alloy compositions, atmospheres inside the SiC preform and outside
the aluminum alloy bath, the binders, and structures of the SiC preforms.
Specific experiments will be carried out to study the infiltration mechanisms.
The structures and properties of the composites and their relationships with the
infiltration conditions will be studied. Mathematical and computer modeling of
the thermodynamics and kinetics of infiltration's will also be conducted.
Finally the infiltration conditions will be optimized. Completion of this
research project should provide valuable information for understanding this
unique infiltration phenomenon. It will also improve our understanding of the
general phenomenon of pressureless infiltration of molten metals into porous
ceramic preforms. At the education front, one problem facing our classroom
instruction is that the students are not offered enough opportunities to relate
the basic theories from the textbooks to the real problems encountered in the
industries. To remedy this problem, more real problems related to materials
manufacturing and processing will be taken into the classrooms. A cross-
disciplinary course on materials manufacturing and processing for undergraduate
students from various engineering programs is the expected contribution to
education innovation. Integrating industrial problems into manufacturing
education can prepare the students for a better understanding of the relevance
of their basic science and engineering courses. Consequently, these future
manufacturing engineers gain the practical knowledge necessary to effectively
contribute to engineering solutions to real world problems in their future jobs.
The research results of a simple, innovative process to infiltrate aluminum
alloy into Silicon Carbide preform has the potential to bring down the
manufacturing cost of this metal matrix composite significantly. As a result,
cast iron may be replaced by a stronger and lighter composite (especially
important for transportation industry) heralding an era of a much broader
application of composites.