* 9502670
* CAREER: Optical Component Technologies Based on Ultraviolet Photosensitivity in Glass
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1995,01/31/2000
* Turan Erdogan, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 01/31/2000
* USD 294,826.00

9502670 Erdogan Glass optical components based on ultraviolet photosensitivity
have tremendous technological potential. In particular, ultraviolet-induced
fiber gratings have charged the fields of optical communications and fiber-based
sensors. A significant component of the research proposed here will impact the
fiber-granting field. Novel devices based on asymmetric gratings will be
investigated to provide new functionality to fiber-optic systems. Along the way
certain f fundamental fabrication issues that should impact feasibility of
manufacturing this technology will be explored. The research will tackle issues
pertaining to sources based on fiber gratings, including hybrid semiconductor-
fiber lasers, in which stability of these sources is a limiting problem, and
all-fiber grating-based lasers for which polarization problems presently limit
applicability. The intention of the proposed research program is to
significantly increase the domestic research effort on this important
technology, as the majority or work in this area is currently conducted outside
of the U.S. Another major component of the research program will emphasize
translating the technology of glass ultraviolet photosensitivity to non-fiber
applications. Certain optical components will be investigated toward this end,
including diffractive optics, tailored mirrors, and ultra-narrowband filters.
The education aspect of the proposed project will be directed both toward
teaching and academic enrichment. Both graduate and undergraduate teaching in
the area of optics are planned. A new graduate-level course is already being
developed that covers optoelectronic device technologies. The course is directed
toward graduate students conducting research in this area, an is intended to
strengthen more applied research efforts at The Institute of Optics. A
significant portion of the educational effort will be expended on the
improvement of the undergraduate degree program in optics at the University of
Rochester.