* 9502327
* CAREER:  Modeling and Control of Chaotic Chemical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1995,04/30/2000
* Helen Qammar, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2000
* USD 285,000.00

Qammar 9502327 This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant which
includes both a research as well as an educational component. Research: The
objectives of this research are to investigate how improved controller designs
may allow a process to operate in a chaotic region which could correspond to the
economic optimum, thus limiting overdesign and inefficient operation. Numerical
simulations using ideal chaotic systems where the underlying properties of the
chaos are known will be performed on conventional feedback controllers to
identify the effect of chaos on controller performance. One measure of the
performance will be the basin of attraction for the desired reference state. A
realistic model of an industrial-scale, chaotic polymerization reaction and
another model of chemical passivation of metals in solution will be applied to a
number of existing control algorithms including PID, exact-linearization,
dynamic matrix control, an adaptive nonlinear predictive controller, and
nonlinear inferential control. In addition, an extensive study of nonlinear
model predictive control will be performed to determine whether models, horizon
times, or observers developed from chaos theory perform better than the generic
choices. Research will be performed on the applicability of NARMAX models and an
ODE synchronization modeling technique to noisy, experimental data sets and a
data-set describing a non-stationary process. This work will be done in
collaboration with researchers at Oak Ridge National Laboratory and NASA Lewis
Research Center. The usefulness of the resulting models for process control will
also be investigated. Education: High student attrition is a problem at many
universities, especially for women and minorities in engineering. As part of her
educational career plan, the PI intends to develop and implement a number of new
courses. A multi-level design course for undergraduate chemical engineers will
be developed. A typical design group will consist of st udents from freshmen to
seniors. Each level will be responsible for that aspect of the project in which
they have completed coursework. The objective of the course is to minimize
student attrition, especially women and minority students. She also plans to
develop a senior level project in advanced computational methods. There are
three main objectives in the course, to encourage computationally adept ChE
students to pursue an advanced degree, to provide these students some experience
in teaching via example problem development, and to reinforce the relationship
between computational techniques and their application to fundamental chemical
engineering concepts. To support her research efforts, graduate courses in
advanced process control, advanced computational methods, and the analysis,
identification, and modeling of chaotic data will also be developed.