* 9502870
* Dissertation Enhancement in Japan:  Fabrication and         Characterization of a Lipid-Attracting Elastomeric Semi-IPN for Use in Physiologic Bearing Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Jerome Gilbert, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 12/31/1995
* USD 9,100.00

9502870 Gilbert This dissertation enhancement award supports a 3-month research
visit in Japan for Philip Williams, a graduate student at Mississippi State
University, who works under the direction of Professor Jerome A. Gilbert. Mr.
Williams' three month stay in Japan will be hosted by the Professor Kazuhiko
Ishihara at the Tokyo Medical and Dental University. The collaborators seek to
improve the lubricity of weight-bearing prostheses via the fabrication of lipid-
attracting polyurethane materials. The specific aim of the research stay by Mr.
Williams is the fabrication and characterization of an elastomeric material
whose surface represents an interpenetrating polymer network with material
capable of attracting boundary lubricants. This proposal brings together
research scientists from two countries working in the area of
biomaterials/bioengineering. The U. S. graduate student will have the
opportunity to become familiar with research techniques, data, equipment, and
facilities the Tokyo Medical and Dental University while contributing to the
overall research effort. The host laboratory possesses the skills to fabricate
polymers, developed for blood- compatibility reasons, suitable for attracting
boundary lubricants. The host will learn from Mr. Williams about considerations
associated with the alternate application of their materials. Therefore, this
proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***