* 9502830
* CAREER:  Closed-Loop Augmented Environment Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Ulrich Neumann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/1998
* USD 122,888.00

Research Component: Closing the loop in AE systems. The project addresses
augmented environment (AE) and virtual environment (VE) tracking system
inadequacies through a new `unified-system` approach to AE system design. Even
with the best head-mounted displays (HMDs) and graphic systems available, the
shortcomings of tracking systems hinder or preclude the usefulness of many AE/VE
applications. Such applications, including on-line surgical visualization,
assembly or maintenance assistance, and interactive training simulations,
require robust solutions to the following problems. 1) Achieving millimeter
(position) and 0.1 degree (orientation) accuracy. 2) Readily achieving precise
calibration of tracking systems to the real world. 3) Eliminating (or
minimizing) latency in tracking (and graphics) systems to prevent gross
misalignment during head motion. This project aims to develop new technology and
improved methods for making video-based AE systems usable and productive for
commercial and scientific applications. The long term research goal is the
accurate alignment of real and virtual objects in an augmented environment under
all conditions of user activity including rapid head motion. Achieving such
performance required the integration of new image and tracking function
components into an AE system. A 2D alignment error metric forms a basis for the
compensation of a variety of 3D tracking and calibration errors. Corrections are
computed and applied at every frame creating a closed loop system which
compensated for both static and dynamic (latency-induced) misalignment. The
project will produce increased understanding of closed loop AR systems by 1)
implementing a software simulator to facilitate rapid exploration of closed loop
AE system design options for feature detection error measurement, and error
compensation, 2) designing a new AE system architecture with components which
have simple, well-defined interfaces to other co mpenents in the system, and 3)
developing a prototype of a complete closed-loop AE system and quantifying its
performance characteristics. Education Component: Richer understanding through
experience. Teaching responsibilities include at least one course during each
Fall and Spring semester. A two-course Computer Graphics sequence for graduate
students is under development. These courses build on the introductory
undergraduate course and emphasize project creation. Hands on system-building
learning opportunities, at the appropriate levels for students, are a major
focus of the educational activities. In addition to syllabus design and class
teaching, directed-research and advising promotes student-faculty interactions.
A CD-ROM with computer graphics simulations of graphics concepts will be
developed for both introductory and advanced levels.