* 9502582
* CAREER:  Flow Control and Traffic Modeling:  A Rigorous     Approach Toward Network Management
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Takis Konstantopoulos, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1999
* USD 134,937.00

NCR-9502582 Konstantopoulos, Takis This is a proposal about the development of a
rigorous approach toward network management and performance analysis for high-
speed networks considering local and global aspects of a network management
system. Local aspects include the design of flow controllers at the edges of the
network that take into account the provision of quality of service and the
interaction between users in a network switch. The investigator will extend
recently developed techniques that are based on the so-called reflection
mapping, develop testing techniques and simulations, and compare these to
existing schemes. The investigator will also study traffic modeling. He will
develop rigorous methods for validating self-similar traffic processes arising
from the operation of an integrated services high-speed networks and use such
models in establishing performance analysis methods. Studying the global aspects
of a management system involves using a macroscopic picture of the network
currently being developed by the investigator. The picture strips out the
minutiae of the operation of the network, while retaining its dynamic character
(it is not static). The investigator proposes the use of such a picture by a
network management system in order to predict, prevent, and correct undesirable
behavior that might lead to degradation of services across the network.