* 9502289
* Cooperative Assistance through Visual Interaction:          Perception and Problem-Solving in Complex-Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Erika Rogers, Clark Atlanta University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 06/30/1998
* USD 142,755.00

The research in this proposal addresses the nature of visual problem-solving and
its impact on the design of cooperative systems which assist and enhance human
performance in complex task environments. The first objective of the project is
to extend the cognitive theory of perception and problem-solving interactions,
with an emphasis on specific visual problem-solving tasks. More extensive
analysis of previously collected protocol data in the field of diagnostic
radiology will be carried out, and additional data from a second visual problem-
solving application such as geographical information systems will be collected
and analyzed as well. The results of this work are expected to lead to an
improved model of visual interaction, and a more comprehensive theory of how
people use visual information to solve problems. The second objective of the
project is to apply this cognitive theory in the development of intelligent
interactive systems which provide assistance to human decision-makers in tasks
such as medical diagnosis and geographical image interpretation. The design will
be incorporated into a number of working prototypes to demonstrate proof of
concept as well as to provide practical platforms for testing and evaluation of
underlying cognitive principles. The entire research project will be carried out
in the context of a comprehensive educational program which emphasizes the
development of visual problem-solving aids for several core courses in a newly
evolving computer science curriculum.