* 9502739
* Uncovering the Chemistry of ansa-Chromocene and             ansa-Vanadocene Complexes/Innovations to Teaching Inorganic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Pamela Shapiro, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 05/31/1999
* USD 183,000.00

Dr. Pamela Shapiro, Chemistry Department, University of Idaho, is supported by
the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program of the
Chemistry Division under a Faculty Early Career Advancement Award to develop the
chemistry of bent-sandwich ansa-chromocene and vanadocene complexes in order to
uncover novel reaction chemistry, discover new homogeneous catalysts, and
further the understanding of the dependence of electronic structure and
reactivity on metallocene geometry. Heteroannular bridges will permit a bent
ring configuration to be tailored in the bis-cyclopentadiene vanadium and
chromium complexes and this will allow an open site to be generated in the
equatorial plane of the complexes. The chemistry of these species will be
explored and the properties of the compounds will be tuned by adjusting the
bridging groups which join the two rings. Also part of this project will be a
restructuring of an inorganic chemistry teaching laboratory to emphasize the use
of modern techniques and the introduction of computer generated teaching aids to
several undergraduate lecture courses. Catalysts are used to improve the rate or
efficiency of a chemical reaction. Thus, the search for new, more effective
catalysts is an important area of contemporary chemistry. In the research
portion of this project a series of vanadium and chromium compounds, which are
surrounded by non reactive groups in such a way as to leave a wedged shaped
cavity into which small reactants can easily fit, will be prepared. By tailoring
the size of this wedge, the ability of the compounds to effect transformations
of the molecules with which they interact can be tailored to maximize the
catalytic properties of the metals. The educational portion will modernize and
improve the chemistry curriculum at the University of Idaho.