* 9502491
* CAREER: Modules for Fiber Optic Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Keren Bergman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 10/31/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9502491 Bergman Optical fibers are essential to many emerging optical
technologies, including communication systems, data processing, video
transmission, and computing. The bandwidths and data rates achievable using
guided photons are several orders of magnitude greater than comparable systems
using electronic or microwave technologies. Fibers are inexpensive low-loss
waveguides, and exhibit the type of nonlinearities which can be exploited in
making ultrafast all-optical switching devices, pulsed fiber lasers,
multiplexers and demultiplexers, as well as various timing control modules for
fiber optic communication systems. Long-haul and local area fiber optic
communication networks as multigigabit-rates will inevitably be done by a
combination of time domain multiplexing (TDM) and wavelength (frequency)
division multiplexing (WDM) techniques. TDM can be used to reduce the number of
frequency channels allowing the WDM channels broader tolerances in carrier
frequency placement and filter requisites. Our objective is to investigate novel
fiber optic modules that incorporate ultrafast time domain techniques with WDM
functions. We propose to build ultrahigh bit-rate femtosecond fiber lasers in
both the soliton and zero dispersion regimes. The method is based on the
nonlinear properties of pulse formation including frequency selection and
shifting, as well as TDM applications such as ultra-high bit-rate demultiplexing
and data retrieval. A new technique we propose to use has been shown to generate
considerable pulse shortening in actively modelocked lasers beyond the predicted
pulsewidths from active modelocking theory. The method is based on the nonlinear
properties on pulse formation and propagation in the soliton or negative
dispersion regime, and has the great advantage of simplicity over previous
modelocked lasers and switching devices that were designed based on fast fiber
nonlinearities concepts. The initial work will focus on developing novel fiber
optic laser sources for hi gh bit-rate pulses at both 1.5p.m and 1.3p.m. The
lasers will then be modified to produce carrier frequency tunable pulse trains
for WDM applications. We will use the pulse streams to test a frequency shifting
module operating on similar mechanisms. Next, a TDM demultliplexer and a
ultrafast data retriever will be demonstated. Finally, a complete system
prototype implementation that integrates the fiber laser source, WDM and TDM
devices will be demonstrated. The successful completion of the proposed research
will have significant impact on research and development efforts in fiber optic
communication technology. This proposed research program addresses the issue of
integrating WDM capabilities with high bit-rate soliton sources and switches,
and will be unquestionable value to future high capacity optical communication
networks. Two particularly important fields positioned to gain from our research
efforts are long-haul communication systems and terrestrial fiber loop networks.
In conjuction with our proposed development of soliton devices for long-haul
communication, we will apply the same nonlinear modelocking principles to the
construction of high bit-rate short pules with Pr-doped fiber amplifiers at the
zero dispersion wavelength wavelength near 1.3p.m The teaching and educational
plans proposed will enter about the following objectives: (1) develop a new
optoelectronic engineering curriculum, incorporating into both, the
undergraduate and graduate courses, new knowledge gained from the explosive
recent advancements in fiber optics research, (2) increase involvement of
undergraduate students in current research efforts to build a foundation for
independent thinking and excitement for new discovery, (3) facilitate
participation of women in engineering research activities, with particular
encouragement for students at the secondary school and freshman year levels, and
(4) train graduate students in broader experimental techniques that the normal
confined experience dictated by a specific thesis research topic: Research
opportunities for undergraduates will be provided in the n new fiber optic
laboratory facilities through supervision of theses and independent projects.
Increased participation of women in engineering research will be accomplished by
a special summer program aimed at offering laboratory experience to senior high
school and college freshman students. The students will be exposed to a
scientific research environment and obtain a first hand view of what a career in
engineering research entails. Mentor support will be included to follow progress
of individual female students through their university curriculum. The
increasing complexity of technology necessitates further specialization by
graduate students who desire to contribute to the field's advancement . This
loop deprives graduate students from gaining the important broad range of
experiences that are required for successful careers in today's rapidly changing
high tech economy. To enhance the graduate students experience and better
prepare them to identify and solve future research problems, a research
"rotation" system will be implemented. ***