* 9502586
* CAREER:  Computational Approaches to Materials Properties   and Engineering at the Nanometer Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Donald Brenner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 105,000.00

9502586 Brenner This CAREER grant contains both research and educational thrusts
that address the application of computer modeling techniques to problems in
materials science and engineering. The research component focuses on a
particular area, namely the development of a fundamental understanding of
mechanical properties of solids at the nanometer scale, and the use of this
understanding to choose appropriate tip shapes and applied stresses to
mechanically build specific nanometer- scale structures. The education component
will broaden the department's curriculum in theory and modeling by the
development of graduate and undergraduate computer applications courses,
including hands-on experience through computer laboratories. %%% This CAREER
grant contains both research and educational thrusts that address the
application of computer modeling techniques to problems in materials science and
engineering. The research component focuses on a particular area, namely the
development of a fundamental understanding of mechanical properties of solids
and the use of this understanding to choose appropriate tip shapes and applied
stresses to mechanically build specific structures. This will all take place on
the length scale of tens or hundreds of atoms. The education component will
broaden the department's curriculum in theory and modeling by the development of
graduate and undergraduate computer applications courses, including hands- on
experience through computer laboratories. ***