* 9502557
* Molecular Orientation and Chemistry at Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Kathy Rowlen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 04/30/1999
* USD 286,500.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the development of a
method for analyzing the structure and orientation of molecular species at
buried interfaces. During the tenure of this three-year continuing grant,
Professor Rowlen and her students at the University of Colorado will apply the
newly developed technique of angle-resolved photoacoustic spectroscopy (ARPAS)
to parallel studies of the relationship between the chemical nature of molecules
and their orientation at surfaces and in thin films. In the first, the
orientation of a variety of phenylazo dyes within zirconium phosphonate
interlayers will be investigated and compared with each layer's nonlinear
optical characteristics. Additionally, the relatively slow kinetics of
orientational relaxation will be investigated for phenylazo dyes trapped within
the transparent polymer matrix of an optical waveguide. In the second study,
which focusses on understanding retention in liquid chromatography, the question
of phase transitions within covalently immobilized alkylsilanes will be
addressed by monitoring the degree of orientation as a function of temperature
and solvent overlayer. Also during this grant period, Professor Rowlen will
pursue an educational development plan that includes course development,
acquisition of equipment for teaching laboratories, increased opportunities for
undergraduate research participation, and introduction of industrial research
internships for both undergraduate and graduate students. A method for analyzing
the structure and orientation of molecular species at buried interfaces is of
considerable technological importance. In this CAREER research project, angle-
resolved photoacoustic spectroscopy will be used to develop new insights into
molecular structure and orientation of phenylazo dyes and alkylsilane thin films
that could lead to improved design of organic-based optical waveguides and also
to an improved understanding of retention in liquid chromatography. The
educational development aspects of this CAREER project should enrich and broaden
the chemistry educational experience of University of Colorado students.