* 9502907
* GEM:  MHD Mesoscale Transport at the Magnetopause
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Yan Song, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 05/31/1999
* USD 241,828.00

The transport of mass, momentum and energy at the magnetopause often occurs in
a patchy and time-dependent manner, where MHD mesoscale physics is important.
The proposed research is to study the MHD mesoscale physical processes using a
recently developed macroparticle concept. In particular, the theory of driven
reconnection as a process which occurs due to the dynamic interaction of the
solar wind and the magnetosheath with the mangetosphere will be developed. This
model will be used to quantitatively determine the threshold for the onset of
reconnection, the statistical distribution of mesoscale events, and the solar
wind-magnetosphere coupling parameters. When the inhomogeneities of the plasma
density, velocity and magnetic field are taken into account, the interaction of
magnetofluids can be described as the interaction of a number of localized
filaments having a relative velocity and carrying different magnetic fields. The
interactions between these filaments and between the filaments and the ambient
magnetic field play a key role in the transport processes. A macro-particle
description involving compressional and shear Alfvenons in cold plasma limit has
been introduced to describe these localized filaments (Song and Lysak, 1994a).
The properties of these Alfvenons, such as their magnetic dipole moment and
polarization, have been described and it has been shown that their interaction
can lead to an onset of reconnection depending on the IMF as well as on the
dynamic pressure impinging on the magnetopause. The objective of this proposed
research is to extend the concept of Alfvenons, which provides a theoretical
basis for patchy and time- dependent driven reconnection, and to pursue further
the quantitative evaluation of the solar wind-magnetosphere coupling parameter
and the statistical prediction of the transient magnetic field events.