* 9502777
* Nonpolymerizable Monomers in Living Cationic Polymerization
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Rudolf Faust, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9502777 Faust Kinetic and mechanistic studies on the additions of 1,1-
diphenylethylene and related highly reactive but non- polymerizable monomers to
living cationic polymers will be carried out. Conductance measurement and UV-vis
spectroscopy combined with structure analysis will determine the kinetics and
mode of addition, the extent of chain end ionization and dissociation. The
kinetics of the addition of diphenylcarbenium ions to monomers will also be
studied, and the absolute rate constants will be determined for free ions and
ion-pairs. The results will be used in the synthesis of well-defined block
copolymers by sequential monomer addition when the reactivity of the second
monomer is higher then that of the first monomer. The method involves capping
with a reactive but non-polymerizable monomer such as 1,1-diphenylethylene,
followed by tailoring the Lewis acidity to the reactivity of the second monomer
by the addition of titanium(IV) alkoxide, by replacing the Lewis acid with a
weaker one or by the use of a common ion salt. Another objective of the proposal
is to explore the synthesis of end-functional polymers by in-situ
functionalization (end-quenching) of the living ends. The last objective of the
proposal is to investigate the combination of living cationic and living
anionic-group transfer polymerization for the synthesis of linear and hetero-arm
star block copolymers. Two different methods are proposed based on
1,1-diphenylethylene capping; one based on site transformation and the other
based on mutual annihilation of the living polymer cations and anions. %%% This
research provides a novel approach to the synthesis of various well-defined
polymers with precisely known architecture. Such polymers are needed to study
the fundamental physical properties as a function of structure. ***