* 9502971
* Mechanistic and Kinetic Studies of Electrooxidation of      Methanol and Formic Acid on Well-Defined Platinum Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Eric Stuve, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 04/30/1999
* USD 286,604.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9502971 This project addresses a number of fundamental issues
regarding the kinetics and mechanism of methanol electrocatalysis on platinum-
based electrodes as well as the behavior of surface oxygen species in this same
reaction. Specifically, it seeks to identify whether carbon monoxide, widely
accepted as the poisoning species, is a necessary intermediate in the reaction
pathway of methanol electrooxidation. Sufficient evidence already exists for
another, hydrogen containing intermediate that may signify a separate reaction
pathway free of carbon monoxide. This project attempts to isolate and identify
this hydrogen containing intermediate and systematically quantify its presence
as a function of the controlling variables: potential, temperature, electrolyte
nature and concentration, and surface morphology. Particular attention is paid
to electrode potential as reaction at the low potentials required of a technical
fuel cell may have an entirely different mechanism than at the high potential
required for oxidation and removal of the carbon monoxide poisoning species.
Variation of electrode surface morphology through preadsorbed probe adlayers of
graphitic or atomic carbon, ethlidyne, isotopically labelled carbon monoxide,
and sulfur helps to identify, respectively, ensemble requirements, the influence
of coabsored hydrocarbon species, the behavior of carbon monoxide, and the
influence of electronic interactions in electrooxidation. Kinetic measurements
supply complementary information to help discrimination between competing
reaction mechanisms and identify particularly favorable reaction conditions. The
nature of surface oxygen is examined with kinetic measurements of electrodes
"seeded" with preadsorbed oxygen and by spectroscopic analysis of the surface of
quenched electrodes. These studies are conducted according to the ex-situ
methodology involving a directly coupled electrochemical cell and ultrahigh
vacuum surface analysis system. This combination of facil ities allows
preparation of clean electrode surfaces or those precisely modified with a
reaction promoter (ruthenium or tin), one of the probe adlayers mentioned above,
or preadsorded oxygen. Cyclic voltammetry and potential step experiments are
used for electrochemical studies, whereas thermal desorption spectroscopy, Auger
electron spectroscopy, low energy electron diffraction, work function
measurements, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and secondary ion mass
spectrometry are conducted in the vacuum system. Thermal desorption measurements
following electrooxidation identify the nature and extent of the hydrogen-
containing intermediate through the relative amounts of hydrogen and carbon
monoxide desorption. The other surface analysis methods provide the necessary
controls for preparing well defined electrocatalysts, document any changes that
occur upon their removal from the electrolyte, and spectroscopically
characterize their surfaces following reaction. Electrochemical fuel cells offer
one of the most efficient means of energy conversion possible, and allow
substantial reductions in fuel consumption and emissions of the pollutants and
greenhouse gases associated with energy production. Especially attractive for
portable power generation, transportation, and leisure/domestic applications,
the direct methanol fuel cell, which combines methanol and oxygen directly to
produce electrical energy, has limited technical feasibility because of poor
methanol electrooxidation kinetics and a tendency to self-poisoning. This
presents a problem in electrocatalysis, where the goal is to find the proper
electrocatalyst and operating conditions that maximize reaction rate (and hence
minimize overpotential) while avoiding the conditions for self-poisoning. ***