* 9502124
* GEM:  The Time Sequence of Substorms in GEM Campaigns:  A   Comparison of Individual Events to Statistical Averages
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Robert McPherron, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 03/31/1999
* USD 206,362.00

A magnetospheric substorms is the collection of processes by which energy is
extracted from the solar wind and deposited in the magnetosphere, ionosphere and
earth's atmosphere. Substorms have significant effects on the near-earth
environment and affect many of man's systems. The represent a natural hazard to
human activities that is becoming more important. Unfortunately, the cause of
substorms, particularly of the most destructive phase, the expansion phase, is
not known. For may years the most popular physical model explaining substorms
has been the near-earth neutral line (NENL) model. This model has been
remarkably successful in organizing numerous observations in the near-earth
plasma sheet and successful predicted the existence and properties of the
magnetotail plasmoid, a bubble of plasma and magnetic field that the earth
releases to the solar wind during substorms. A number of new observations have
not been incorporated in the NENL model, and it appears difficult to do so. It
seems that the substorms expansion begins at local midnight very close to
synchronous orbit (6.6 Re) and propagates outward into the tail. This expansion
begins on closed, quasi-dipolar field lines at the inner edge of the cross-tail
current sheet. Subsequently it moves tailward by disrupting the tail current,
diverting it along magnetic field lines to the auroral ionosphere. A new model
called the current disruption (CD) model is being developed to explain these
observations. Some versions of this model predict dynamics of the tail plasma
sheet and magnetic field that are diametrically opposite to the predictions of
the NENL model, and the observations on which it is based. Such a fortunate
circumstance should be easy to resolve. The model either agrees or disagrees
with observations and we should be able to decide between them. It is proposed
to re-examine the observations in the near-earth plasma sheet and place them on
a firmer footing so that it will be pos sible to develop a reasonable physical
model of the substorm expansion phase. To this end, data already at UCLA, and
additional data from other investigators will be used to study the problems of
frequency of occurrence and time delay of phenomena relative to substorms onset.
Other ground indicators of substorm onset will be used including brightenings in
satellite auroral images, midlatitude positive bays, Pi 2 pulsation bursts,
maxima in inclination of synchronous magnetic field, and dispersionless plasma
injection at synchronous orbit. Features to be examined include changes in
magnetic field, particle fluxes, plasma pressure, plasma flow and temperature.
Based on these results, the different models and their success in explaining the
observations will be considered.