* 9502059
* Faculty Early Development (CAREER)
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Robert Almgren, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1998
* USD 125,444.00

Almgren 9502059 This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development Award. The National Science Foundation strongly
encourages the early development of academic faculty as both educators and
researchers. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a
Foundation-wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty within
the context of their overall career development. It combines in a single program
the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and the full
participating of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering. This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation
places on the development of full, balanced academic careers that include both
research and education. The research will focus on the development of
computational techniques for dendritic solidification in three dimensions using
two methods. The first method is implementation of adaptive mesh refinement to
simulate the phase field model of dendritic growth, which models the
solid/liquid interface by a thinviscous layer. In addition to the coding
complexity, the central issues are construction of stable and accurate time
discretization formulas, specification of accurate criteria to guide the
automatic refinement strategy, and possible permiting the interface thickness to
depend on local velocity. The second, more speculative, method is a lattice-
based variational method, using an Ising-type model and simulated annealing to
minimize a combination of bulk and surface energy at each time step. The first
approach is expected to be effective at large undercoolings or supersaturations,
where kinetic effects are important; the second approach will be more efficient
at small undercoolings, near local equilibrium. The overall purpose of this
project is to develop effective computational tools for predicting and
controlling the microstructure which develops almost every time a metal or other
substance solidifies from its melt, that is, in almost every casting process
from horseshoes to jet turbine blades. The details of this microstructure have a
tremendous influence on the mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties of
the resulting material piece; if the processes which produce them could be
understood and controlled, then dramatic improvements might be possible. The
teaching side of this project is construction of an applied mathematics
component for the University of Chicago's SESAME program, which teaches
mathematics to elementary teachers from the Chicago Public Schools. The
investigator will develop classroom and computer material focusing on the
questions of how and why objects in Nature assume the shapes they do in response
to their physical environment; he will consider trees and tree leaves, soap
films, crystals, seashells, and square-cube scaling laws.