* 9502142
* Mathematical Sciences: Perturbation Theory for               Near-Integrable Equations and Its Application
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* Gregor Kovacic, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 234,088.00

9502142 Kovacic This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development Award. The research will focus on the theory of near-
integrable systems. These systems are small perturbations of completely
integrable ordinary and partial differential equations or integro-differential
equations. Two areas will be addressed: multi-pulse homoclinic orbits in low-
dimensional systems, and regular and irregular dynamics of the Maxwell-Bloch
integro-partial differential equations that describe ring- cavity laser optics.
The proposed research in the area of multi-pulse homoclinic orbits is a
continuation of the author's previous work on unstable resonant systems. It will
exhibit several new classes of multi-pulse orbits in a large family of near-
integrable systems, and thus reveal the intricate phase-space structure of the
systems in this family. This research will also provide computable methods for
verifying the presence of these complicated homoclinic orbits, and therefore
irregular dynamics, in specific examples. Applications of these methods in
mechanics, fluid and solid dynamics, and nonlinear optics are also proposed. In
the area of the Maxwell-Bloch equations, the proposed research contains a broad
array of theoretical, computational, and applied questions. These questions
include finding new explicit solutions of the integrable Maxwell-Bloch
equations, homoclinic orbits and chaotic dynamics, finite-dimensional
attractors, stabilization of the excited states of lasers, numerical simulations
of solutions, and mathematical descriptions of fiber lasers and diode lasers.
Comparisons with realistic physical and engineering applications and experiments
are also proposed. The education component involves translating the author's
research experience into a geometric and dynamical-systems oriented approach to
teaching courses in differential equations on the sophomore, junior-senior, and
graduate levels, and advising students and involving them in research
collaborations with Los Alamos National Laboratory. The National Science
Foundation strongly encourages the early development of academic faculty as both
educators and researchers. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program
is a Foundation- wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty
within the context of their overall career development. It combines in a single
program the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and
the full participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering. This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation
places on the development of full, balanced academic careers that include both
research and education. The research component of this project involves intended
research that addresses both regular, mainly time-periodic, and irregular, or
chaotic, behavior in two classes of physical systems in mechanics and laser
optics. The work will focus on mathematical models that are near-integrable,
that is, models whose degree of approximation is a small step away from making
them explicitly solvable. By neglecting certain small quantities, these models
do become explicitly solvable, or integrable. The explicit solutions obtained in
this way may be used to approximate the solutions of the more complicated near-
integrable systems. The proposed work will thus develop a mathematical
description of the mechanisms behind certain types of behavior of the physical
systems under investigation, such as the irregular beats in the amplitudes of
coupled pendula, and some of the regular and chaotic operation regimes of
lasers. Numerical computations will be used to motivate the analytical
investigations and confirm their findings, as well as to extend their results to
mathematical models that are less simplified and thus not amenable to either
explicit or approximate solution, but are more phys ically accurate. Comparisons
with realistic physical and engineering applications and experiments are also
proposed. The mathematical techniques discovered in the course of this
investigation should be general enough to apply to similar problems in other
areas of physics, such as nonlinear fiber optics, solid, and fluid mechanics.
The education component will involve incorporating the author's research
experience into classroom work on the sophomore, junior-senior, and graduate
levels and advising students and involving them in research collaborations with
Los Alamos National Laboratory.