* 9502897
* Faculty Early Career Development: Development of an         Integrated Environment for Surface Mount Device             Technology Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,03/03/1999
* Jesus Villalobos, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 03/03/1999
* USD 315,000.00

9502897 Villalobos In the electronics industry, components are so small and
delicate that manufacturing requires automation systems, but the paradox is that
a person inspects components visually. This Faculty Early Career Development
award's research and educational components will focus on this problem. This
research develops an integrated engineering approach to assembly and inspection
of surface mounted devices (SMD's). The tasks are: inspection routine generation
formulated as a Markov decision problem, development of a physical distributed
flexible inspection system, and use of neural network technology for diagnostics
and process control, and a very focused on SMD manufacture. The educational
focus complements the research, involving undergraduates, advising and
undergraduate student recruitment, in addition to new courses. The education
plan, while tied to integrated electronics manufacture, is broader in its scope.
It will develop three courses, one of which is an entrepreneurship course that
will include successful role models from industry to instill the product-to-
market spirit. The principal investigator plans to continue his activity with
student involvement in applied research, advising undergraduates and graduates,
and spending time recruiting undergraduate students, all the marks of a well-
rounded faculty member. The research and educational plans have a high
probability of improving the technology and engineering resource base. The
educational program is strong in student development in a total way. ***