* 9502610
* CAREER:  Traffic Scheduling and Network Interconnection in  All Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Murat Azizoglu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 12/31/1998
* USD 135,000.00

9502582 Murat Azizoglu This proposal outlines a career development plan for the
principal investigator with a coherent integration of research and teaching
goals. The research program addresses important issues in the design of all-
optical wide area networks. The education plan includes development of graduate-
level courses on optical communication systems and all-optical networking,
integration of communication networks into undergraduate curriculum and
development of a laboratory in which the students can design, implement, and
test prototype optical networks. An all-optical network is a network in which
the signals remain in the optical domain from the source to the destination.
This approach eliminates the speed mismatch between optical and electronic
devices by avoiding optical-to-electrical signal conversion within the network.
When the electronic processing is limited to the terminal nodes as prescribed,
several challenging problems arise which require new and innovative approaches.
Among these issues are traffic scheduling in circuit- and packet-switched
networks with Wavelength Division Multiple Access, all-optical interconnection
of all-optical LANs, dynamic vs. static wavelength assignment in interconnecting
bridges, and architectural issues in interconnected networks. Solution to such
problems must take into account optical device limitations, such as laser tuning
delay and finite number of resolvable channels.