* 9502710
* CAREER: High-Performance Computing for Computational        Science and Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Andrew Lumsdaine, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1999
* USD 118,249.00

The primary emphasis of this Career Development Plan is the coordinated
development of research and education programs in high-performance computing for
computational science and engineering. Research Plan: The main goals of high-
performance computing are high-performance, scalability, and portability. To
attain these objectives for modern scientific and engineering applications, new
hardware paradigms, new software methodologies, and new numerical algorithms are
needed. Moreover, the interdependencies between hardware, software, algorithm,
and application have an essential bearing on performance, scalability, and
portability and must also be well understood. This work is an inclusive effort
to create a substantial, unified base of understanding about high-performance
computing for scientific and engineering applications that can be broadly
applied. The specific objectives of this work are to: (1) Develop and analyze
high-performance, portable, computational kernels and numerical libraries that
are capable of exploiting modern computing architectures and operating systems,
such as symmetric multiprocessors, operating systems, and gigabit networks; (2)
Develop and analyze prototype object-based and object-oriented scalable software
libraries for high-performance computing and for computational scientific and
engineering applications; (3) Develop and analyze new algorithms for maximizing
the scalability of stationary and time-dependent problems; (4) Apply the new
algorithms and software libraries to real, substantial, computational science
and engineering applications. Education Plan: Because of the increasing
importance of computational science and engineering, it is important that
computer scientists (and indeed, scientists and engineers in general) understand
the intricacies and inter-relationships inherent to high-performance computing.
A graduate course in numerical computing has already been developed and
incorporated into the graduate core curriculum in the Computer Science and
Engineering program at the University of Notre Dame. Building on this course,
new graduate-level courses in high-performance computing will continue to be
introduced. At the undergraduate level, a senior elective in high-performance
computing is being introduced, and there will be continued effort to support and
direct undergraduate research.