* 9502016
* CAREER:  Synthesis and Electrical Characterization of       Ultrafine-grained Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2000
* Chrysanthe Demetry, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 05/31/2000
* USD 200,372.00

9502016 Terwilliger The goal of this research is to develop a scientific basis
for the understanding of nanoscale ceramics with novel electrical properties.
Enhanced electrical conductivity at low temperatures relative to conventional
polycrystalline material is expected due to grain size-dependent
nonstoichiometry as a result of impinging space charge layers. The effects of
grain size, temperature, and oxygen partial pressure on de and ac conductivity
will be evaluated for cryochemically synthesized, highly dense nanoscale
titanium (grain size &lt; 30 nm), both pure and doped with donor and acceptor
solutes. Impedance spectroscopy and quantitative microanalysis will be used in
parallel to establish correlations between grain boundary and bulk conductivity
and chemistry, from which a unified model of defect chemistry in ultrafine-
grained nonstoichiometric oxides will be developed. %%% The goal of this
research is to develop a scientific basis for the understanding of nanoscale
ceramics with novel electrical properties. Innovative uses of active and
cooperative learning, student team work, and peer-assisted instruction will be
developed and assessed quantitatively for several courses, with a concentrated
effort in Introduction to Materials Science. In addition, the possibility of a
cross-disciplinary team master's thesis as an innovative approach to graduate
training will be explored. A long-term objective is to provide leadership at the
local and national level in understanding the "pipeline" issues that continue to
result in an underrepresentation of women in science and engineering.