* 9502434
* SBIR Phase II:  Computer-Aided Braille Music Transcription  System
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Samuel Flores, Opus Technologies
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9502434 Flores Computer-assisted transcription provides a means of responding to
the challenge presented by the large increase in printed materials requiring
human interpretation. The process of transcribing printed sheet music into
Braille music is currently a tedious manual process that can be performed only
by specially trained Braille music transcribers. In addition, the certification
process for music transcribers is long--two and a half to three years--and
arduous; one must take the correspondence course offered by the National Library
Service for the Blind and Physically Handicapped of the Library of Congress,
which entails one year to learn literary Braille and then another 18 months to
two years to learn music Braille. As a consequence of the extensive training
required and the small number of individuals who complete it and stay in the
field, thousands of blind musicians in this country alone are severely limited
in their access to Braille music. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project from Opus Technologies will develop prototype software for a
computer-aided (PC Windows environment) Braille music transcription system which
allows individuals with no training in the Braille music code to transcribe
printed music into Braille. The system interfaces to a scanner which captures an
image of the sheet music for display on the screen. A sighted user uses this
image as a template for accurately entering musical symbols into a graphical
music notation editor. The entered music is then translated into Braille. A
built-in Optical Character Reader (OCR) in combination with a literary Braille
translator recognizes scanned lyrics and other textual elements and translates
them into literary Braille. A Braille editor displays the resulting Braille code
for editing and output. A reverse translator allows a blind musician to enter
Braille music code and produce printed sheet music for use by sighted musicians.
Results of this research will lead to the development and co mmercialization of
a complete Braille music transcription system for the U.S. and international
markets and will improve blind musicians' access to printed music. Building on
the concept that the user will hear the graphics that represent the Braille
music characters spoken; in the future, the next step will be to make the
graphics that represent the print music symbols and their position also spoken.
Thus ultimately, the whole process could be accomplished without the
intervention of a sighted person. In addition, these same techniques have
potential applications to other Braille codes including mathematics and graphics
data.