* 9502775
* Viral - Bacterial Interactions in the Marine Environment:   Significance of Lysogeny
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* John Paul, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9502775 Paul The overall objective of this research project is to understand the
significance of lysogeny in the marine environment. Toward that end, the
proposal addresses three questions: How prevalent is lysogeny in the marine
environment? What environmental factors control or influence the lysogenic
decision? and Why does lysogeny impart a competitive (or does it impart) over
nonlysogens? These studies will be performed with populations and isolates
collected along a trophic gradient from estuarine to oligotrophic surface waters
of the southeastern Gulf of Mexico and the South Atlantic Bight and from surface
waters to deep aphotic environments. The research will address environmental
factors that have been shown to influence the "lysogenic decision" (nutrient
status, pressure, temperature, mutagenic radiation and xenobiotics) on natural
populations and lysogenic isolates. Finally the research will examine if the
presence of a prophage in a bacterium results in a competitive advantage as
determined by growth rates and expression of prophage encoded genes. Overall
this study will provide insight into many of these processes and expand the
knowledge of the interactions of viruses with the rest of the water column
microbial community. ***