* 9502945
* CAREER: Robust Design of Adaptive Nonlinear Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Ioannis Kanellakopoulos, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1999
* USD 280,000.00

9502945 Kanellakopoulos Since most physical systems contain nonlinearities and
unknown parameters, adaptive control of nonlinear systems is directly relevant
to practical applications. The Principal Investigator's previous research
resulted in several new systematic design procedures which deliver high
performance over large operating regions without an increase in control effort
and without requiring full-state measurements. The proposed research plan will
continue the development of a new generation of adaptive systems, in which the
nonadaptive part of the controller is capable of guaranteeing boundedness, while
adaption is used only for the improvement of transient an asymptotic
performance. Additional design tools will be developed that not only result in
even stronger stability and performance properties, but are also applicable to
larger classes of nonlinear systems, and characterize those classes via
geometric conditions. The new tools will be applied to problems which are of
importance to commercial applications such as induction motors, the automated
operation of heavy-duty vehicles on intelligent highways and semiconductor
manufacturing processes, and will develop cooperative research efforts with
interested industrial sponsors. The proposed education plan will develop several
new undergraduate and graduate courses on linear, nonlinear and adaptive
control, as well as an undergraduate laboratory control course. Furthermore, it
will enhance the teaching effectiveness of control systems through the early
introduction on nonlinear examples and concepts in order to stimulate student
interest and ensure their understanding of the fact that linear control theory
can only yield regional results for most physical systems. In addition, the
education plan includes graphical and symbolic software into the undergraduate
and graduate control curriculum, so that students can spend less time deriving
complicated expressions and coding them into a simulatio n package, and more
time exploring design options, comparing different approaches, and watching the
results of their efforts come alive through animation and visual simulation. ***