* 9502134
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Resampling Approaches    to Neural Model Validation
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,10/27/1999
* Alice Smith, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 10/27/1999
* USD 349,574.00

9502134 The focus of this research is the improvement of the validation of
neural network models by developing neuro-adaptations and hybrids of statistical
resampling methodologies for model validation. The field of statistics has
matured several approaches to statistical model validation which use the
available data for both model construction and validation. Resampling approaches
have the drawback that they require the construction of multiple models. The
construction of several models is computationally intensive, unlike their
deterministic statistical counterparts. Furthermore, there are stochastic
aspects to neural network model construction that are not present in statistical
modeling. This research is aimed at developing neuro-adaptations of resampling
approaches by investigating the trade-offs between precision, bias, and variance
of the validation procedure with the computational requirements for each of the
three major resampling techniques - cross validation, jackknife, and bootstrap -
along with the two most commonly used neural network validation techniques -
resubstitution and train-and-test. Other research issues to be investigated and
resolved are alternative error metrics, initialization of neural network
weights, hybrid resampling methodologies, neural network training termination
criteria, and reuse of multiple neural network models through the committee
network approach. The methodologies developed will be demonstrated on typical
manufacturing problems such as wave soldering of circuit boards, process
planning for job shop metal forming, and other applications where data is
sparse. The improvement of validation techniques for neural networks is
essential for furthering research and implementation of complex systems modeling
and optimization. The research has the potential to impact several disciplines
currently involved in neural network modeling where data is sparse and model
validation is crucial. These areas include precision manufacturing, robotic
control, me dical diagnosis, and defense pattern classification and control
applications. The methods to be developed can be generalized to other empirical
modeling techniques where the construction of the model is computational
intensive.