* 9502254
* Symposium on RNA Biology:  RNA-Protein Interaction on       October 13-15, 1995 at Research Triangle Park, North        Carolina
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Charles Hardin, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 03/31/1996
* USD 3,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F K 6 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l ' 6 ' 6 9 : ; < = > ? @ A B F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; ^ do foj oPj R v SQW K F ho > o o o ~ t 2j t u ~ u ~ t N 3 j j
F V = u ; t, j j F V 6 j 6Rj >+ Bj+ v N ~o o F V o o F V o F 6Rj > +~ +>Bj ~ u ~
t > o u 9> ot tI ^ F V ~o o N 9502254 PRIVATE Agris RNA synthesis, chemistry,
structure and function are central to the viability of all biological systems
and thus, are important to agricultural, medical and environmental research.
This research has led to biotechnological applications of RNA as both target and
reagent. Even though the first RNA structure was resolved some twenty years ago,
only now are we beginning to understand RNA interaction with proteins through
combined use of x ray crystallography, NMR, biochemical, molecular biological
and genetic approaches. New and exciting RNA structures have been discovered and
are revealing interesting new functional modes of interaction with proteins.
However, no meetings have focused exclusively on the topic of RNA protein
interactions to create an environment of intellectual exchange and a forum to
share data and techniques. Many different groups are using a variety of
approaches to understand the plasticity of RNA and how RNA structure is
recognized by proteins. Thus, a Symposium on RNA Protein Interactions would be
timely. Seven major researchers (six from the USA, one fro m Europe) have
already accepted invitations to speak at a Symposium on October 13 15, 1995 in
the North Carolina Research Triangle. Funds amounting to almost half the
estimated cost of the conference have already been obtained. This proposal
requests NSF funding for stipends for one major speaker and three young
investigators. The requested funds are approximately 10% of the estimated total
budget. %%% RNA synthesis, chemistry, structure and function are central to the
viability of all biological systems and thus, are important to agricultural,
medical and environmental research. This research has led to biotechnological
applications of RNA as both target and reagent. New and exciting RNA structures
have been discovered and are revealing interesting new functional modes of
interaction with proteins. However, no meetings have focused exclusively on the
topic of RNA protein interactions to create an environment of intellectual
exchange and a forum to share data and techniques. This proposal funds stipends
for one major speaker and three young investigators. *** ; ; @ ....()()))()() Z
: phoenix B L s A ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 8 Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen jack cohen @ A @ @ 5 @ Microsoft Word
6.0 2 e = e " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L h x | | | | | | | \ r T ( " | | | | |
| " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 > " " " " | | 0 | 9502254 PRIVATE Agris RNA
synthesis, chemistry, structure