* 9502728
* Faculty Early Career Development: Research in Combinatorial Structure of Mechanical Parts
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2001
* Vadim Shapiro, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

9502728 Shapiro A major roadblock for rapid prototyping of mechanical systems is
the absence of combinatorial models to describe mechanical forms, functions, and
fabrication processes in terms of discrete, simple, and interacting primitives.
The goal of this research is to investigate a combinatorial relationship among
mechanical form, function, and fabrication for single-part mechanical components
by (1) studying, experimenting with, and modifying existing production practices
for a class of industrial parts; (2) developing a new theory capable of
supporting systematic creation and modification of combinatorial models of such
parts based on physical and manufacturing characteristics; and (3) developing
computer algorithms, representations, and systems that can be used in
conjunction with existing commercial CAD software. The education plan considers
solid modeling as an intermediate stage in the evolution of engineering
languages. With new knowledge resulting from the research, subjects in
engineering analysis, design, and manufacturing can be reorganized and
systematized. This will contribute to progress along a migration path from solid
modeling toward the more general disciplines of mechanical and physical
modeling. Insights and new knowledge resulting from this research should lead to
better approaches toward engineering design, more effective communication among
many engineering activities, and more efficient production processes.
Generalizing these results to mechanical functions, processes and systems that
involve multiple interacting parts and phenomena can improve our ability to
effectively automate some aspects of design while still incorporating important
human engineering knowledge and experimentation.