* 9502766
* Mathematical Sciences: New Numerical Methods for            Conservation Laws. Application to Non-Standard Shocks
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Philippe Le Floch, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1997
* USD 16,000.00

9502766 LeFloch This work is supported by a National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development Award. The research component will focus on the study
of nonlinear hyperbolic conservation laws; these laws are essential to the
description of a large number of problems in continuum mechanics, from fluid
dynamics to material science (e.g., multiphase flows, propagation of
interfaces). The plan will have two major goals: (1) to provide new insight on
the nonlinear stability of entropy discontinuous solutions and on the design and
nonlinear analysis of shock-capturing numerical methods and (2) to contribute to
better understanding of several applied problems from physical sciences
admitting non-standard shock waves. The education component will include
curriculum development at the graduate level, disseminating the research into
the scientific community, including industrial laboratories, and directing the
work of students, emphasizing collaborative activities with engineers and
researchers in the physical sciences. The National Science Foundation strongly
encourages the early development of academic faculty as both educators and
researchers. The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program is a
Foundation- wide program that provides for the support of junior faculty within
the context of their overall career development. It combines in a single program
the support of quality research and education in the broadest sense and the full
participation of those traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering. This program enhances and emphasizes the importance the Foundation
places on the development of full, balanced academic careers which include both
research and education.