* 9502990
* Learning from Instruction and Experience
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,01/31/2002
* Jude Shavlik, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 01/31/2002
* USD 276,300.00

This is the 1st-year of a 3-year continuing award. The objective of this
research is to widen the currently narrow `information pipeline` between humans
and machine learners; instead of solely providing labeled training examples to
the learner as is typically done, the algorithms being designed also allow
humans to provide broadly applicable advice regarding the task at hand. The
human advice-giver does not have to understand the machine learner's internal
representations and algorithms, nor does the provided advice have to be
completely correct or fully explicit. The algorithms being developed use
techniques from connectionist reinforcement learning to (slowly) learn from the
feedback provided by the learner's environment. The advice-giver observes the
machine learner's decision making and occasionally makes suggestions, expressed
as instructions in a simple programming language. Based on techniques from the
field of knowledge-based neural networks, the advice is inserted directly into
the agent's knowledge base. Importantly, the learner can subsequently refine the
assimilated advice both by neural training based on further experience and
additional advice from the human advisor. This work promises to simplify the
interaction between humans and machine learners, and may lead to flexible,
adaptive software that tunes itself to specific users via this project's
flexible advice-giving framework.