* 9502669
* A Systematic Approach to the Design of Cost-Effective,      High Performance Switching Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1999
* Ellen Zegura, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 11/30/1999
* USD 151,604.00

This proposal aims to answer a set of critical questions dealing with
communication systems by way of the development and use of a simulation and
implementation modeling environment for virtual circuit switches. The first
question concerns systematic, standardized performance comparisons. Using
relevant traffic models and trace data from actual applications, this study is
standardizing performance measurements, eliminating the apples-to- oranges
comparisons that result when considering performance results from different
research groups. The second question concerns cost and implementation modeling.
This work is integrating the design of system architecture and implementation.
The particular focus is on electronic implementation and multichip module
packaging technology. The third question concerns the role of architecture in
providing quality of service guarantees. The usual abstraction of the switch as
a queue hides too much detail about internal architecture that is relevant to
traffic behavior when traversing a switch. This work is characterizing the
effect on traffic of different switch architectures, and developing switch
mechalisms to work in concert with other mechanisms in providing quality of
service guarantees. The educational part of the project is using the simulation
and implementation modeling environment as a key component of a graduate course
in High Speed Switching Networks. In addition, portions of the research amp
appear in two undergraduate courses, one on VLSI Design and the other on
Modeling. Other education efforts include significant mentoring activity and
ongoing improvement in teaching.