* 9502629
* Audio-Visual Signal Compression Using Vector                Quantization
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Wai-Yip Chan, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1999
* USD 112,041.00

This research involves the development of efficient, reliable, and real-time
realizable coding algorithms and techniques for compressing and transporting
audio-visual signals, targeting particularly the visual-telephone application.
For a total channel bit-rate of 64 kb/s or less, our goal is to achieve superior
grade-of-service by treating the compression of the audio (speech) and video
signals as an integrated problem. Our thrust centers around the use of vector
quantization techniques, and schemes that jointly optimize the signal analysis
and quantization functions. We place particular emphasis on finding an efficient
representation of the displacement ("motion") field for motion compensated
prediction of the video signal. To facilitate personal wireless communications,
we are exploring adaptive coding schemes that exploit the prioritized
transmission of encoded data. For compressing speech signals, we are exploring
variable rate coding schemes, and are allocating bits between the speech and
video signals to optimize the overall grade-of-service. Achieving our goal would
give significant impetus to the development of the emergent Information
Superhighway, which can form part of an infrastructure for supporting high
performance computing. Educational activities undertaken in conjunction with the
above research include but are not exclusive to: the development of
undergraduate digital signal processing laboratory courses; the introduction of
graduate courses in the area of audio-visual information processing and
communications; increasing the use of computer-based multimedia instruction in
the classroom; assisting in speeding up the digitization of the library and
networking of its databases.