* 9502695
* CAREER:  Development and Implementation of Antenna Array    Processing Techniques for Wireless Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Guanghan Xu, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 08/31/2000
* USD 180,346.00

Array signal processing techniques were traditionally limited to military
applications. Researchers recently found that these techniques could be applied
to significantly expand channel capacity and improve quality of wireless
communication systems through exploitation of spatial diversity. Despite
significant research activities in array processing during the last decade,
conversion of such military technology to cost sensitive commercial technology
is not trivial. A significant amount of research and development effort is
required to realize these techniques in a wireless communication system. This
research is developing innovative antenna array processing techniques and fast
implementation schemes for various wireless communication systems. The program
scope is not limited to algorithm development, theoretical analysis, and
simulation studies; our ultimate objective is to implement the resulting
algorithms in real hardware. Industry specializing in digital signal processing
and its applications in telecommunications has experienced rapid growth in this
world due to high demand for information access and processing. To respond to
such a growth, new courses in these areas and innovative teaching methodology
must be developed so that students can quickly adapt to various challenges.
During the proposed period, the principal investigator plans to develop several
new courses in these areas including undergraduate lab courses, continue
involving undergraduates in industry sponsored projects, design more computer
projects, create opportunities for minority students and students with
disabilities, and, what is more important, develop a multimedia teaching method
drawing on advanced technology, e.g., live audio, video, and graphical
illustrations and real hardware demonstrations.