* 9502872
* SBIR Phase II: A Diffusion Gradient System for Studying     Process and Behavior in Microbial and Cellular Biology
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1998
* John Koh, Koh Development Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/1998
* USD 265,000.00

9502872 Koh This project is designed to further develop, and test the diffusion
gradient system constructed during Phase I research. The system consists of a
diffusion gradient chamber (DGC) for culturing microorganisms in multiple,
continuous diffusion gradients of small soluble molecules. In addition, there is
an effluent chamber for consolidating effluent flow from the DGCs, a
transilluminator that provides back lighting to visualize microbial growth, and
a camera system to monitor and quantify microbial growth and movement. This
phase of the research will focus on refining and reducing the cost of the
system, and demonstrating its versatility for studying a variety of problems in
microbial and cellular biology. The feasibility of constructing the DGC by
injection molding will be investigated. This would improve its quality and
reduce its cost. An automated tracking camera system will be designed and tested
that will enhance the quantitative power of the system. A temperature control
unit that encloses the entire system and maintains a stable temperature will be
tested. The system s capability to establish gradients will be tested in
collaboration with Michigan State University (MSU). A number of solutes will be
tested in the DGC and the empirical results will be compared with results
predicted by a mathematical model Scientist at MSU will also evaluate the system
s ability to track population changes in a detoxifying bacterial community
exposed to multiple gradients, and they will study the role of chemotaxis in
competition between defined mixed cultures of bacteria. In addition, they will
use the DGC to elucidate patterns of gene expression in response to
environmental stimulus using reporter genes in Rhizobium meliloti. A University
of Michigan scientist will also study the growth and response of a tissue
culture line of osteoblast cells to imposed gradients in the DGC.