* 9502936
* CAREER: Advanced Control Stategies For Microelectronics     Manufacturing Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2000
* Oscar Crisalle, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

This is a Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant which includes both a
research as well as an educational component. Research: The microelectronics
industry is constantly challenged to improve the performance of the
manufacturing processes to respond to the high-performance expectations of a
competitive international market. Advanced process control technologies hold
great promise for rising to the challenge and delivering tight process control.
The objective of this research is to develop and evaluate advanced process
control strategies useful for the control of processes of relevance to the
fabrication of microelectronics devices. The research addresses three
fundamental issues, namely, (1) the characterization of uncertainties that may
corrupt the accuracy of process models, (2) the design of robust model-based
controllers, and (3) the application of the control strategies to specific
processing operations, including plasma etching and metal-organic chemical vapor
deposition. An international collaborative research effort will be established
with the Ins titut d'Automatique of the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in
Lausanne, Switzerland. Education: The objective of the teaching plan is to
enhance the quality of control- engineering education at the University of
Florida through (1) the introduction of computer-aided control design tools in
the undergraduate process control course, (2) the design of new experiments in
the undergraduate process control laboratory, including experiments with an
industrial process control computer connected to a 24-tray distillation column,
(3) the development of computer modules for a multidisciplinary Virtual Control
Laboratory for control engineering education, and (4) the development of
projects for advanced process control design for a graduate control course for
chemical engineers. These activities will be supported by computer tools such as
multimedia presentations, in-class development of simulations, and the use of
projection panels for in-class demonstrations.