* 9502541
* CAREER:  A Compiler-Assisted Approach to High Performance   Memory Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Zhiyuan Li, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 05/31/1998
* USD 135,000.00

The widening gap between processor speed and memory latency will continue to be
a critical issue to the performance of computer systems. The latency problem is
even more acute on multiprocessors that share the same space, in which a main
memory module is typically remote to all or all but one of the processors. It is
therefore important to reduce unnecessary remote memory references and
unnecessary network activities, and to achieve high hit ratio at the private,
primary caches. The project explores coherent designs of compilers and memory
architectures to improve the average memory latency, and the network traffic.
The main thrust of this work is to combine compilers' ability to predict program
behavior with harrdware's ability to record memory reference patterns at run
time. The research focuses on three major issues: (1) The use of a compiler-
assisted and hardware controlled coherence mechanism on multiprocessors with
private cache memories; (2) The use of sophisticated interprocedural analysis to
support the proposed coherence mechanism, via array data flow analysis and
static task scheduling; and (3) The effects of program transformations, false
sharing and limited directory pointers on the proposed coherence mechanism. This
work covers a variety of multiprocessors that share a common address space,
including bus-based systems, the Non-Uniform Access (NUMA) multiprocessors and
the Cache-Only Memory Access (COMA) multiprocessors. The main objectives of the
PI's education plan in this funding period are (1) to redesign the compiler and
language design course sequence for the Computer Science Department of Minnesota
and to solidify the interfaces of these sources with other language design
sources; (2) to augment the main compiler and language design sources by seminar
courses which address new issues regarding the interfaces of the compilers with
the rest of the computer systems, and (3) to achieve teaching excellence in
these c ourses so as to provide students solid understanding of the principles
of programming language design and implementation and compiler techniques which
will be important to their scientific and engineering career. The PI will
conduct two experiments in this funding period. One is to develop a language
design source to be taught after the compiler courses and the other is to add an
operating system implementation course to the curriculum. Additional educational
activities of the PI include exploration of new avenues for creating industry
co-op programs for students in the computer systems area and exploration of new
avenues or providing professionals with excellent access to both the basic
courses and the seminar courses, e.g. through the university's Distributed
Multimedia Learning Center.