* 9502141
* Halogen Free Methods for Catalysts Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Richard Masel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1998
* USD 307,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9502141 This effort lays the basis for replacing chlorine used for
redispersion of supported metal catalysts with a (-diketone. Previous work has
shown that (-diketones react with transition metals and their oxides to form
(-diketonates, and that these can be reduced back to active catalysts.
Preliminary experiments suggest that platinum on alumina can be redispersed by
treatment with hexafluoro-2,4-pentanedione (hfac). The present study examines
the redispersion process in detail. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is
used to determine if redispersion goes through an etching, mechanism or a
spreading mechanism. Temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) is used to examine
the interaction of (-diketones with metal surfaces and supports, including the
variation of binding energy with nature of the ligand. Spectroscopic and TPD
measurements are correlated with redispersion rates. Studies are done on both
model catalysts and real industrial catalysts. Current practice uses chlorine to
redisperse supported metal catalysts. While this process is regarded as
technologically and economically satisfactory, it has some environmental
drawbacks relating both to release of chlorine to the atmosphere and the
formation of chlorinated dioxins from chlorine residues left on the catalyst.
The approach investigated there avoids both of these problems, and may do so
without any loss of effectiveness. ***