* 9502459
* Positron Annihilation Induced Auger Electron Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Alexander Weiss, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 277,945.00

9502459 Weiss Positron annihilation induced Auger Electron Spectroscopy (PAES)
utilizes a fundamentally new process in which the excitations necessary for
Auger spectroscopy are created by positrons annihilating core electrons and not,
as in conventional Auger methods, by collisional ionization. PAES is uniquely
sensitive to the critical topmost atomic layer of solids due to the trapping of
positrons in an image potential well just outside the surface before
annihilation. Experiments are proposed which will capitalize on this ability of
PAES to determine the elemental content of the topmost atomic layer in achieving
an understanding of catalytically important ultrathin metal fillm systems,
including neodynium on copper, and copper on palladium, as well as to study
surface segregation in alloys such as platinum- nickle and platinum-gold. The
fact that PAES measurements can be made using energy doses many orders of
magnitude less than those needed with conventional Auger techniques will be
utilized to study fragile adsorbed layers and chemically unstable systems
including hydrogen and organic molecules on metal surfaces. %%% Positron
annihilation induced Auger Electron Spectroscopy (PAES) utilizes a fundamentally
new process in which the input energy required for the emission of so-called
Auger electrons from a solid results from the annihilation of positive electrons
(antimatter) with negative electrols in atomic cores rather than from collisions
of energetic incident electrons with the core electrons, as in conventional
Auger methods. PAES is uniquely sensitive to the composition of the critical
topmost atomic layer of solids due to the trapping of positrons just outside the
surface before annihilation. The proposed experiments will capitalize on this
sensitivity of PAES to determine the elemental content of the topmost atomic
layer to advance undertanding of catalytically important ultrathin film
materials, such as copper on palladium, and to study the surface segregation of
constituent elements in alloys such as platinum-nickel. In addition, the fact
that PAES measurements can be made using energy doses hundereds of times weaker
than those needed with conventional Auger methods will be utilized to study
fragile adsorbed layers and chemically unstable coverings such as hydrogen and
organic molecules on metal surfaces. ***