* 9502502
* Faculty Early Career Development:  Methods for Large-Scale  Network Design and Education Plan
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,12/09/1998
* Pamela Vance, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 12/09/1998
* USD 214,998.00

9502502 The objective of the research is to develop efficient solution
procedures for large-scale capacitated instances of Fixed Charge Network Design
(FCND) problems. The research focus is on the development of new and stronger
formulations that provide a tighter linear programming (LP) bound. Alternate
formulations of the problem will be investigated, including the node-arc and
path-flow formulations. To support the new formulations, new solution algorithms
will be developed to solve the models. The techniques to be explored in
developing the algorithms will have a strong emphasis on branch-and-price
approaches (i.e., column generation techniques for solving LP relaxations
embedded in a branch-and-bound approach), Lagrangian relaxation, and Benders
decomposition. While emphasis will be on exact solution, the insights gained
from the exact solution procedures will be used to develop heuristic algorithms.
On the educational side, experiences from this research will be used to
restructure the current approach to teaching operations research to integrate
modeling and algorithms with applications. The restructuring will be carried out
with an overhaul of the industrial engineering undergraduate curriculum at the
host university. The restructuring will also involve developing a new elective
course on mathematical programming for undergraduates to provide a forum for
teaching advance modeling and algorithmic issues. A sequence of core courses in
optimization will also be developed at the graduate level. The research problem
is significant since the models to be developed are applicable to a broad range
of industrial problems, including transportation, telecommunications, logistics,
and production. Most existing solution techniques for these classes of problems
are effective only for small size problems. Because the emphasis on this
research is on moderate to large size problems, many industries stand to realize
financial benefits if this research produces meaningful solution algorithms for
reasonable size problems. Furthermore, existing solution techniques are directed
mostly to uncapacitated problems. The current project is aimed at extending the
research to the more general capacitated problem.