* 9502460
* Probe-Ion Laser Spectroscoy of Interfaces in Conventional   and Nanocrystalline Metal Oxide Ceramics
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Brian Tissue, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 09/30/1998
* USD 219,687.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project, supported in the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, focusses on the study of structure and
defect chemistry at grain boundaries in conventional and nanocrystalline
ceramics. During the tenure of this three-year continuing grant, Professor
Tissue and his students at Virginia Polytechnic Institute &amp; State University
will approach this problem using laser-excited fluorescence (LIF) techniques.
Rare earth ions will be incorporated into ceramic materials and these local
probes, which segregate at interfaces during materials synthesis, will be
interrogated using LIF. The objectives of this research are (1) to characterize
the structure and defect chemistry at grain boundaries, (2) to determine the
utility of probe-ion spectroscopy for interface characterization, and (3) to
identify novel optical properties of rare-earth ions in restricted geometries.
Also during this grant period, Professor Tissue will pursue an education plan
that focusses on the development and evaluation of chemistry hypermedia for
undergraduate students in instrumental analysis and analytical chemistry. The
ability to probe the structure and composition of grain boundaries and defects
in ceramic oxide materials is of crucial importance in materials chemistry and
processing. This CAREER research project utilizes rare-earth based laser induced
fluorescence in the development of an enabling analytical technology with which
to address this problem. The educational aspects of this CAREER project will
give rise to the integration state-of-the-art information technology in the
teaching of chemistry at the undergraduate and graduate levels.