* 9502500
* CAREER:  An Integrated Approach for Improving the           Performance, Programmability, and Portability of Shared     Memory Multiprocessors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Sarita Adve, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 06/30/1999
* USD 96,991.00

While shared-memory multiprocessors simplify many aspects of programming, it is
widely believed that naive shared- momory programs are not likely to result in
high performance on most shared-memory systems. The broad objective is to
develop and evaluate techniques for improving the performance of shared- memory
systems while simultaneously enhancing programmability and portability. A key
problem that inhibited performance in shared-memory systems is that, unlike
message passing programs, the exact communication requirements of shared-memory
programs are not obvious. Therefore, compilers, runtime systems, and hardware
typically need to make conservative assumptions, resulting in excessive
communication and synchronization primitives provided on a particular machine
(e.g., locks and barriers), the intended sharing behavior is obscured by these
details. Furthermore, the low-level primitives that must be used to obtain good
performance vary from platform to platform, thus inhibiting program portability.
This research takes an integrated approach to improving the performance, and
portability of systems. The approach broadly is: (1) to identify common
implementation-independent communication patterns along with primitive to
express those patterns in a programming language, (2) to develop heuristics that
can be used by the compiler, runtime systems, hardware or some combination
thereof to map these high-level primitives to the appropriate low-level
primitives supported by the particular target system, and (3) to evaluate the
resulting performance benefits on the system. By exposing the intended sharing
behavior, many instances of unnecessary communication should be avoided, thus
achieving higher performance. Furthermore, despite the larger variety of
synchronization patterns that a programmer must choose from his or her task is
simplified because details of implementing the patterns are left to the
programming support system (note tha t the sharing patterns themselves must be
understood by the programmer anyway). Finally, in combination with other
projects within the overall research program, this research should demonstrate
that these common, high-level synchronization patterns can be efficiently
supported on a variety of platforms, thus enhancing the portability of the
program. This part of the research program is focused on investigating a
specific kind of target system - a hardware distributed shared- memory
multiprocessor that provides software control for protocols and efficient active
message support (e.g., Stanford Flash and Wisconsin Typhoon)- using execution-
driven simulation. Other projects in this research program are already exploring
similar issues on other types of target systems. Education: The educational
objectives fall within three broad areas: curriculm development, teaching
methods, and education outside the classroom. The objectives of the curriculm
development part are (1) to introduce a course in parallel computing involving
computational scientists and engineers along with computer scientists (both in
terms of students attending and faculty teaching the course), (2) to introduce
hands-on parallel programming experience as part of currently existing
undergraduate computer architecture course, (3) to impart a sound education on
performance analysis techniques, and (4) to impart a research experience to
undergraduates by having a modest research project as part of the senior level
architecture course and by actively recruiting undergraduates in the proposed
research program through the Rice senior honor's thesis program. The teaching
methods part of the education plan address growth as an effective teacher by
exposure to research in teaching methods. The final part seeks to (1) encourage
women and other under- represented groups to pursue computer science by actively
interacting with such groups informally and through formal workshops, and (2)
encourage an ex change between industry and academia through tutorials and short
courses.