* 9502983
* Mathematical Sciences: RUI: Spaces of Holomorphic Functions and Their Operators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Benjamin Lotto, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9502983 Lotto This project involves work on spaces of holomorphic functions and
operators on these spaces.. Particular problems in the proposal include the
classification of the multipliers and interpolating sequences for de Branges-
Rovnyak spaces, the boundedness of products of (possibly unbounded) Toeplitz and
Hankel operators, the relationship of the noncyclic vectors of the backward
shift to operator ranges, the classification of rigid functions in Hardy spaces
and the behavior of such functions under composition, the use of disintegration
of measures in the study of composition operators, the study of von Neumann's
inequality for three or more commuting diagonalizable contractions, the
perturbation of commuting operators to commuting diagonalizable operators and
the cyclicity of the compression of analytic multiplication operators to an
invariant subspace of the backward shift operator. Hilbert space operators are
infinite generalizations of matrices. The infinite generalization of a vector is
frequently a function and for this reason Hilbert space operators are frequently
modeled as the operator of multiplication on a space of functions. This project
involves the study of many basic problems of multiplication models for operators
acting on a variant of Hilbert spaces called de Branges-Rovnyak spaces. The
theme that connects all these problems is the interplay among operator theory,
functional analysis, and complex function theory. The interplay provides a
richer and deeper understanding of all three of these topics than one could hope
for by studying them individually ***