* 9502307
* Analog VLSI Sensory Processing
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* John Harris, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Cozzens
* 07/31/1999
* USD 112,887.00

This research deals with the implementation of continuous-time analog VLSI chaps
for processing of sensory signals. Two specific analog sensors are being
developed: 1) a single-chip visual time- to-contact sensor that reports the
amount of time until the chip collides with an oncoming obstacle (assuming
constant relative motion), and, 2) a sound localization chip that computes the
direction (in two-dimensions) of a sound source using signals from two
microphones. Though these projects may appear to be unrelated, the proposed
solutions using adaptive analog computation in CMOS hardware lead to many common
problems that must be solved. By providing a cross-fertilization between
auditory and visual processing, it is hoped that the underlying biological
computational primitives and neuronal representations will be discovered. The
resulting low-power analog devices have obvious applications in such areas as
collision warning sensors for intelligent automobiles and improved, low-power
hearing aids. The educational plan at both the undergraduate and graduate level
has a strong interdisciplinary emphasis. Too often students are taught to
specialize in a narrow area and are consequently unable to relate their work to
an overall system objective. Teaching objectives are: 1) to stress the
interdisciplinary nature of real- world systems, and 2) to introduce students to
problem solving techniques for real-world signal-processing applications. In
existing classes, the use of laboratories and computer experiments where
students can do hands-on experimentation with concepts is emphasized. New
courses at the undergraduate and graduate levels that give students more
exposure to real-world experimentation in laboratories will be designed.