* 9502156
* CAREER:  High Performance Storage Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Margo Seltzer, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 06/30/1998
* USD 131,975.00

The demand for network services is growing at an exceptional rate. This growing
demand requires that the necessary infrastructure be developed to facilitate
rapid and easy access to vast, distributed information stores. The focus of this
research is the essential base technologies required to make distributed
information systems generally useful. Specifically, this research includes: high
performance file system design and analysis, rotationally optimal disk
scheduling, and distributed caching data. The research will result in a high-
performance, distributed information server, utilizing new file system
techniques, advanced disk scheduling algorithms, and caching based upon network
topological location (geographical push-caching). The file system design borrows
the essential characteristics of today's log-structured and journaling file
systems, combining them with adaptive, rotationally optimized disk scheduling
techniques. New caching techniques designed for scalability enhance the file
system's feasibility by reducing user-perceived latency for distributed
requests. The teaching component emphasizes curriculum development for both
computer science concentrators and non-concentrators and training programs for
undergraduate and graduate teaching assistants. For concentrators, the focus on
undergraduate curriculum complements Harvard's commitment to the establishment
of a strong computer systems research group. Undergraduate courses have been and
will continue to be modified to incorporate the fundamental concepts in an area,
the classic literature, and research activities. This combination of class
activities is the cornerstone for producing undergraduates who can fully
participate in ongoing research projects. For non-concentrators, the
introductory computer science sequence has been modified to emphasize design and
problem solving skills over programming mechanics. Future developments will
extend this idea still further with the development of an introductory design
course. The course is intended to serve both as a common ground for computer
science and engineering concentrators as well as a broad introduction for non-
concentrators. The focus of the graduate curriculum development is on the
application of the scientific method to systems research. Students are asked to
critique published work, design experimental evaluation platforms, analyze and
critique data sets, and produce quality research. The last aspect of the
teaching proposal is the development of teaching assistant training seminars.
Professor Seltzer has been working closely with the Derek Bok Center for
Teaching and Learning, participating in their workshops and presenting panels
and seminars with her teaching assistants. The orientation procedure she has
developed will be enhanced so that it will be suitable for teaching assistants
in all compute science classes, and potentially other fields.