* 9502260
* Scaling Up Planning Systems Using Parallel Hardware and     Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1995,02/29/2000
* Diane Cook, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2000
* USD 147,375.00

The objective of this project is to scale up the applicability of planning
algorithms developed in the field of Artificial Intelligence. The basic research
component of the project is to first investigate techniques for improving
scalability of planning using parallel techniques, then to explore machine
learning techniques for reusing and refining generated plans. Industrial
applications of AI planning algorithms have been limited largely by the
computational complexity of the planning task. The significant speedup that can
be obtained using parallel hardware and machine learning techniques can bridge
the gap between research and a wide variety of industrial applications. To
demonstrate the power of the techniques developed here, they will not only be
formally verified but will be applied to such applications as automated assembly
and cooperative planning of unmanned ground vehicles. The CAREER project will
also impact graduate and undergraduate education. Existing seminar courses in
Parallel AI and in Planning and Robotics will be refined. An industrial team
will be formed to suggest topics and to oversee class projects. All course
materials developed for these classes will be packaged and available for general
dissemination over the Internet.