* 9502843
* Energetics and Dynamics of H-H,C-H, and C-C Bond Activation by Transition Metal Atoms and Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* H. Floyd Davis, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* joyce guest
* 04/30/1998
* USD 245,000.00

In this Faculty Early Career Development Award funded by the Experimental
Physical Chemistry Program in the Chemistry Division, Harry Floyd Davis of
Cornell University will study the physical and chemical interactions between
neutral transition metal atoms and complexes and small covalent molecules such
as methane. Laser ablation will be used to produce sufficient quantities of
transition metals which will react with a molecular beam of the covalent
molecule. Laser spectroscopies will be used to excite the resulting complex in
either the van der Waals region or the insertion intermediate region of the
potential surface. Electronic excitation and vibrational overtone excitation
will be used to obtain information on excited state and ground state
unimolecular decomposition products by measuring angular distributions and
branching ratios. Studies of bimolecular reactions using different initial
electronic configurations of the transition metal will also be undertaken. The
educational component of the program will involve undergraduates in studying
chemical reactions at the fundamental level in a research environment less
structured than regular undergraduate laboratory sessions. Transition metals are
important in a wide variety of catalytic systems involving organic and inorganic
molecules. Professor Davis will study the effects of electronic structure and
energy in reactions of transition metal atoms with small covalent molecules. A
determination of these effects is important in controlling reactivities and
understanding the mechanisms involved in catalysis.