* 9502109
* Faculty Early Career Development: Environmentally Conscious Machine Tool Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1997
* John Sutherland, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9502109 Sutherland This Faculty Early Career Development award will focus on the
environmental aspects of industries that build or use machine tools. The
research focus is on environmentally conscious design and manufacture (ECDM) as
it pertains to machine tool systems. Design research issues will define and
develop product value models to weigh tradeoffs on materials, features, etc.,
that affect their reuse or re-manufacturability. Manufacturing research issues
emphasize ways to eliminate or reduce the impact of fluids in machining systems.
The research plan will integrate well with MTU's participation in the NSF/ARPA
funded Machine Tool Agile Manufacturing Institute, as well as an EPA sponsored
Center for Clean Industrial Treatment Technology. The educational focus
complements this with courses that emphasize the environmental issues in the
design and manufacture of discrete parts. These courses will be available at
MTU, but also to industry using distance learning technology. Sutherland brings
an outstanding background as an educator, winning campus or statewide awards for
his teaching and mentoring activities, which adds to the strength of this
proposal's clear and achievable educational plan. The high probability of new
discovery in this fertile area, coupled with education plan for both students
and practicing engineers, will have a high future impact for industry and
overall competitiveness. ***