* 9502389
* NMR Spectroscopic Investigation of Peptide Aggregation
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Cynthia Larive, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 03/31/1999
* USD 195,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is in the general area of
analytical and surface chemistry and in the subfield of bioanalytical chemistry.
During the tenure of this three-year continuing grant, Professor Larive and her
students at the University of Kansas will pursue research designed to provide a
detailed understanding of the relationships between peptide primary structure,
three-dimensional conformation, and aggregation. These studies will involve five
specific aims, namely (1) to understand the importance of primary structure in
aggregation; (2) to perform peptide conformation analysis; (3) to measure
peptide diffusion coefficients; (4) to develop an aggregation model; and (5) to
test the model by examining aggregation under various conditions of solvent,
temperature, pH, and ionic strength. A family of synthetic peptides based on
systematic alteration of primary structure of a sixteen-residue sequence will be
examined using a suite of experimental techniques featuring nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) and circular dichroism (CD). The results of these studies should
indicate the relative contributions of hydrogen bonding, dipolar interactions,
and hydrophobic contacts to the stabilization of aggregates of these peptides.
Also during this grant period, Professor Larive will pursue an educational
development plan that includes the reorganization and revitalization of the
undergraduate analytical chemistry laboratory, introduction of an environmental
option for chemistry majors, and increasing the involvement of undergraduates in
research. Peptide and protein aggregation is a fundamentally and practically
important problem. By exploring the effects of solution conditions such as
solvent, pH, and ionic strength, this CAREER research project will produce a
foundation of experimental results which will be useful in controlling
aggregation of proteins expressed for research, therapeutic, or commercial
purposes. The educational developmen t aspects of this CAREER project will
enrich and broaden the undergraduate analytical chemistry curriculum at the
University of Kansas.