* 9502360
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Dielectric Studies
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Joseph Dougherty, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 43,000.00

9502360 Dougherty This award provides funding under the "Self-Sufficient
Partnership for Research" Program for one year to the Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Dielectric Studies at the Pennsylvania State
University. The Center was founded in 1983 to do research on ceramic dielectric
materials that serve as the technological basis for vital components used in
electronic circuits. The Center's aim is to improve the fundamental
understanding of the synthesis, processing, and properties of dielectric
materials used in electronic devices. The Center derives financial support from
industrial members who use the results of the Center's research to guide their
industrial development of products of technological interest. At present there
are fifteen corporate members. The research emphasizes the study of multilayer
ceramic dielectrics to include the problems of putting diverse materials
together into a single integrated ceramics package that contains capacitors,
interconnects, thick and thin films, sensors, and polymers. The Center conducts
research to improve basic scientific understanding and techniques that will
serve as the basis for future generations of products, while industrial members
develop the generic advanced technologies used to manufacture and test advanced
dielectric devices. These devices are critical to the electronics,
communications, and computer industries. The Program Manager recommends
Pennsylvania State University be awarded $21,500 for one year.