* 9502674
* Career: Type Theory and Operational Semantics for           Programming Languages
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Robert Harper, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 02/28/1998
* USD 105,000.00

This CAREER award supports an investigation into the use of type theory and
operational semantics in the design and implementation of programming languages.
Type theory has proved to be an important organizing principle in programming
language design. This is well exemplified by the use of type theory in the
design of modularity and abstraction constructs. This investigation seeks to
consolidate advances in type theory into the design of the ML2000 programming
language. Type theory has proved important for the implementation of programming
languages. Conventional syntax-directed compilation methods are generalized to
type-directed compilation, allowing type information to be exploited during
compilation. Sophisticated type systems such as those derived from the Girard-
Reynolds polymorphic lambda-calculus suggest new implementation strategies based
on passing type information at link- and run- time. This research investigates
the use of type-based compilation techniques. Operational semantics provides a
suitable framework for addressing issues of compiler correctness and proving
properties of programs. Typed programming languages such as Standard ML provide
a rich setting in which to discuss high-level programming techniques such as
data abstraction, modularity, and separate compilation. Types are essential for
reasoning about programs. A procedure can in general be deemed to have certain
input/output properties only under the assumption that its arguments have
suitable types. Operational semantics is a useful pedagogical tool for teaching
undergraduate programming, both as an explanatory device and as the basis for
proving properties of programs and languages. Important advantages are expected
through the interplay between research and education.