* 9502675
* Collaborative Research:  Studies of Structure, Dynamics     and Phase Transitions of Suspensions of Charged Polymer     Spheres in Equilibuium and Non-Equilibrium States
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Noel Clark, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 156,986.00

DMR-9502675 Clark Experimental and modeling studies directed toward
understanding the collective behavior of strongly interacting spherical particle
systems will be carried out. Experiments will exploit the large length and time
scales characteristic of colloidal suspensions of polymer spheres to probe
equilibrium and nonequilibrium collective properties such as melting, crystal
nucleation and growth, shear-induced melting and rheology. Experimental
techniques include optical microscopy and digital image analysis, static and
quasielastic light scattering, and x-ray diffraction. The modeling will focus on
exploring the roles of geometric and topological defects on liquid structure,
equilibrium melting, and shear-induced melting. %%% Systems of interacting
spherical particles (colloids) are of fundamental interest in condensed matter
physics. They are the simplest way to exhibit the still poorly understood
melting-crystallization transition. Colloids exhibit the unique combination of
softness of interaction, slowness in motion, and large spacing between particles
that enables their effective use in the study of spherical particle behavior.
Experiments involving a variety of optical techniques will be combined with
model calculations to study recrystallization and glass formation as well as the
importance of structural defects. ***