* 9502825
* Polarizations and Symmetries in Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Charles Rosenblatt, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 10/31/1999
* USD 228,256.00

9502825 Rosenblatt The purpose of the proposed work is to investigate symmetry-
related behavior of liquid crystals. Specifically, the investigations are
designed to increase the understanding of how chirality and symmetry affect
liquid crystalline behavior. A variety of phenomena related to ferroelectric and
antiferroelectric liquid crystals will be studied including the dynamics of the
electroclinic effect, low frequency second harmonic generation in ferroelectric
liquid crystals, spatially periodic polarizations, the behavior of the
antiferroelectric -"disordered" phase transition, and the antiferroelectric -
ferroelectric phase transition. The effects of symmetry-breaking surfaces as
they relate to liquid crystalline polarizations will be probed. Related
investigations on ferroelectric liquid crystals will also be performed,
including studies of ionic adsorption and enantiomeric concentration
fluctuations. Finally, a new thrust area involving liquid crystals in confined
geometries will be explored, with special attention paid to the role of the
large surface-to-volume ratio of the host matrix as it relates to chiral liquid
crystals. A battery of experimental tools will be used, including static and
dynamic light scattering, dielectric relaxation, magnetic and electric
birefringence and other electrooptic measurements, magnetic susceptometry, and
Freedericksz techniques. %%% This research is designed to increase the
understanding of how chirality and symmetry affect liquid crystalline behavior.
Symmetry plays an important role in liquid crystalline behavior. In a smectic C
phase composed of chiral molecules, for example, one finds a macroscopic
polarization in the plane of the smectic layers. At a symmetry-breaking
interface there exists a polarization normal to the surface; if the molecules
are chiral, lack inversion symmetry, and are tilted with respect to the
interface, an additional component of polarization may reside at and parallel to
the interfac e. Chirality may also affect the nature of a phase transition, or
introduce entirely new phases such as the blue phases. The proposed research
will provide a deeper fundamental understanding of these phenomena, and it may
also impact the technological infrastructure as well. Work under the prior grant
led to a new display technology; the results of work to be performed under the
proposed research have the potential to affect current scientific and
technological thinking, and possibly have impact on the display industry as
well.