* 9502170
* CAREER: Equilibria and Mass Transfer Characteristics of     Nonvolatile Organic Chemicals in Unsaturated Soils
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Thomas Harmon, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 304,500.00

9502170 Harmon This is an award to provide the support this investigator
requested in response to NSF 94-101, the National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Program which has the intent of encouraging
the early development of academic faculty as educators and researchers. The
objective of his research is to link common soil characteristics to the specific
phase distribution and accessibility or extractability of nonvolatile organic
chemicals in soil-water systems. His secondary objective is to evaluate
supercritical carbon dioxide extraction as a laboratory-based analytical method
for decontamination of soil groundwater. The investigator's education plan
involves activities that will help him to maintain a career-long focus on
educational advances in science and engineering. He plans to address this by
developing a viable research group at all academic levels and presenting courses
that are consistent with his research interests, departmental and accreditation
issues and developing courses that integrate theory and technology for
researchers and practicing engineers. Results of this investigator's research
are expected to improve the engineering design of procedures to decontaminate
soil. Targeted results include correlations of soil properties to predict their
responsive behavior when subjected to decontamination procedures. This
investigator's educational plan is expected to result in improved approaches to
integration of advances in knowledge gained from his research into the education
of engineers and to continue his participation in outreach programs for local
pre-college students and displaced defense workers. ***