* 9502421
* A Protein Analog Approach to Biomimetic Studies of          Metalloenzymes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Yi Lu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 06/30/2000
* USD 439,775.00

Dr. Yi Lu, of the University of Illinois, is supported by the Inorganic,
Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry Program under a Faculty Early Career
Advancement Award for biomimetic studies of enzyme function. Site directed
mutagenesis will be used to alter the protein environments of small
metalloproteins such as azurin and cyctochrome c peroxidase in an effort to
induce them to become functional mimics of cyctochrome c oxidase and lignin
peroxidase, respectively. The primary objective of this work is to obtain
structural and mechanistic information about the function of the active site
that is difficult or impossible to obtain for the larger, more complex proteins.
A variety of techniques will be used to study the genetically engineered
proteins including UV-VIS, EPR, MCD, NMR, ENDOR and EXAFS spectroscopies. When
possible x-ray structures on the modified proteins will be obtained. The
teaching plan outlines methods for introducing modern research methodology into
undergraduate laboratories with emphasis on the first year advanced chemistry
laboratory. Also detailed are plans for training graduate research students in
the recently developed Biomolecular Chemistry program at the university, which
aims to foster interdisciplinary research at the interface of chemistry and
biology. A major challenge for the chemical industry, which continues to enjoy a
favorable trade balance, is to develop new processes that are still low-cost and
high yielding, but are environmentally benign. Small, properly designed proteins
may serve as catalysts for certain processes, which would be entirely
nonpolluting since the reagents, catalyst and products (new proteins) would be
biodegradable. The studies to be conducted in this project will support the
ultimate design of such small proteins. For the chemical industry to convert to
such manufacturing processes will require scientists who are skilled in several
areas besides chemistry. Interdisciplinary research training such as that
envisioned by Dr. Lu for graduate students in the Biomolecular Chemistry program
is crucial to the development of such highly skilled scientists.