* 9502029
* CAREER: Toward a Scientific Basis for the design of         Integrated Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Kevin Sullivan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1998
* USD 128,730.00

The broad objective of this CAREER project is to help cement the status of
software engineering as a discipline that uses models, methods, and mechanisms
based on generalizable scientific knowledge. The research component of this
project addresses three important problems in software design. The mediator
method is an approach to design in which the behavioral relationships needed to
integrate independent behaviors are separately identified and represented as
objects external to the objects representing those behaviors. Externalizing
relationships as mediators depends in turn on a careful application of both
explicit and implicit invocation mechanisms. The first research focus is an
attempt to improve scientific foundations for software design, scientifically
testing the claim that common methods for designing integrated systems are
poorer than the mediator method with respect to ease of evolution of integration
requirements. Second is the exploration, through pilot projects, of using the
mediator method to aid the design of distributed systems. Third is the
investigation of a new approach to helping designers balance multiple objectives
as software designs evolve. An environment that reflects how well a design meets
each of several objectives by depicting divergences of the design from each of
several a models, where each model is defined by the designer as good with
respect to one particular objective. The teaching focus is intended to develop
engineers who understand software design to be a multi-objective, risky
activity, done with incomplete information and thus demanding creativity and
reflective, rigorous, risk-reducing methods. To help students understand how to
manage the complexity and risk of real software systems, courses focus on
realistic development projects, such as a mobile robot system.