* 9503143
* Delta Cache Coherence Protocols
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Paul Reynolds, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 08/31/1999
* USD 259,616.00

Finding a good solution to the cache coherence problem is critical to the
effective use of medium and large scale multiprocessors. The high cost of remote
memory access in such systems makes it important that processes be able to
access data locally, but allowing processes to hold local copies of shared
writable data requires finding a good way to keep the copies consistent. This
project will investigate a new family of cache coherence protocols called delta
cache protocols that maintain cache coherence with little or no synchronization.
Delta cache protocols are directory, as opposed to snoopy, protocols. The delta
cache protocols are based on isotach time systems, time systems implemented by a
class of networks called isotach networks. Isotach networks are characterized
not by topology - they can be imp lemented on arbitrary topologies - but by the
guarantees they provide about the relative order in which operations appear to
be delivered. Isotach systems require custom switching elements, but can be
built with off- the-shelf processors and in a variety of configurations ranging
from tightly -coupled multiprocessors to clusters of workstations. A simulation
study of isotach systems shows that they outperform comparable conventional
systems under realistic workloads, in many cases by an order of magnitude or
more. In extreme cases, they outperform conventional systems by an arbitrary
amount. The project is a three year study of the cache coherence problem with
the goals of exploring the design space for cache coherence protocols opened by
isotach networks; and evaluating the performance of delta cache protocols. The
exploratory work includes protocol and cache design; extending the approach to a
variety of topologies and to other levels of the memory hierarchy; and devising
ways to reduce the network bandwidth requirements of the protocols and to
improve the efficiency of the protocols through data migration. The performance
study will simulate isotach and conventional systems with caches and compare
their performance under a variety of workloads. The simulation will build on the
already completed simulation of isotach systems without caches.