* 9503901
* North American Research Fellows Program:  Synergizing       Case-Based Reasoning with Bayesian Models
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1996
* Juan Vargas, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 01/31/1996
* USD 8,300.00

9503901 Vargas This award is under the North American Research Fellows Program,
which enables U.S. scientists and engineers from the United States, Canada and
Mexico, to visit research establishments in one or both of the other two
countries for periods of three to twelve months. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a two-month research visit by Dr. Juan E. Vargas to work with Drs.
Francisco Cantu and Jose Manuel Sanchez at the Center for Artificial
Intelligence at the Instituto Tecnologico y de Estudios Superiores de Monterrey
(ITESM) in Mexico. This award will support research into methods for designing
knowledge-based systems that integrate statistically-sound techniques,
probabilistic inference (using Bayesian belief networks) and case-based
reasoning. Dr. Vargas will also conduct research into knowledge representation
models that can employ Bayesian belief networks as templates from which cases
may be generated for case-based reasoning. He will lay out conceptual designs
for computer systems capable of using the integration of these concepts for
automated reasoning under uncertainty. ***