* 9503392
* Mathematical Sciences: Studies in Nonlinear Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Donald Aronson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 12/31/1998
* USD 70,000.00

******************************************************************************
STUDIES IN NONLINEAR ANAYSIS: ABSTRACT The proposed research is directed towards
two types of problems concerning the behavior of solutions to nonlinear
differential equations. The first of these problems concerns the existence and
intermediate asymptotic behavior of self-similar solutions to the porous medium
equation (a degenerate nonlinear parabolic equation) and to the Navier-Stokes
equations of gas dynamics. The objective here is to obtain the asymptotic
description of various critical transitions in the flows involved, such as the
closing of holes (focusing) in porous medium flow or the implosion of shock
waves in gas dynamics. The second problem concerns the study of the dynamics of
of load coupled arrays of Josephson point junctions. These arrays are modeled by
nonlinear systems of ordinary differential equations, and the object of the
study is to understand the onset of stability and instability of various kinds
of phase locked solutions. Particular emphasis will be placed on predicting the
loss of stability of phase lock and the dynamical consequences of such a loss.
Self-similar solutions to partial differential equations are solutions of a
particularly simple structure determined by the underlying symmetries of the
equation. They often arise in the asymptotic description of critical transitions
in the flow, because these transitions are characteristic of the equations
themselves and do not depend on the details of the particular flow. An example
of this phenomenon occurs in engineering practice in connection with coating
flows of very viscous fluids. The process of filling holes in such flows is
often described by a porous medium equation, and our results will be useful in
developing numerical methods for the study and control of such processes. Large
arrays of load coupled Josephson junctions are used in many electronic devices
such as microwave generators and parametric amplifiers. In all these devices the
most desirable operating condition is one in which all of the junctions
oscillate in unison. Unfortunately, for various junction characteristics and
load configurations this phase locked state is not stable. It is therefore
important to know how to predict the stability and instability of the phase
locked state in terms of the parameter values for any particular array.