* 9503817
* Paleoceanographic Evolution of the Subantarctic Southeast   Atlantic:  A Site Survey Proposal for the Ocean Drilling    Program
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1995,03/31/1998
* David Hodell, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 03/31/1998
* USD 274,929.00

9503817 Hodell This collaborative field program in the sub-Antarctic ocean
involves researchers from University of Florida, Georgia Tech, Scripps
Institution of the University of California at San Diego and Lamont-Doherty
Earth Observatory of Columbia University. The objectives of the research cruise
planned for early 1996 are to sample sediments deposited within various water
masses of the Antarctic ocean for studies of climatic and oceanographic
variations over the past few hundred thousand years. The Antarctic region has a
major influence on global oceanography, for it is here that many of the
intermediate and bottom waters of the world ocean are formed, and thus the heat
and chemical budgets of the ocean are dependent in a number of ways on changes
in climate and oceanography here. The record of these variations is recorded in
microfossils preserved in the sediments, and this group of investigators will
sample sediments from all of the major intermediate and deep water masses of the
region. Their research will include faunal, chemical and pore water analysis of
the sediments recovered to construct chronologies of change in a large number of
parameters throughout the last two or three glacial cycles (as far as their
piston cores will reach). In addition, the data they collect will be used to
define suitable sites for drilling by JOIDES Resolution in 1997 or 1998 at sites
which have been highly ranked as part of the Ocean Drilling Program, the
international program for scientific ocean drilling of which NSF is a major
sponsor. Though presently considered a high drilling priority, these Antarctic
sites do not presently have sufficient site survey information to allow precise
hole locations, and this project will provide those necessary geophysical and
sedimentological data. ***