* 9503437
* Control of Electrochemical Batch Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Karlene Hoo, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract - Kosanovich The manufacturing cost of chemicals can be decreased by
improving the operating performance of chemical reactors. One way to accomplish
this is through timely control of the operating variables. For batch systems,
this is important to maintaining the quality of the final product. This research
is to develop new robust, feedback control formulations for electrochemical
batch processes that satisfy multiple performance objectives in the face of
model uncertainties and disturbances. The formulation is general and can be
applied to other batch systems as well. Specifically, this project consists of
three studies on new fundamental approaches to the modelling and control of
batch systems: (1) development of a time-varying state space model of the non-
stationery batch process for use in a model predictive control strategy; (2)
system identification using multi-resolution (wavelet) analysis; and (3)
formulation of a controller strategy for a multi-resolution representation of
the process. The research will include and experimental demonstration of the
concepts on an electrochemical batch system. Effort will also be devoted to the
development of effective computational procedures. The planned career
advancement activities include six months of rigorous study in the
methodologies, two summer months in a cooperative industrial program, and four
months devoted to educational material preparation and experimental
demonstration on a laboratory scale electrochemical batch process. The
methodologies that are relevant to the goals of this study are (1) multi-
resolution theory, (2) model predictive and optimal control theory; and (3)
theory of electrochemical systems. The experimental portimn of the activities
include a cooperative program that provides hands-on experience in the
operations of systems at an industrial site and collaboration with department
colleagues on electrochemical systems. Other activities include active
participation in workshops and seminars, both do mestic and international,
assistance of a post-doctoral research fellow, and development of a graduate
control course that combines theory with experiments on batch systems.