* 9503408
* Iterative Substructuring Methods for Elliptic Problems and  Related Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Olof Widlund, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 07/31/1998
* USD 227,000.00

The development of numerical methods for large systems is central in the
development of efficient codes for fluid dynamics, elasticity, and other core
problems of continuum mechanics. Many other tasks in such codes parallelize
relatively easily. The importance of the algebraic system solvers is therefore
increasing with the appearance of parallel and distributed computing systems,
with a substantial number of fast processors, each with relatively large memory.
The development of improved methods will, together with more powerful computer
systems, make it possible to carry out simulations in three dimensions, with
quite high resolution, relatively easily. Work will continue in developing
iterative substructuring and other domain decomposition methods for increasingly
difficult elliptic problems. Domain decomposition algorithms are iterative
methods, often of conjugate gradient type, for the parallel solution of the
large linear, or nonlinear, systems of algebraic equations that arise when
partial differential equations are discretized by finite elements, finite
differences, or spectral methods. In each iteration step, local problems
representing the restriction of the original problem to a potentially large
number of subregions are solved approximately. The subregions, which can be
allocated to individual processors of a parallel computer, form a decomposition
of the entire domain of the problem. In addition, the inclusion of a coarse
subproblem substantially increases the efficiency of the preconditioner. In this
study, which combines mathematical analysis with the design and numerical
testing of algorithms, a special emphasis is on the study of elements and other
high order finite element methods, on nonconforming methods such as the mortar
finite elements, and on the difficulties which are related to distorted
subregions or elements.