* 9503233
* 1995 Gordon Research Conference on the Physics and Chemistry of Laser Diagnostics in Combustion
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/1995,09/30/1995
* Marshall Long, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* MILTON J LINEVSKY
* 09/30/1995
* USD 5,000.00

Abstract 950323 Long The Gordon Research Conference on the Physics and Chemistry
of Laser Diagnostics in Combustion has been held biennially since 1981. The 1995
meeting will be held in July, 1995 at Plymouth State College in New Hampshire.
The purpose of this conference is to examine closely and to discuss freely the
chemical and physical foundations of the various laser diagnostic techniques,
including issues such as quenching, energy transfer, quantitative species
concentration measurements, line spacings, line shapes, widths and convolutions,
and measurement biases. New themes of the 1995 Gordon Conference will include
laser diagnostics of resonant wave-mixing techniques, the interaction between
modeling of chemical flame structure and laser diagnostics, and the metrology of
particle diagnostics. The emphasis of the conference is directed toward the
science of the measurement approaches, not upon the meaning of the measurements
to combustion per se. The invited speakers and discussion leaders include both
researchers specializing in the development and application of laser diagnostics
in combustion as well as investigators from basic areas not directly involved in
laser diagnostics. The major products of this conference will be the exchange of
information between researchers on the cutting edge of this technology area,
hopefully leading to synergism which will result in further advances, and a
final report which will summarize the activities of the conference.