* 9503885
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Intramolecular        Electron Transfer in the Inverted Region
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Thomas Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1998
* USD 39,000.00

9503885 Meyer This U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Science Program award supports travel
expenses for graduate students from the laboratory of Dr. Thomas Meyer, Univ. of
North Carolina, Chapel Hill to the laboratory of Dr. N. Katz, Universidad
Nacional de Tucuman, Tucuman, Argentina. Three visits of two month duration are
supported. The Argentine side, in turn, will support three two month long visits
by scientists from Dr. Katz' lab to the Univ. of North Carolina. Some expendable
research supplies and publication costs are also supported under this award. The
area of investigation is an important one, both as it relates to the basic
understanding of photochemistry/physics and to more practical areas, such as
solar energy conversion. The work will involve investigations in intramolecular
electron transfer in a series of mixed- valence dimers containing Re(I, II) and
Mo(I,0). These complexes will be designed such that the redox potential of
photoinduced Re to Mo electron transfer can be varied by ligand modifications.
In all cases the driving force will be greater than the reorganizational energy,
so that the process occurs in the Marcus "inverted region". These studies will
complement and extend Meyer's research on metal- ligand charge transfer in the
inverted region , which has centered on monometallic complexes. Operationally,
the strengths of the North Carolina and the Argentine groups will be efficiently
utilized. While the design of the compounds is a joint responsibility,
preparative work will be carried out in Tucuman, where the laboratory and
personnel have much synthetic expertise. The complexes will then be transported
to Nopth Carolina, where the photochemical experiments will be carried out,
using Meyer's highly specialized laser facilities. In order to produce a
coherent research team that effectively combines the individual talents of the
two research groups, the research plan contains a detailed schedule for the
interchange of workers b etween the U.S. and the Argentine laboratories. ***