* 9503883
* Construction of an Undulator Beamline Using a Normal        Incidence Monochromator for Ultra-High Resolution Photoemission and Other Studies at NSF's Synchrotron Radiation Center
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Juan Carlos Campuzano, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Robert J. Reynik
* 07/31/1999
* USD 530,000.00

9503883 Campuzano The technique of Angle-Resolved Photoemission (ARPES) is
currently the only method of determining the energy - momentum relationship of
electrons in materials, that is, the complete electronic structure of materials.
Recently, we have dramatically improved the technique of ARPES from its previous
typical resolution of ~30 meV to 8 meV. This improvement opens up new
possibilities in understanding new materials, particularly the man-made ones
with large unit cells. This is because in materials with large unit cells the
eclectron states are closely spaced in energy, requiring extreme resolution.
Examples of what we propose to study are the high temperature and organic
superconductors, quantum confinement in metallic, magnetic, and semiconducting
multilayers, etc. Although we have made great strides in improving the energy
resolution, the same cannot be said about momentum resolution. The new man- made
large unit cell materials have very small Brillouin zones. This problem is
fortunately only geometrical in nature: the momentum resolution can be improved
by simply restricting the acceptance angle of the electron analyzer. However,
since the counting rate decreases as the square of that aperture, higher photon
beam flux is required. %%% With this award we will construct an undulator-based
beamline with a high throughput-high resolution normal incidence monochromator
at the University of Wisconsin-Madison's Synchrotron Radiation Center;s Guest
Investigator Program. The instrument will not only open new possibilities in the
study of electronic structure, but will also relieve the heavy burden placed on
the existing 4m NIM beamline at SRC. ***