* 9503279
* Paleoclimate Records from Lake Sediments in a Cape Dyer-    Quvitu Transect, Eastern Baffin Island, Arctic Canada
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 04/30/1998
* USD 202,515.00

Abstract ATM-9503279 Miller, Gifford University of Colorado Title: Paleoclimate
Records from Lake Sediment in a Cape Dyer- Quvitu Transect, Eastern Baffin
Island, Arctic Canada The sensitivity of the polar regions to increased
greenhouse gases is described by global circulation models. Rapid changes in
Arctic boundary conditions that influence climate, such as vegetation type
(especially tundra vs boreal forest), extent and duration of sea ice and
seasonal snow cover, and continental ice thickness/ice berg discharge may have
had dramatic impacts outside the Arctic in the past, and may have similar future
impacts. These impacts underlie current interest in the role of the Arctic in
the global climate system. A primary objective of the PALE Initiative
(Paleoclimate from Arctic Lakes and Estuaries) is to obtain and analyze a series
of lake sediment cores that span the circum-arctic region. This project focuses
on the 0-20,000 yr time period, with opportunistic sampling of older records and
high-resolution younger records where encountered. Research will continue lake-
coring research efforts, including the interpretation of pollen, diatom,
sedimentological and isotopic analyses. Work also continues to develop
additional proxies for past climate utilizing the isotopic composition (C- and
O- isotopes) of aquatic macrofossils and specific classes of dissolved organic
matter preserved in lake sediments and changes in diatom floral assemblages.