* 9503863
* Improving Requirements Completeness through Inquiry-Based   Goal Refinement
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Colin Potts, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/1998
* USD 49,966.00

Requirements completeness is the extent to which an application meets user
needs. Many applications fail to meet user needs because their requirements
incompletely specify what should happen in non-normative situations. Such
applications constrain users' actions, so that "workarounds" must be invented.
This project is to develop and evaluate novel methods for improving and
predicting the completeness of requirements with an emphasis on interactive
applications for individual users and small groups. It is assumed that
requirements can be derived from user and enterprise goals, and so completeness
is defined as the fit between a feature set and the goals and goal-thwarting
obstacles that arise in the use context. There are two research challenges: (i)
development of methods for analyzing the use of context to uncover goals and
obstacles, and (ii) development of methods for deriving requirements from goals
and obstacles. Approaches are to be developed for performing these
transformations: identifying goals, decomposing goals into subgoals,clarifying
goal dependencies, transforming goals into operations, establishing the boundary
between application and environment, allocating operations to application and
users, identifying obstacles, inventing scenarios for analysis of obstacles, and
adding operations or goals to deal with obstacles. The project also seeks to
extend and specialize for goal refinement the Inquiry-Based Requirements
Analysis process (in which requirements derivation intertwines the expression of
models, discussion of their content, and transformation). Work in design
rationale is applicable to guiding recurring patterns of goal refinement.
Candidate feature sets can be compared by exploring scenarios that are derived
systematically from the goal structure: Scenarios are generated using a story
grammar, with each significant episode representing a goal or an obstacle.
Scenario generation heuristics lead to greater goal/obstacle coverage, and
therefore greater requirements completeness without unnecessary redundancy.
Development and evaluation of the goal refinement strategy are proceeding
simultaneously. The number and quality of additional requirements that are
identified as a result of applying the strategy to realistic case studies will
be measured. Industrial case studies are carried out in parallel with industrial
funding. ***