* 9503210
* Epitaxial Growth and Properties of New Group IV             Semiconductor Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Harry Atwater, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/1998
* USD 283,496.00

9503210 Atwater This research aims at a definitive assessment of the synthesis,
structure and electronic structure of a class of Group IV semiconductor alloys
containing tin. New approaches to alloy synthesis will be explored to overcome
thermodynamic and kinetic limits to growth of homogeneous, single-crystal, Sn-
based group IV semiconductor alloys. Two types of epitaxial heterostructures are
of interest: Binary alloys with large misfit relative to silicon grown either in
thick strain-relieved layers or thin, coherently strained layers; and alloys
where atomic size differences enable local strain compensation and low misfit
relative to silicon. First principles electronic structure calculations in the
local density approximation will be performed to enable determination of which
structures are stable and to obtain energy band structures of strained and
unstrained Sn-based alloys. Information from the electronic structure
calculations will be used to construct force fields for molecular dynamics
simulations of Sn incorporation using energetic beams. Measurements of
electronic and optical properties (e.g. optical energy gap, carrier mobilities
and carrier concentrations) of single crystal alloy films will be compared to
calculated electronic and optical properties. %%% This program will be the first
comprehensive investigation of a new class of materials whose electronic
properties may result in the integration of new functional heterojunction
electronic and optoelectronic materials and devices on silicon substrates.
Because of the pervasiveness of silicon integrated circuit technology and its
enormous economic importance, the technological impact of the proposed program
is potentially very large. An important feature of the program is the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials
research. ***