* 9503994
* CISE Postdoctoral Program:  Postdoctoral Research Associate in Experimental Science:  Applying Computer Vision Methods  to Image Databases
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Hanan Samet, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 08/31/1999
* USD 68,200.00

9503994 Samet One of the emerging areas of research is the integration of
databases containing nontraditional data with conventional databases. New
indexing methods are required in order to store and retrieve nontraditional data
efficiently. These methods must capture the nature of the data and sort on this
information. In this research the methods for integrating symbolic images into
relational database systems will be extended to a more general case of images.
The problem is how to match the stored image with an observed image that is
presented to the database as a query, but is taken from a different viewpoint. A
solution based on utilizing methods that are used in computer vision to solve
these problems, and integrating these results into a relational (or any other)
database system will be investigated. The solution is based on the use of
geometric invariants. An additional research goal that extends this work into
other nontraditional data types such as video data will also be performed. As
video is becoming a common data type in information systems, data management
systems should support this new kind of data. The important issue is how to
extract contextual, spatial and temporal information from the video sequences in
order to index on video data based on its contents. A solution that is based on
gathering information about methods that are used for this purpose in computer
vision, and adapting them so they can be used in the framework of database
systems will be outlined. In particular, using a system the recognizes facial
expressions from video sequences of a human face is suggested as a testbed. ***