* 9503447
* Mathematical Sciences:  Conference on Dynamical Numerical   Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Donald Estep, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1996
* USD 8,200.00

Dieci The investigator and his colleagues organize an international conference
on numerical methods for dynamical systems. The interaction between dynamical
systems and numerical analysis has grown in recent years as the limitations of
classical quantitative numerical analysis have become increasingly apparent. In
practice, a common goal of computation is to obtain information about solutions
over moderate to long time intervals, yet classical error analysis is generally
not meaningful past a short initial transient. It is thus fundamental to the
numerical analysis of differential equations to address both the efficacy of
existing computational methods and the design of special methods for computation
over long time intervals. Specific topics to be covered include convergence of
integration algorithms over long time intervals (including long-time error
bounds and convergence of invariant sets), stability of integration algorithms
over long time intervals (including preservation of dynamical structure and
spurious solutions), new approaches to error analysis (including shadowing
results and backward error analysis), and design of computational techniques for
invariant sets such as algorithms to compute invariant torii, inertial
manifolds, heteroclinic orbits, homoclinic orbits, and Lyapunov exponents.
Differential equations describe how one position in space of a physical system
at a particular time influences neighboring positions in the immediate future.
It is this local nature of a differential equation that makes it possible to
model complicated physical situations, because it means that the entire system
does not have to be described simultaneously. But this also means that obtaining
the correct differential equation model of a system is not the end of the story,
because it is necessary to solve the differential equation to obtain information
about the original system. Accordingly, the study of solutions of differential
equations has grown int o one of the major areas of mathematics while becoming
centrally important in science and engineering. The introduction of the computer
made it possible to approximately solve differential equations on a wide scale
for the first time. Over the last thirty years, numerical mathematicians have
made great progress in devising methods to approximate a specific solution of a
differential equation and in analyzing the accuracy of the approximate solution.
The classical approach to study numerical methods for differential equations is
very good at describing the behavior of the approximation of a particular
solution in a small region of space over a short time interval. But
understanding the nature of nonlinear equations requires knowledge about many
solutions over relatively long time intervals. In response to this need, there
is increasing interest in using numerical methods to study structures and
patterns in solutions of differential equations, which is known as the dynamical
behavior of the equation. This conference gathers leading experts from the
United States and from around the world, representing nearly all aspects of the
area, together with interested students and other researchers, to discuss the
current state of the art and to stimulate new developments. The conference is
expected to have a long-ranging impact on many applications in science and
engineering.