* 9503785
* U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Internet Access for   the Instituto Darwinion, San Isidro, Argentina
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Robert Magill, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 07/31/1997
* USD 31,770.00

9503785 Magill This U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program award, which has
been approved by Argentina, supports travel expenses for the P.I., Dr. R.
Magill, Missouri Botanical Gardens (MBG), St. Louis, Missouri to Buenos Aires,
Argentina. Dr. Magill will supervise the installation of an INTERNET connection
between MBG and the Instituto Darwinion (ID), San Isidro, Argentina, and train
personnel on INTERNET, TELNET and TROPICOS operations. Support is also included
for the purchase of permanent computer equipment, some programming and computer
time, and one year maintenance of a dedicated line, required to establish the
connection. The ID is committed to supporting the dedicated line after the first
year of operations. The Catalogue of the Vascular plants of Argentina is a
collaborative research effort between MBG in the U.S. and the ID in Argentina.
Its objective is to produce an updated, computerized inventory of the flora of
Argentina as both a published document and as an electronic database. Most of
the information for the catalog is captured at the ID, utilizing a personal
computer version of TROPICOS, the software developed by MBG. Every six month,
the data is sent to MBG, and merged with the TROPICOS database. This process is
cumbersome and expensive, and will be eliminated by the direct INTERNET
connection. The INTERNET link will provide project personnel at the ID with
direct access to all the resources of the INTERNET, and in particular to the
TROPICOS database. At the same time, MBG and the U.S. scientific community will
benefit directly from the information on Argentine plants that will be added to
the TROPICOS database and to MBG's Gopher and World Wide Web servers. The
connection will also be available to scientists from a number of other
institutions in Argentina, such as the Instituto Miguel Lillo, INTI and
Instituto de Botanica del Noroeste, and will thus prove a link to these
institutions. ***