* 9503282
* Mathematical Sciences: Wavelets Based on Several Scaling    Functions and Related Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,05/31/1999
* David Ruch, Sam Houston State University
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9503282 Wang This project will involve research in the theory and applications
of wavelets. The problems to be considered include: (1) the construction and
characterization of wavelets of Battle-Federbush type and their associated
wavelet packets; (2) the general construction of multiwavelets from an
orthogonal multiresolution analysis generated by scaling vectors; (3)
determining properties of certain classes of solutions of matrix refinement
equations; (4) applications of fractal multiwavelets to second order hyperbolic
partial differential equations; and (5) adaptations of fast wavelet
transformations by incorporating multiwavelets in order to study nonlinear
integral equations. This project is being supported under the Research in
Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) activity. The RUI activity is part of the
Foundation's effort to help assure a broad base for science and engineering
research, and thereby enhance the scientific and technical training of students
in undergraduate institutions. The specific objectives of the RUI program are
to: (1) support high quality research by faculty with active involvement of
undergraduate students, (2) strengthen the research environment in academic
departments that are oriented primarily toward undergraduate instruction, and
(3) promote the integration of research and education at predominantly
undergraduate institutions. This project will involve research on the theory of
multiwavelets. Multiwavelet theory involves replacing the classical dilation
equation of wavelet theory by a matrix dilation equation. The relationship of
the dilation equation and the various features of the wavelet bases generated
will be investigated. The use of wavelets for the numerical solution of partial
differential and integral equations will also be studied; these techniques will
be compared to more classical algorithms.