* 9503642
* Suspension and Suspension Noise for                         LIGO Test Masses
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Stanley Whitcomb, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Cook
* 12/31/1998
* USD 272,756.00

This award will initiate a collaborative program of experimental research, by
Vladimir Braginsky's Moscow- University research group, in support of the Laser
Interferometer Gravitational-Wave Observatory (LIGO) Project, with special focus
on issues relevant to "advanced" interferometers that would operate in the LIGO
vacuum system after the first interferometers have completed their studies. Most
of the research will focus on suspension systems for the interferometers' test
masses. Several versions of the suspension system will be developed and tested
in Moscow. The key goals of this research will be to achieve the highest
possible quality factors Q for the suspensions' pendulum modes and violin modes
(Q's greater than 108 are expected) with test masses of 1 to 2kg, and thereby to
reduce the thermal noise that the suspension introduces into LIGO's gravity-wave
searches; to investigate the level of excess noise (non-Gaussian noise of
nonthermal origin) in several versions of the suspension; to develop theoretical
models to explain the observed excess noise, and compare those models with the
experimental measurements. The Moscow group will transfer to the Caltech/MIT
LIGO team the know-how, techniques, and technology for suspension systems, which
they develop. In addition, they will make recommendations to the LIGO team about
the design of test- mass systems for advanced interferometers, and will provide
estimates of the thermal noise that the recommended suspensions would introduce
into the interferometers. The Moscow group will also provide ongoing advice to
the LIGO team about various aspects of the team's interferometer R&amp;D
program, including the R&amp;D for the first LIGO interferometers. In parallel
with this experimental work, the Moscow group-- in collaboration with members of
Kip Thorne's Caltech group and possibly with members of the LIGO team--will
analyze various "Quantum Nondemolition" readout systems for very advanced LIGO
interf erometers. These QND readout systems will have the goal of beating the
"standard quantum limit" for interferometer sensitivity.