* 9503042
* CAREER:  Nonlinear Inversion of Remotely Sensed Ocean Data  Using Artificial Neural Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Dayalan Kasilingam, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas D. Waite
* 08/31/2000
* USD 239,429.00

9503042 Kasilingam The PI's career plan is to develop an integrated remote
sensing program at the University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth. The program will
have an emphasis on marine related remote sensing in accordance with the needs
of the local region. The PI's research plan will focus on developing advanced
signal processing techniques for extracting information from remotely sensed
data from the ocean. With this goal in mind, it is proposed to develop a
technique based on artificial neural networks to extract ocean surface wave
information from synthetic aperture radar images of the ocean and to improve
wind speed and directional estimates from radar scatterometers. The two tier
approach is expected to test the applicability of this technique to both imaging
and non-imaging applications. Through a grant from the Engineering Foundation
the PI is currently supporting a graduate student for a year to study the
properties of artificial neural networks and how they may be utilized for
nonlinear mapping applications such as the two proposed projects. It is planned
to continue this effort as a part of the proposed research program. The ultimate
research objective is to use remotely sensed field data along with in-situ
measurements to test the inversion schemes. If successfully completed, the
technique is expected to provide greater insights into the physics of the
measurement processes. There is also the potential for using similar techniques
in other areas of ocean remote sensing such as marine pollution monitoring. ***