* 9503643
* U.S-Argentina Cooperative Research:  Ozone-Related Impact   of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation on the Marine Food Chain in  Argentine Coastal Waters
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Osmund Holm-Hansen, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 12/31/1999
* USD 32,190.00

9503643 Holm-Hansen This U.S.-Argentina Cooperative Science Program award
supports travel expenses and some expendable research supplies related to the
visits of Drs. O. Holm- Hansen, E. Helbling and V. Villafane, Scripps Institute
of Oceanography, La Jolla, CA to Ushuaia, Argentina. The objective of the
research is to determine the impact of the UVR on sub-Antarctic plankton and to
gain some insight into the possible ecological impact of enhanced UV-B radiation
on these organisms. The Argentine counterpart is Dr. L. Orce, CIB, CONICET,
Argentina Seasonal ozone concentrations in the stratosphere over Antarctica have
been progressively decreasing during September-November of each year for the
past decade, with the result that the fluence of the shorter UV-B wavelengths
(280-320 nm) is greatly enhanced. The biological impact of this increased
ultraviolet radiation (UVR) has been studied intensively in the Antarctic, but
little work has been devoted to this problem at lower latitudes, such as the
southern regions of South America. Although ozone depletion is greatest at very
high latitudes, increased UVR may pose significant problems for plant and animal
life in the southern regions of Argentina, due to the ozone hole actually
extending over the South American continent, and also to the fact that low-ozone
air flows from the Antarctic north over South America. The marine environment at
Ushuaia represents a prime locality for studying the biological impact of
increased UVR on the marine food chain leading up to harvestable marine
resources. These cooperative UVR studies incorporate into one integrated field
program the biochemical expertise provided by Dr. Orce and his colleagues in
Argentina, with the oceanographic and experimental experience with UVR provided
by the U.S. investigators. The studies are specifically designed to assess the
effect of increased UVR on the viability and metabolism of marine phytoplankton,
with emphasis being p laced on rates of primary production, which constitutes
the base of the marine food web. The laboratory and field facilities for such
studies are excellent at Ushuaia. An essential component of the work is the
availability of recording UV- spectroradiometers and profiling
spectroradiometers which can be lowered to a 100m depth, installed by Dr. Orce
under an Interamerican Development Bank (IDB)-CONICET grant. ***