* 9503850
* U.S.-Argentina Workshop:  First International Symposium of  Sucrose Metabolism; Mar del Plata, May, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Ed Echeverria, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9503850 Echeverria This U.S.- Argentina Joint Workshop supports travel expenses
for U.S. scientists and graduate students, who will attend the First
International Symposium on Sucrose Metabolism, to be held at Mar del Plata,
Argentina. The U.S. organizer is Dr. Ed Echeverria, U.of Florida , Gainesville,
FL, and the Argentine co-organizer is Dr. Horacio Pontis, Fundacion para
Investigaciones Biologicas Aplicadas, Mar del Plata, Argentina. Sucrose is the
major product of photosynthesis, and the main form of carbon translocation, as
well as the principal form of carbohydrate storage in plant cells. In brief, the
growth, vigor and productivity of plants are directly dependent on an effective
sucrose metabolic system. The advent of new techniques and instrumentation since
the discovery of the enzymes of sucrose metabolism in 1955 has brought about an
outburst of information in every aspect of sucrose metabolism in plants. The
present symposium was organized in response to the growing need to assemble the
enormous amount of relevant basic data on all aspects of sucrose metabolism, in
order to construct a comprehensive and integrated view of this system in plants.
The discussions and formulations of the symposium will assist in setting the
direction for the future of sucrose research, and will allow U.S. and Argentine
scientists to plan future collaborations, and will provide a rewarding
international experience to the U.S. graduate students. Several of the U.S.
scientists attending are leaders in the field, which is also an extremely strong
area of research in Argentina. In fact, the symposium is held in commemoration
of the 40th anniversary of the discovery of the enzymes of sucrose metabolism in
the laboratory of Dr. Leloir (the same laboratory which is co-hosting the
meeting in Argentina), who received the Nobel Prize for this discovery. It is
expected that a follow up symposium will be held in the U.S.A. ***