* 9503607
* An International Symposium on Micelles, Microemulsions and  Monolayers: Quarter Century Progress and New Horizons;      August 1995; Gainesville, Florida
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Brij Moudgil, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/1996
* USD 20,000.00

9503607 Shah In the past twenty-five years (1970-1995), considerable work has
been done on micelles, microemulsions and monolayers. This work is not only of
basic scientific interest, but is also relevant to a broad range of technologies
including detergency, microelectronics, nanoparticle synthesis, food,
pharmaceutical and biotechnology. Dynamic properties of micelles such as
relaxation time measurements by pressure-jump, temperature-jump, stopped-flow,
ultrasonic absorption, shock wave, etc. have produced very valuable information
about the relaxation processes in micellar solutions as well as for the life-
time of micelles. During the past twenty-five years, microemulsions have been
shown to be relevant to enhanced oil recovery, and preparation of nanoparticles
of magnetic materials, silver halides, electronic materials and superconductops.
Many reactions such as polymerization in microemulsions have also been shown to
be very promising for the formation of submicron latex particles. In the area of
monomolecular films, many novel techniques have been designed to study such
systems (such as STM, AFM, Brewster Angle Microscopy, absorption spectroscopy,
etc.) An International Symposium on this topic will be organized with funding
from the University of Florida, National Science Foundation, industry and
participants in the form of registration fees. About thirty graduate students
and post doctoral associates from universities in the United States will be
invited to participate in this symposium. There will be three plenary speakers,
and twenty invited speakers as well as many oral and poster presentations on
these three topics. At the end of the symposium, a half-day workshop will be
organized. This will be attended by a panel of world class researchers chosen
from among the invited speakers. The workshop will be organized into three
groups: micelles, microemulsions, and monolayers. Each group will summarize the
quarter century progress made in that area, and list the new ho rizons as
presented in the symposium. These summaries will be compiled by the Principal
Investigator (Dr. Shah) and will form the basis for the final report to be
submitted to the National Science Foundation. This report will also include a
description of the scientific and technological relevance of various topics
discussed in the symposium. The symposium will be held August 28-31,1995, at the
University of Florida. The first three days of the symposium will include the
invited talks and general papers in all three areas. The fourth half day will be
devoted to the workshop. ***