* 9503000
* Use of Direct Numerical Simulations and Lagrangian Methods  in Turbulent Transport
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,02/29/2000
* Thomas Hanratty, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 02/29/2000
* USD 308,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9503000 Thomas Hanratty Univ. of Illinois Advances in the analysis
of turbulent heat transfer have been limited because of the need for more
detailed information about the statistics of the fluctuating temperature and
velocity fields than is obtained in laboratory studies. The proposed research
responds to this need by using supercomputers to calculate the time-dependent,
three-dimensional temperature and velocity fields. It is novel in three ways: It
supplies results over a wide range of Prandtl numbers. I relates (for the first
time) Eulerian and Lagrangian results. It explores the use of Lagrangian methods
to describe sediment transport. The usual approach to transport problems is to
use an Eulerian framework in which a differential equation is written to
describe the concentration changes in a fixed volume in space. A viewpoint to be
explored in this research is that physical understanding emerges in a more
natural way by using a Lagrangian frame work, which considers concentration
fields of a transported species (thermal markers or sediment) as resulting from
the contributions of a number of sources and sinks. For the problems considered,
the fundamental building block is dispersion from and infinitesimal source at
the boundary. The head transfer system is turbulent flow through a channel in
which the bottom wall is heated and the top wall is cooled. Direct numerical
sumulations will be carried out for Pr=0.05-40. Lagrangian methods will be used
to extend these to Prandtl numbers as high as 2000. Turbulent transport of
sediment in a horizontal rectangular channel will be considered.