* 9503582
* Mathematical Sciences:  Stochastic Analysis in Nonlinear    Financial Markets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Jaksa Cvitanic, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 09/30/1998
* USD 74,892.00

9503582 Cvitanic This project, which is funded through the Applied Mathematics
Program, the Statistics and Probability Program, and the Economics Program, will
investigate various mathematical problems of stochastic analysis and control
that arise in the context of modern theory and practice of nonlinear financial
markets. These include (i) questions of optimization, hedging and pricing of
contingent claims in markets with transaction costs, as well as in markets in
which the prices can depend in a nonlinear fashion on the investment strategy
and wealth of the agent; (ii) nonstandard models for asset prices. Mathematical
questions related to (i) include existence and uniqueness of certain forward-
backward stochastic differential equations, viscosity solutions to certain
partial differential equations and variational inequalities, as well as a non-
standard stochastic control problem in which the terminal loss function has a
random component. With regard to (ii), it is expected that a new kind of
stochastic calculus will have to be developed, one which goes beyond the
semimartingales framework. One of the reasons for the present gap between the
theory of finance and the reality of the stock market is the prevailing
assumption in theoretical work that the market is perfect in the sense that
every financial contract can be priced by calculating exactly its present value.
This is, however, not the case in reality due to different types of market
friction" such as transaction costs, different interest rates, presence of large
investors who can influence the asset prices, and so forth Thus, it is very
important to develop new methods for pricing financial instruments in imperfect
markets, some of which will be the focus of this research. In a similar vein,
the risk one undertakes when buying or selling financial instruments is
typically much larger than predicted by the perfect-market theory (as recent
scandals involving the trading of options confirm). This project will develop a
theory of risk-hedging in imperfect markets that is more general and at the same
time more applicable to realistic financial markets than current theory. ***