* 9503757
* RUI: Finding All Numerical Solutions for Large-Scale Nonlinear Systems of Equations Parallelly and Reliably in a        Given Domain
* CSE,CCF
* 12/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Chenyi Hu, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 09/30/1999
* USD 88,686.00

9503757 Hu This project will investigate efficient parallel algorithms to find
all numerical solutions for large-scale nonlinear systems of equations in a
given domain with mathematical certainty, even in the presence of uncertainty in
the data, roundoff error, and nonlinearities by finite digit computations. The
basic algorithm to be used is based on the interval Newton/Generalized bisection
method. Parallel algorithms will be implemented on vector processors, shared-
memory multiprocessors, and distributed-memory multicomputers. On a vector
processor, new data structures will be designed to take full advantage of
completely pipelined functional units of vector processors. To speed memory
accessing, techniques will be developed to increase cache hit ratio on machines
with cache such as the IBM 3090, and to reduce bank conflict on interleaved
memory systems such as the CRAY C90. On a shared memory multiprocessor, optimal
partitioning schemes will be studied for given nonlinear systems based on two
protocols. By overlapping communication and computation, in addition to reducing
communication and contention, large speedup is expected. On distributed-memory
multicomputers, algorithms on coarse grained SPMP schemes and fine-grained MPMP
schemes will be implemented on realistic machines. General sparsity and
scalability will be considered in all implementations. ***