* 9503855
* Unstable Regions Around Underground Openings: A Model Based on Block Theory, Reliability, Stress Analysis and Linear    Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Karen Chou, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2000
* USD 139,778.00

CMS-9503855 Matthew Mauldon and Karen Chou, The University of Tennessee
(Knoxville) "Unstable Regions Around Underground Openings: A Model Based on
Block Theory, Reliability, Stress Analysis and Linear Programming" Knowledge of
unstable regions is crucial to the safe design of underground structures and
facilities. At low to moderate in situ stress, the unstable zone location and
dimensions are strongly influences by excavation geometry, in situ effective
stresses, and rock mass inhomogeneities and discontinuities. A rational approach
to excavation design, including design of support systems, should be based on an
understanding of the combined effects of these major influences. This research
addresses the problem of determining the size and shape of the unstable zone
around underground openings in cases where the block theory model is
appropriate, i.e., hard, jointed rock at low to moderate stress levels. Unstable
keyblocks, the dominant failure mechanism, are limited in size by two main
factors in addition to the excavation size: the sizes and shapes of the bounding
discontinuities, and the stabilizing effect of in situ stress. This research
will be completed with 1) development of an analytical model for keyblock size
distribution, 2) development of characteristic probability density functions for
keyblock size, 3) combining block theory with stress analysis to determine
maximum size of unstable keyblocks, and 4) combining 2) and 3) to develop a
reliability analysis for support systems. The results of this research will be
applicable to tunneling, mining, and the development of underground space, as
well as to infrastructure rehabilitation and safety assessments. The methods
developed can be extended to rock slopes and foundations, with significant cost
savings possible from designs based on objective, consistent and rational
procedures.