* 9503829
* Hierarchical Exploration and Visualization of Large and     Complex Multi-Dimensional Data Sets
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1995,01/31/2001
* Allen Van Gelder, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Yavuz A. Oruc
* 01/31/2001
* USD 388,949.00

This project investigates the use of hierarchical methods for accessing and
visualizing large and complex multi- dimensional data sets. Visualization can
provide an efficient and powerful means of exploring such data However, most
visualization methods are developed for moderately sized non-hierarchial data
sets that can be imaged acceptably fast on graphics workstations. In practice,
there are many data sets that cannot be effectively explored using these
methods. The project is developing and implementing visualization approches
designed for very large, multi-dimensional data sets over a variety of grid
types. Such data sets present significant problems in the management of time and
space resources, which will be addressed by this research. The unifying theme
will be the use of hierarchical data structures to manage both resources
effectively. Addressing time efficiency, techniques are being developed for the
selective traversal and rapid interactive imaging of the data. For space
efficiency, various data models, such as wavelets, are investigated to achieve
compression, while being directly amendable to visualization. These hierarchies
are being integrated with existing visualization techniques for isosurface
extraction, direct volume rendering, and flow visualization, many of which have
already been developed at UC Santa Cruz and elsewhere for non-hierarchial data.
Techniques for rectilinear, structured, and unstructured grids are studied.
Parallelization of these methods of SIMD and MIMD machines is also is being
explored. This research is developing new algorithms for visualization of large,
complex data sets, as well as making software systems available for use by
scientists. Software is modular to facilitate integration with existing
visualization packages. While the main objective is visualization, the
hierarchical methods developed will also be of use for any data analysis
hampered by access problems in dealing with very large data sets.