* 9503398
* Mathematical Sciences: Logic and Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1998
* C. Ward Henson, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 11/30/1998
* USD 173,398.00

9503398 Jockusch This project concerns mathematical logic and its connections
with other areas of mathematics, especially algebra and analysis. Carl Jockusch
will work in computability theory (recursion theory) and its connections with
other areas. In particular, he will study degrees of unsolvability, both in
their own right and in connection with effective combinatorics, group theory,
and algebra. L. van den Dries will investigate expansions of the real field by
quasi-analytic classes of functions that are familiar from analysis. The goal is
to prove o-minimality and polynomial boundedness of such expansions. This is
part of an effort to create a framework for solving Hilbert's 16th problem on
limit cycles and similar problems. Mathematical logic provides a precise
framework for mathematical assertions and deductive systems. It also provides a
precise concept of computability by abstract computers, i.e. ones without
limitations of running time or memory space. Jockusch will study the theory of
computability and its connections with other branches of mathematics.
Theoretical limitations on what can be computed and the possibility of computing
information given access to other information are of central interest for this
research. In particular, he will analyze questions related to computability in
algebra and number theory. Lou van den Dries will work in analytic geometry,
using tools from mathematical logic, especially model theory. These
investigations are expected to shed new light on questions about analytic vector
fields. Information gained in current research on real numbers is presently
being applied to many areas, including robotics and neural networks. ***