* 9503009
* Experiments on the Electrodynamics of Charged Quantum       Liquids
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1998
* George Gruner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 360,000.00

9503009 Gruner This project investigates the surface electrodynamic response of
metallic systems referred to as charged quantum liquids. The experiments are
unique in that they probe a broad frequency range, at low temperatures, where
deviations from conventional Fermi liquid behavior can be pronounced. The
experiments will provide important tests of theories of non-Fermi liquids. The
project involves low temperatures, to 0.35 Kelvin, and high magnetic fields, to
9 Tesla. The materials to be investigated include UPt3, a conventional Fermi
liquid, and suspected non-Fermi liquid alloys, cerium-copper-gold and uranium-
yttrium-palladium, as well as two-dimensional organic metals. The work is of
fundamental interest, but the results may also bear on other important non-Fermi
liquid materials such as the high temperature superconductors. %%% This project
looks at the response of unusual metallic systems, including so-called organic
metals, to a broad range of electromagnetic radiation (light). The response to
the radiation is measured at very low temperatures and at very high magnetic
fields. The motivation of the work is to understand differences in the response
of these materials as compared to ordinary metals, whose electrical properties
are much better understood. The experiments are technically complex and can only
be carried out in a few laboratories in the world. The materials to be
investigated include UPt3, a conventional metallic material, the suspected non-
conventional metal alloys: cerium-copper-gold and uranium-yttrium-palladium, as
well as two-dimensional "organic" metals. The work is of fundamental interest,
but the results may also bear on other important non-Fermi liquid materials such
as the high temperature superconductors. ***