* 9503844
* NSF-CGP Science Engineering Fellows Program:  Functional    Role of Different Classes of Neocortical Inhibitory         Interneurons in the Thalamocortical Circuit
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Ariel Agmon, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 12/31/1996
* USD 60,234.00

9503844 Agmon This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Ariel Agmon of the
Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology at the University of California-Irvine
and Dr. Yasuo Kawaguchi of the Bio-Mimetic Control Research Center of the
Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN). Project funding will enable
Dr. Agmon to spend one year in Japan, resident at RIKEN, in order to study the
functional role of different classes of neocortical inhibitory interneurons in
the thalamocortical circuit. Dr. Agmon has previously studied the functional and
morphological organization of thalamocortical connections in mature and
developing animals. Dr. Kawaguchi has been instrumental in shedding light on the
rich diversity of morphological and electrophysiological properties of
inhibitory interneurons in the cortex. Dr. Agmon will combine his expertise with
that of Dr. Kawaguchi to study the functional and morphological organization of
inhibition with the thalamocortical circuit. This proposal brings together
research scientists from two countries working in the area of neuronal anatomy
and physiology. The U. S. scientist will have the opportunity to become familiar
with research techniques, equipment, and facilities at RIKEN while contributing
to the overall research effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives
of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an
international collaboration. ***