* 9503935
* Integration of Parameter and Tolerance Design with Off-Line Quality Control
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Kwun-Lon Ting, Tennessee Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 03/31/1999
* USD 152,942.00

9503935 Ting This project addresses the issue of mechanical system design for
performance quality and manufacturability by integrating parameter design and
tolerance allocation at an early stage in the design process. The project
includes three main tasks: (1) characterizing tolerances by geometric tolerance
representation, modeling of mechanical assemblies with kinematic chains, and
modeling of form tolerances; (2) developing a robust design methodology for
mechanical systems that identifies performance characteristics and derivation of
system sensitivity indices; and (3) synthesizing tolerances for performance and
manufacturability by determining tolerance allocation for performance,
manufacturability and cost reduction, and achieving optimal decisions for
performance, quality and manufacturability. The approach will be demonstrated in
a case study. The results of this research offer an effective method to
understand the effects of tolerances on performance. This method treats the
tolerance sensitivity of the whole system rather than an individual link. Yet,
it allows one to identify unambiguously the relative impact of each individual
tolerance on the performance quality and to select a system less sensitive to
the tolerances. For mechanism synthesis, it is applicable to any type of
synthesis problems, including function, path, and motion generation or finite,
infinitesimal and mixed positions. Its effectiveness remains unchanged
regardless of the number of desired positions or the number of links. In
summary, this research leads to a method which enables designers to vigorously
pursue the optimal parameter design and tolerance allocation concurrently in the
early stage of the design process. Thus, manufacturing cost reduction, fast
product design and prototyping, and off-line quality control is achieved.