* 9503140
* Mathematical Sciences:  Representation Theory of p-adic     Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Philip Kutzko, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Earnest
* 05/31/1999
* USD 100,778.00

This research concerns the classification of the category of smooth
representations of a p-adic group via restriction to compact, open subgroups.
This classification is of interest both intrinsically and because of the
fundamental role that the representation theory of p-adic groups plays in the
program outlined by R.P. Langlands for tackling certain basic questions in the
theory of numbers. In a series of papers with C.J. Bushnell, the principal
investigator has singled out certain pairs, called types, consisting of a
compact, open subgroup and an irreducible representation of this subgroup. The
existence of such a type leads to the possibility of analyzing representations
via Hecke algebra methods; the existence of a complete set of such types in the
case of the groups GL(N) has already paid substantial dividends. This project
extends the theory of types to others p-adic groups. The local Langlands
correspondence is also considered in light of the theory of types, as is the
possibility of using types to compute local factors. This research falls into
the broad category of p-adic algebraic groups. Historically, algebraic groups
arose in an effort to describe all the transformations or symmetries of an
n-dimensional space. The spaces under consideration here, however, are not the
familiar real spaces like the line and the plane, but related objects which are
important in number theory and pure algebra.