* 9503513
* Japan JSPS Program:  A Flourometric Assay of Inositol-1,4,  5-triphosphate in Single Cells
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Julie Matheson, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Randall Soderquist
* 10/31/1996
* USD 3,000.00

9503513 Matheson This award supports a 12-month Japan Society for the Promotion
of Science (JSPS) postdoctoral fellowship for Dr. Julie M. Matheson, employed at
the U.S. Naval Hospital, Yokusuka, Japan. The fellowship opportunity will enable
Dr. Matheson to initiate collaborative research with Dr. Katsuhiko Mikoshiba at
the Institute of Physical and Chemical Research in Japan (RIKEN), NHK Science
and Technical Research Laboratories, Tsukuba. The goal of the proposed research
is to develope a fluorescent probe for inositol 1,4,5 triphosphate (IP3) that
can be used to investigate signal transduction pathways in single cells. Cloning
and expression of IP3 binding proteins will be done in Dr. Mikoshiba's
laboratory at RIKEN and microscopic imaging will be done through a collaboration
with Dr. Roger Tsien at the Howard Hughes Medical Institute at the University of
California at San Diego (UCSD). A similar collaboration between Drs. R. Y. Tsien
and S. Taylor at UCSD led to the development of a fluorescent indicator for a
different cellular messenger, and this proposed project provides a logical
bridge between the laboratories of R. Y. Tsien and K. Mikoshiba. The
postdoctoral fellowship will allow Dr. Matheson to become familiar with research
practices in Japan as well as to establish professional contacts
internationally. It will also provide access to unique research facilities and
will encourage international cooperation between U.S. and Japanese scientists.
Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange
and transfer of scientific knowledge through international collaberation.