* 9503880
* RUI: Specifying and Verifying Delay-Sensitive Distributed Software/Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Wuxu Peng, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 12/31/1997
* USD 80,049.00

This RUI research project studies the issue of specification and verification of
computer systems that are both delay-sensitive and distributed. The behaviors of
such a system strongly depend upon the timing sequences of events, and failure
to meet these timing requirements can either cause severe consequences or affect
the correctness and/or performance of the system. Due to the extra dimension of
complexity introduced by the time components in these systems, specification and
verification of delay-sensitive distributed systems have presented a unique
challenge to software practitioners. This project studies a broad range of
issues related to specifying and verifying delay-sensitive distributed systems.
A new specification model, Time Communicating Finite State Machines (TCFSMs), is
proposed. TCFSMs is based on the classical CFSMs model with capability added to
express time constraints for specifying and verifying delay sensitive
distributed systems. A token passing-based system is studied to demonstrate how
to concisely specify and verify self-stabilizing systems with TCFSMs. This
research examines a broad spectrum of problems related to TCFSMs: the semantics
and alternative semantics of TCFSMs and their effects on applications and
efficiencies; methodologies for synthesizing time constraints in TCFSMs; new
verification techniques for TCFSMs extending symbolic timing verification
techniques; methodologies for modeling self-stabilizing distributed systems with
TCFSMs, suitable formalisms for self-stabilization and special classes of TCFSMs
that can be efficiently self-stabilized; alternative extensions of TCFSMs
related to other popular specification models; and TCFSMs-based tools for
simulations and rapid prototyping. A component of this RUI project is th e
comparison of TCFSMs with other specification models to identify and evaluate
their strengths and weaknesses.