* 9503399
* U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Science:  Theoretical Approaches to Interfacial Transfer
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Mark Ratner, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 04/30/1997
* USD 31,300.00

9503399 Ratner This U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Science Program award will fund a
collaboration between Dr. Mark A. Ratner, Northwestern University, Evanston, and
Dr. Vadimiro Mujica, Universidad Central de Venezuela, on theoretical approaches
to interfacial electron transfers. The research will be on formal and numerical
investigations of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) currents in systems
comprising metal substrate, adsorbed molecule, and STM tip. The approach
considers the time-dependent behavior of the system, with the electron moving
from metal through molecule to tip. The study will include electro/vibration
interactions, electron/electron repulsion, and complex molecular geometry
coupling, and will focus on the overall dynamics of the process, and the
calculation of the conductance and its variations. The research is timely and
important, both from the fundamental knowledge and the technological point of
view. The expertise and resources of the collaborators are complementary.
Studies will be carried out with sufficiently realistic molecular detail
allowing meaningful comparison with experimental data, thus providing valuable
perspectives about the interrelationship of conductance, conductivity, and
super-exchange-mediated donor-acceptance. ***