* 9503079
* Copper Pitting and New Approaches to Teaching:  A Career    Development Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Marc Edwards, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 06/30/1998
* USD 140,000.00

9503079 Edwards This is an award to provide the support this investigator
requested in response to NSF 94-101, the National Science Foundation Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) Program which has the intent of encouraging
the early development of academic faculty as educators and researchers. The
research this investigator plans to conduct is directed toward improving our
fundamental understanding of factors that result in corrosive behavior of
materials used in distribution systems for water. The investigator's education
plan involves exploring changes in basic course structure that include active
learning, development of supportive learning environments in the classroom and
implementation of a reward structure that encourages development of non-
traditional target skills such as teamwork, class motivation and interest in
learning outside the classroom. Materials used in constructing water
distribution systems are subject to corrosion over long periods of time which
reduces the effective life of the system's components and has a potentially
degrading effect on the quality of water delivered to users through the
distribution system. Procedures to adequately determine the effect of corrosion
can be useful in the improving the engineering design of water distribution
systems. The teaching plan this investigator plans to pursue seeks to implement
and evaluate new approaches to learning in the undergraduate engineering
classroom environment that will improve the way in which undergraduate
engineering courses are taught. ***