* 9503301
* Postdoc: High Performance Solution of Three-Dimensional     Nonlinear Transient Aeroelastic Problems
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Charbel Farhat, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 05/31/1998
* USD 46,200.00

9503301 Farhat The accurate prediction of aeroelastic phenomena is essential to
the design of safe high performance aircraft. This prediction requires solving
simultaneously the appropriately coupled fluid and structural equations of
motion. Therefore, numerical aeroelastic simulations are in general resource
intensive. We propose to develop high performance methodologies for the parallel
simulation of three-dimensional transient aeroelastic problems on advanced
homogenous and heterogeneous hardware architectures. More specifically, we
intend to develop mixed partitioning procedures for the parallel space and time
integration of the governing coupled nonlinear partial differential equations,
and investigate their merits in terms of accuracy, stability, heterogeneous
computing, I/O transfers, subcycling, and parallel processing. This research is
multidisciplinary and includes four components: computational structural
mechanics, computational fluid dynamics, applied mathematics and numerical
analysis and, computer sciences and parallel processing. The first two
components involve the development of discrete mathematical models based on
finite elements and finite volumes for representing aerospace structures as
assemblies of beams, plates, and shells, and modeling high speed flows around
them. The third component addresses the design of staggered and efficient time-
integrators for advancing the solution of the governing coupled semi-discrete
equations. The last research component aims at exploiting the capabilities of
homogeneous and heterogeneous parallel systems to significantly reduce the
overall simulation time of these very compute-intensive engineering
applications.