* 9503872
* A Library of Mathematical Models of Biological Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Naomi Broering, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1998
* USD 202,378.00

The aim of this proposal is to facilitate the use of models of biological
systems by developing a facility for locating and retrieving published models
via the Internet. Models are used widely to study complex biological systems.
They are used to represent hypotheses, (circulation in physiology), test
theories (effect of enzyme concentration on reaction rate), make predictions
(pharmacological response to a drug), design outcomes (calculate intake for
optimal growth), and analyze data (calculate rate of substrate movement into
cells). Models coalesce a large amount of information and form valuable tools in
research and education, but their utility resides in being able to use and
manipulate them interactively. Currently there is no centralized way to do this.
This proposal describes the establishment of such a facility, called a library.
Potential users of the library are researchers, educators, and students who
would use the models to analyze data, evaluate theories, and design experiments.
Models from the fields of metabolism, pharmacokinetics, endocrinology,
immunology, physiology, toxicology, and biochemistry will be entered and will
include linear and non-linear, compartmental models. The models will be
collated, indexed, catalogued, and described mathematically in formats
compatible with several (based on cost and demand) widely-used modeling software
packages. Users will be able to access the library via the Internet and, using
menus, search and locate models, view graphical and mathematical descriptions of
the models, perform limited simulations in the library, or download models to
use with their own modeling software. The library will be developed by an
interdisciplinary team from Georgetown University and the University of
Pennsylvania with expertise in the fields of informational science, library
science, biology, modeling, computer science, and networking. A panel
representing users in universities, indust ry, pharmaceutical companies and
Government agencies will advise on the library structure, contents and
dissemination. More than 300 models will be entered into the library over a 3
year period. In view of the resources committed to developing models of
biological systems, access to tested, working versions of published models is
necessary to allow them to be used for their intended purpose, i.e., to explore
and test systems through simulation. This task will be accomplished by
scientists in the biological and informational science fields through the
development of a library of mathematical models.