* 9503622
* U.S.-Mexico Research:  IUMRS-ICAM 95 The Fourth             International Conference on Advanced Materials, Cancun,     Mexico; Aug. 27-Sept. 1, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1996
* John Ballance, International Union of Materials Research Societies
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 11/30/1996
* USD 30,000.00

9503622 Chang This U.S.-Mexico award will help to support attendance to the
Fourth International Union of Materials Research Societies' International
Conference on Advanced Materials (IUMRS-ICAM 1995), that will take place in
Cancun, Mexico from August 27th to September 1, 1995. Support will be aimed at
attracting promising investigators at the start of their research careers.
Applications will be submitted in response to announcements to be published in
major U.S. materials societies' bulletins. An international organizing
committee, chaired by the principal investigator, Dr. Robert Chang of
Northwestern University, will select the U.S. participants. This conference,
which is co-sponsored by the International Union of Materials Research Societies
(IUMRS) and the Mexican Academy of Materials (AMM), will provide an opportunity
for materials scientists from around the world to discuss their latest
discoveries. Thirty-two symposia on advanced materials will be presented by
leading scientists in their fields, and a series of proceedings of the
conference will be published. In addition to providing a valuable forum to
exchange ideas, the conference will encourage the development of collaborations,
particularly among scientists from Canada, Mexico and the United States. This
award is jointly supported by the Division of Materials Research and the
Division of International Programs of NSF. ***