* 9503963
* Postdoc: Extensive Spatiotemporal Chaos in Extended         Nonequillibrium Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Eberhard Bodenschatz, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 06/30/1997
* USD 46,200.00

9503963 Bodenchatz The objective of this proposal is to study numerical and
analytically the microscopic equations describing certain experimental systems.
This research will take three directions, it will make quantitative comparisons
between simulations experiments, study lengthscale and order parameters in
experimental systems, and examine the appearance and role of topological
defects. A specific goal of this proposal is to use the powerful parallel
computing facilities to explore new physical regimes which are described by the
Boussinesq equations. Although the equations have been simulated before, the
simulations have been limited to small systems, short integration times, limited
fixed resolution, or particular boundary conditions. By comparing a code using
spectral methods to one based on iterative methods, such as multigrid or
conjugate-gradient-like methods, we will develop a general scalable Boussinesq
solver optimized for parallel computers that will allow long integrations of
large systems with aspect ratios greater than 100 and with adjustable resolution
in all directions. This next generation convection code will allow this research
to perform exhaustive explorations of spatiotemporal chaos in extended
convection systems, and, hopefully, these explorations will constitute a
significant step toward a formalism similar to equilibrium thermodynamics.