* 9503209
* Active Control of Structures Using Neural Networks and      Fuzzy Logic
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Y. Wen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 04/30/1998
* USD 269,997.00

9503209 Ghaboussi This project continues and extends the development of an
active structural control method using neural networks by the investigators at
the University of Illinois in 1992 under the NSF's structural control program.
The main controller in the new method of structural control is a trained neural
network, referred to as the neuro-controller. The training of the neuro-
controller is accomplished with the aid of an emulator neural network, which is
first trained to learn the structural behavior. Results from the numerical
simulations showed that the new structural control method performs well compared
to other control methods and is far more robust as well as being an inherently
adaptive controller. In this project research on neural network based methods of
structural control will be continued to consist of (1) experimental verification
of the new structural control method; and (2) the extension into nonlinear
control problems. The experimental work will be done in two stages. In the
initial stage, extensive trial and error, adjustment and the online training of
the emulator neural network and the neuro-controller will be done. Verification
tests will be conducted on the shaking table at the University of Illinois
Structural Engineering Laboratory, using a three story, one bay structural
model, similar to those used in numerical simulations. The next stage of
experimental work will be conducted at the NCEER facilities, on a larger
structural model. Finally, the new method of structural control must be extended
to address the problem of nonlinear control of structures sustaining
unpredictable damage and develop a feasible and practical method of nonlinear
structural control. ***