* 9503518
* Mathematical Sciences:  Midwest Geometry Conference:  1995 -1997
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Gary Jensen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 30,000.00

9503518 Jensen The Midwest Geometry Conference is an annual meeting dedicated to
the dissemination of important recent advances in differential geometry to the
community of midwestern mathematicians. Each conference is devoted to a small
number of topics, and the aim is to create a focussed environment, conducive to
a lively exchange of ideas, in which this regional community of geometers can
benefit from contact with some of the leading contributors in those selected
fields. Identifying themselves as active members of the world community of
differential geometers gives young mathematicians, in particular, a sense of
wider purpose and guides them into more productive and relevant research paths.
A series of three annual meetings will be held, respectively, at Washington
University, St. Louis, MO, in 1995, at the University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK,
in 1996, and at the University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, in 1997. The St. Louis
meeting is centered on four plenary addresses: Robert J. Zimmer, University of
Chicago, on Differential Geometry, Dynamics, and Rigidity of Group Actions;
Francis Bonahon, University of Southern California, on Three- Manifolds,
Hyperbolic Geometry, and Foliations; Chuu-Lian Terng, Northeastern University,
on Submanifold Theory; Claude Lebrun, SUNY at Stony Brook, on Kaehler Geometry
and Special Metrics. Based on the experience of previous years, the organizers
expect the participation of approximately 60 to 70 faculty mathematicians and
graduate students. ***