* 9503104
* Mathematical Sciences: Stochastic Models for Reliability of Systems with Dependencies Among Components
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* William Padgett, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1998
* USD 231,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9503104 PIs: W. J. Padgett, J. D. Lynch and S. D. Durham
Institution: University of South Carolina - Columbia Title: STOCHASTIC MODELS
FOR RELIABILITY OF SYSTEMS WITH DEPENDENCIES AMONG COMPONENTS Abstract: The
research involves the reliability of complex systems. There are three main
thrusts: (1) modeling component reliability, (2) incorporating component
reliability and dependencies into the system reliability which result in
tractable data analytic models, and (3) developing a criticality theory for such
models. Regarding (1), some models are studied for the analysis of component
reliability, including the conditional Weibull and inverse Gaussian
distributions and a Poisson-Weibull flaw model. The "conditional Weibull"
distribution is studied since it fits certain fiber strength data sets well and
may be justified due to "censoring" considerations in the fiber manufacturing
and testing processes. The Poisson-Weibull flaw model with finite-state Markov
random intensity has the mixed distribution (zero intensity) and the mixed
hazard model (infinite intensity) as extremes. A major objective of this part of
the project is the investigation of a unified mixture theory for this flaw model
which subsumes the theory of mixtures developed for the extremes of mixed
distributions and mixed hazards, respectively. To address (2) and (3), a general
model is investigated which is hierarchical in nature. The hierarchy consists of
(i) the micro (or component) level, (ii) the subsystem (or "bundle of
components") level, and (iii) the system (or "chain of bundles") level. It has
long been known that in many systems, the failure of a component changes the
stress applied to the remaining components. Thus, incorporating component
dependencies into a reliability model in a realistic manner is highly desirable
for accurate results. Here, component dependencies/interactions are incorporated
into the model by using "load-sharing rules," m ost applicable to situations
where "loadings" are due to mechanical or physical considerations. General
monotone load-sharing rules are considered for which a method of calculating the
system reliability has been developed. The present research includes a special
class of these rules where the component load can be calculated using absorption
probabilities for random walks on a network. In particular, a number of the
popular load-sharing rules can be reduced to the consideration of electrical
networks. Energy considerations give insight into the behavior of stress
concentrations induced by these rules as components fail. Major objectives are
to continue the investigation of these electrical network rules, and other
network rules which are appropriate for mechanical load transfer situations,
especially for composite materials, and, specifically to study the "effective
distance" that a load can be transferred via matrix material and its
relationship to the "ineffective length" around fiber breaks for load transfer
through the matrix. Criticality issues are also considered. Preliminary work for
k-out-of-n systems and systems with a small number of components suggest that an
exact theory may be obtainable when each component has a Weibull failure
distribution using a mixed transformed gamma model, where the transformation
depends on the Weibull distribution. Such a model also lends itself to
calculation of extreme value approximation errors and to system identification
using the mixing distribution. The research involves the development of models
for describing the failure of complex systems with dependent components. The
researchers are investigating reliability models for complex systems of
components including complex materials which allow for component dependencies
and interactions. Such models have direct application to many problems of
current importance, including failure of fibrous composite materials and
electrical networks. This has important imp lications for the design and large
scale manufacture of complex materials where high reliability.