* 9503118
* U.S.-Argentina Workshop in Lie Groups and Quantum Groups;   Cordoba, Argentina, August, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Joseph Wolf, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/1996
* USD 30,465.00

9503118 Wolf This U.S.-Argentina Joint Workshop will support travel expenses
related to the participation of Dr. Joseph A. Wolf, UC at Berkeley and nine
other U.S. scientists in a Workshop in Lie Groups and Quantum Groups, to be held
in Cordoba, Argentina in August, 1995. Dr. Wolf is the U.S. organizer, the
Argentine co-organizers are Drs. Juan Tirao and Roberto Miatello, of FAMAF, the
Faculty of Mathematics, Astronomy and Physics of the University of Cordoba,
Argentina. Some publication expenses will also be supported. Lie theory is one
of the central areas of mathematics, with a wide range of applications in
harmonic analysis, differential geometry, number theory and physics, and also
plays an important role in applied mathematics. In South America there are
several excellent centers of activity in this area, notably in Argentina and
Chile. The workshop will bring together internationally known U.S. and Argentine
researchers, who will discuss recent developments in the field, and will set the
stage for a number of joint research projects between U.S. and Latin American
scientists. The program will include specialist and topical lectures, as well as
formal and informal discussions among the participants. In addition to senior
researchers, young scientists and graduate students from the U.S., Argentina,
Brazil and Chile will participate. Training and development of these students
will be another major aspect of the workshop. U.S. as well as Latin American
scientists and students will benefit from this interaction, in an important area
of mathematics. ***