* 9503116
* Performance Measurement and Modeling of Parallel Computer   Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Amy Apon, Fisk University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 11/30/1996
* USD 17,364.00

The purpose of this Research Planning Grant is to perform preliminary research
and to develop a full proposal which will be submitted to NSF in the fall of
1995. The primary objective of the research is a measurement and modeling study
of parallel computer systems. The platforms to be used include the Kendall
Square KSR1 and the Intel Paragon multiprocessor systems located at Oak Ridge
National Laboratory, and a network of Sun Solaris 2.3 workstations located at
Fisk University, an HBCU/MI. The method of evaluation is to measure and evaluate
various system design alternatives using alternative queueing network models of
parallel computer systems. Queueing network models are chosen because, unlike
other methods such as Markov models and Petri net models, queueing network
models do not require the enumeration of all possible states that the system may
enter, but rather, use computationally efficient techniques to determine mean
performance metrics of the system. The use of parallel and distributed computer
and communications systems is becoming commonplace. However, the computer
systems which are the focus of this research have characteristics which are
difficult to measure and model. The systems may have forking and joining in the
task graph, variations in the multiprogramming level and use various
synchronization techniques. System issues such as thread scheduling and
placement are difficult to model accurately. Thus, the development and
application of computationally efficient techniques for evaluating the
performance of these types of systems is an important and significant area of
research. The project includes a component for undergraduate research
experiences at Fisk University. Given appropriate guidance, undergraduate have
the opportunity to alter parameters, run experiments, and participate in the
measuring and modeling process.