* 9503400
* NSF-CGP Science Fellows Program:  Characterization of       Primary Na+ pumps:  Respiratory Chain NOAH-Quinone          Reductases
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Dale Webster, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 02/28/1997
* USD 75,836.00

This award supports the collaboration of Dr. Dale Webster, Department of
Biology, Illinois Institute of Technology and Professor Tsutomu Unemoto,
Laboratory of Membrane Biochemistry, Chiba University. Project funding will
enable Dr. Webster to spend ten months in Japan, resident at Chiba University,
in order to study the sodium pump of aerobic bacteria and to investigate this
pumps involvement in oxidative metabolism. The growing field of the
biotechnological use of microorganisms necessitates the accumulation of
knowledge concerning their metabolism in general and in particular, of their
respiratory chain and its connection to ion transport across cell membranes.
This project brings together research scientists from two countries working in
the area of cell physiology. The U.S. scientist will have the opportunity to
become familiar with research techniques, equipment, and facilities at Chiba
University while contributing to the overall research effort. Additionally, the
extended visit by Webster will help him to establish a personal and professional
link with a leading research er in Japan. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the
objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge
through an international collaboration.