* 9503109
* Belief Dynamics and Action Selection in Qualitative         Approaches to Reasoning about Uncertainty
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Yoav Shoham, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 10/31/1998
* USD 215,829.00

Concerning reasoning and decision making in uncertain environments. The standard
approaches to dealing with this uncertainty are quantitative, and typically make
use of probability theory. The long-term goal of this project is provide more
qualitative methods that can be used effectively by agents reasoning about
uncertainty. The project focuses on the interplay between beliefs and actions,
and how this can be dealt with in a qualitative framework. Of particular
interest are two uses that will be crucial in attaining the long-term goal:
belief dynamics and action selection. Belief dynamics involves understanding how
an agent's beliefs should change after the agent makes an observation or
performs an action. To capture belief dynamics, a formal model for belief is
used that includes time explicitly. The ultimate goal of this research is to
provide a basis for a general theory of qualitative belief dynamics. Action
selection involves understanding how an agent should act, given his beliefs. The
usual decision theoretic approach uses a utility function describing the agent's
preferences and a probability distribution describing the agent's beliefs. But
in many situations it is infeasible to completely quantify uncertainty. An
alternative approach that dispenses with preferences describes the agent's
choice of action by a program directly specifying the behavior of the agent in
terms of his beliefs, allowing compilation of plans directly from the
specification that we want it to satisfy.