* 9503853
* Acquisition of Time-Resolved Near-Field Optical Spectrometer for Semiconductor Nanostructure Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Howard Jackson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9503853 Jackson This award is for partial support of a time-resolved near-field
optical spectrometer (TRNFOS) to be used fop .semiconductor nanostructure
research. By combining two commercially available instruments, we can configure
a spectrometer that achieves both ultrafast (<100 fs) time-resolution and
spatial-resolution (< 500 A) more than an order of magnitude better than
previously achievable using the best far field optics. The unique combination of
capabilities of the instrument will allow us to consider experiments that
previously were not possible. In particular, this instrument will allow for the
first time: (A) Optical observation of spatially local potential fluctuations no
longer masked by the inhomegeneously broadened photoluminescence lines
(following Hess et al.) (B) The study of exciton dynamics in confinement to, and
scattering from, these spatially local potential fluctuations. (C) The study of
exciton dynamics in quantum wires and dots. Namely spatially resolved capture of
excitons to wires and dots, as well as spatial transport of excitons along
wires. %%% The principal aspects of the proposed research are the study of III-V
and II-VI nanostructures. In the III-V multiple quantum wells the availability
of the TRNFOS instrument will provide a spatial resolution that will allow
optical observation of exciton confinement to lower dimensions through both
"intrinsic" local potential fluctuations, as well as "extrinsic" potentials
fabricated through focused ion beam mixing. For the case of focused ion beam
mixing, the instrument will be capable of providing in a unique manner the
lateral potential profile created by compositional intermixing. This
understanding is an essential step in creating quantum wire and quantum dot
structures. For quantum wire-like structures the TRNFOS instrument will provide
local information on exciton lifetimes and exciton anisotropic diffusion to
contrast with our p resent far field results. Similarly, in II-VI diluted
magnetic heterostructures this instrument will allow us to observe directly the
affect of magnetic ion clustering and alloy fluctuations on exciton dynamics and
the magnetization dynamics of the magnetic ion themselves. In particular, we are
interested in the dynamics of exciton self-localization in the formation of
lower dimensional exciton magnetic polarons, and in the affect of d-d
superexchange on the magnetization dynamics of magnetic ion clusters. The
acquisition of this time-resolved near-field optical spectrometer will
significantly advance present NSF supported efforts as well as open new
opportunities to explore semiconductor material science and physics. The
understanding of confined structures, quantum wires, quantum dots, and arrays
will be strongly influenced by the acquisition of this instrument. ***