* 9503356
* Mathematical Sciences:  Geometric Properties of Extremal    Trajectories and Singularities of the Value Function
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Heinz Schaettler, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1998
* USD 59,960.00

9503356 Shaettler Using a field theoretic approach the links between geometric
properties of extremal trajectories and singularities of the value function will
be investigated. Typically singularities in the value-function occur as extremal
trajectories need to be terminated because they lose optimality. The relation to
conjugate points and cut-loci of competing control strategies will be
investigated. The nonuniqueness of optimal controls on the cut-locus is the
primary source for nondifferentiability of the value function. The main tool in
this analysis will be a geometric theory of conjugate points and corresponding
construction of a field of extremals. When the flow of extremals covers the
state space 1-1 and smoothly, the value function and corresponding regular
synthesis of extremals can be constructed by the method of characteristics
analogous to classical Hamilton-Jacobi theory. This construction can be done
piecewise and as such directly applies to broken extremals. It also has the
advantage that it can immediately be localized and Jacobi type sufficient
conditions for local optimality can be attained for broken extremals. It is
intended to develop a theory which applies to arbitrary piecewise smooth
extremals unifying existing concepts for nonsingular extremals with those for
bang-bang trajectories. For nonsingular extremals (which satisfy the
strengthened Legendre condition) the usual Riccati equations for
characterizations of the conjugate points are obtained while for bang-bang
controls the conjugate points reduce to certain switching points. Special
emphasis will be given to optimal control systems with a compact control set and
a Hamiltonian function which is quadratic, more generally strictly convex in the
control. Under generic conditions the Maximum principle generates a piecewise
defined dynamical system on the cotangent bundle for which still local existence
and uniqueness properties hold, a so-called hybrid system. %%% Using a field
theoretic approach the links between geometric properties of extremal
trajectories and singularities of the value function will be investigated. In
particular, the connections between singularities in the value function and
conjugate points/cut-loci of competing control strategies will be investigated.
The nonuniqueness of optimal controls on the cut-locus is the primary source for
nondifferentiability of the value function. The main tool in this analysis will
be a geometric theory of conjugate points and corresponding construction of a
field of broken extremals. This has the advantage that results can immediately
be localized and Jacobi type sufficient conditions for local optimality can be
attained. It is intended to develop a theory which applies to arbitrary
piecewise smooth extremals unifying existing concepts for nonsingular extremals
with those for bang-bang trajectories. Special emphasis will be given to optimal
control systems with a compact control set and a Hamiltonian function which is
quadratic, more generally strictly convex in the control. For this case, the
Maximum principle typically generates a piecewise defined dynamical system on
the cotangent bundle for which still local existence and uniqueness properties
hold, a so-called hybrid system. ***