* 9503676
* 1995 Joint U.S.-Venezuela Conference:  Combinatorial        Set Theory and its Consequences
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* Jean Larson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 04/30/1998
* USD 22,500.00

9503676 Larson This U.S.-Venezuela Cooperative Program award will support travel
and related expenses for eleven U.S. scientists to participate in a conference
to be held in Curacao, Netherlands Antilles, in June 1995. The participants
include nine senior scientists, two postdoctoral associates, and one graduate
student. Organizers are Dr. Jean A. Larson, University of Florida and Dr. Carlos
A. de Prisco, Instituto Venezolano de Investigaciones Cientificas. The
conference will focus on combinatorial set theory and its applications. It is
designed to stimulate existing collaborations and to initiate new projects
between researchers in the U.S. and Venezuela. Combinatorial Set Theory is at
the heart of modern day set theory. The techniques and constructions developed
to look at the basic structure of the universe of sets also find applications to
other areas of mathematical logic and to algebra, topology and analysis. While
progress in certain areas of algebra and topology have long been closely tied to
set theory, recently the range of applications has broadened to include such
areas as harmonic analysis and the braid group in topology. This meeting will
seek to build on those trends and stimulate individuals who may be working in
increasingly narrow specializations. Besides support from the NSF and the
Venezuelan National Council for Science and Technology (CONICIT), the Caribbean
Mathematics Foundation will support expenses for participants from the European
Union and from other parts of Latin America. ***