* 9503093
* CAREER:  An Object-Oriented 3D Interaction Toolkit for      Virtual Ennvironment Research
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1995,06/15/1998
* Russell Turner, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 06/15/1998
* USD 134,756.00

While hardware issues are important, it is ultimately the software that will
determine the success of virtual environment applications. One important new
area of virtual environment software research is in 3D interaction: how should
such applications behave interactively and what software architectures should
they use? Since user input is relatively low-bandwidth, future solutions to
these problems will have enormous processing power to draw upon. Recently,
several developments have emerged in various fields which hold great promise for
advancing 3D interaction research. Examples are: object-oriented frameworks,
incremental hierarchical constraint solvers, automatic recognition of hand
gestures, inverse kinematics algorithms, and physically-based models of rigid or
deformable objects. Because of the complexity of developing 3D interaction
software, reusable software libraries are clearly needed. While some virtual
environment software libraries are currently available, there are no higher-
level toolkits available which incorporate these newer ideas, are publicly
available and written in a standar d object-oriented language. This research
project will investigate what form of software architecture a modern, high-level
3D interaction toolkit should take, build an implementation of one in C++, and
make a documented version publicly available for researchers and developers of
virtual environment applications. Such a high-level software framework would
serve as a catalyst for researchers developing highly interactive virtual
environments in the sciences, medicine, engineering and industry.