* 9503595
* Thermodynamic and Kinetic Theory of Structural              Transformations in Metal and Ceramics Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,04/30/1999
* Armen Khachaturyan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 04/30/1999
* USD 345,000.00

9503595 Khachaturyan The objective of this project is to develop a set of
numerical methods which can be efficiently used in the microstructure (and thus
physical property) control of multiphase advanced materials, with the potential
use in intelligent design and processing of materials with phase
transformations. The theory and the corresponding simulation models
incorporating the transformation-induced strain are expected to be advanced to a
point where three- dimensional numerical modeling is able to (i) realistically
characterize and predict the microstructure evolution during the processing,
(ii) test different models, and (iii) obtain insight into the details of atomic
mechanisms of structure formation. Emphasis will be placed on Ni-based
superalloys, zirconium oxide, and displacive transformations. %%% This project
supports the continuing work of one of the leading materials theorists in
America. The Principal Investigator has adapted his analytic theory into
computational codes which model the development of microstructure during phase
transformations. Materials properties are closely related to the structure on
the micrometer scale, so it is desirous to understand how to produce such
microstructures so that materials can be designed with properties of interest.
In this project the Principal Investigator will extend his work from two-
dimensional modeling to three dimensions. He will apply his simulations to a
variety of materials of importance which can, in some circumstances, be compared
with experimental microstructures. ***