* 9503669
* (ESH) Reconstructing Surface Ocean Productivity and Bottom  Water Oxygen Content for the Eastern Pacific Over the Past  Several 100,000 Years
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Paul Loubere, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 07/31/1997
* USD 52,630.00

9503669 Loubere Detailed quantitative analysis of surface ocean productivity and
bottom water oxygen contend over the past 400,000 years is proposed using two
cores from the eastern equatorial Pacific. Paleoproductivity estimates will be
based on a new quantitative, benthic Foraminiferal transfer function constrained
by qualitative proxies extracted from statistical analysis of combined
planktonic and benthic Foraminiferal assemblages, accumulation rates of
sedimentary components and accumulation rates of benthic Foraminifera. The deep
water paleo-oxygen estimates will be based on a quantitative benthic
Foraminiferal transfer function tested at this stage by seeking a coherent
signal at coring locations positioned under different biological productivity
regimes. The main objective of the paleoproductivity work will be generate
quantitative estimates over a time period long enough to test the relationship
of eastern equatorial Pacific productivity to global climate change. Also, the
data can be used to examine a model of equatorial paleoproductivity in which
changes along the equator are antithetical to those in the 5 to 10 degree
latitude belts on either side of the equator. Finally, the data, combined with
accumulation rates of terrigenous components, can be used to examine the 'iron
hypothesis' for productivity enhancement. The main objective of the paleo-oxygen
work will be to test for signal coherence at different coring locations and to
test initial results showing paleo-oxygen minima corresponding to North Atlantic
melt water pulses and to Heinrich events.