* 9503503
* Mathematical Sciences: Logic and Computability
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Anil Nerode, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 122,190.00

9503503 Shore Shore will investigate a broad range of topics in computability
theory (recursion theory) and logic. Included in the first area are
investigations of the structures of sets and functions ordered by different
notions of relative complexity of computation. Particular emphasis will be
placed on the complexity structures of those sets which are effectively
enumerable, and on the most general notion of relative computability as defined
by unrestricted Turing machine computations. Computation procedures that place
effective bounds on the access to oracle information or on the run-time of the
computations will also be investigated. The second area includes the study of
structures representable by finite automata, decision procedures, the analysis
and development of nonmonotonic logic, concurrent programming models, and
applications of linear programming ideas and algorithms to data structures and
logic programming. A study of the logical and mathematical foundations of hybrid
(continuous and discrete) control theory will be conducted, as well as of the
practical implementation of algorithms. This research project on computability
is primarily concerned with analyzing various ways of measuring the complexity
of functions on the natural numbers (0,1,2,...) and other common mathematical
structures, in terms of how hard they are to compute. A primary goal is the
study of the relations between various notions of complexity of a function,
notions which are based on machine models of computation and other notions, such
as how hard it is to define or describe the function. Techniques developed here
will also be applied to the study of the difficulty of proving the existence of
various mathematical objects, as well as to the relationship between abstract
proofs of existence of an object and the possibility or difficulty of actually
computing it. Shore's project also includes applications to logics such as (i)
those designed to model the real life development of knowledge, taking into
account the possibility that what we think we know today will seem false
tomorrow, and (ii) ones designed to interact with real measuring devices to
implement procedures to control systems that must both react to outside stimuli
and follow logical decision procedures. ***