* 9503084
* Gravitational Radiation Sources for                         Cryogenic Resonant Bar Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/1995,03/26/1999
* Lee Finn, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 03/26/1999
* USD 200,000.00

This CAREER award will initiate a new theoretical research program to study
issues connected with the design of the next generation of acoustic
gravitational wave detectors designed to operate at high frequency. Data
analysis techniques that properly account for detector noise will be adapted to
the truncated isocahedral gravitational antenna TIGA design. These techniques
will be used to evaluate several astrophysically relevant high-frequency
gravitational radiation sources, including but not limited to the final burst of
radiation from the coalescence of a binary neutron star or stellar mass black
hole system, supernovae explosions, precessing pulsars, and general non
axisymmetric pulsars. An educational program is proposed that focuses on
communicating to non-science students the nature of scientific inquiry and the
manner in which it is conducted. The vehicle for this program is an astronomy
course that fulfills a university distribution requirement. Computer
laboratories will be constructed that will allow students to, for example,
determine the age of a star cluster by examining the distribution of stars
within it, or calibrate the distance scale and find the Hubble constant and age
of a model universe. In addition, a novel evaluation and study aid - concept
maps - will be introduced into the same course. A concept is an object e.g.,
star, planet, galaxy, black hole or an event e.g., eclipse, nova, sidereal year
. New concepts come to be understood in terms of their relationships with
concepts previously known. Deeper understanding of concepts already known
corresponds to the construction of new relationships between them. A concept map
is a graphical representation of the concepts and the relationships among them
that a student has come to recognize.