* 9503024
* Comprehensive, Multiplatform Software for Morphometric      Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Dennis Slice, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* THOMAS QUARLES
* 08/31/1998
* USD 150,847.00

This project involves the development of a comprehensive, cross-platform
software package for morphometric analysis. The package will provide a
convenient environment for scientists to incorporate the many recently developed
methods for shape analysis into their own research programs. These new methods,
generally termed "geometric morphometrics", pay particular attention to the
complete retention of geometric information, such as is archived in sets of
point, or landmark, coordinates. Such information makes possible not only an
exhaustive analysis of shape variation, shape differences, and the covariation
of shape with external factors, but also allows for the visualization of
original and mean forms, group differences, and hypothetical configurations
based on the results of more abstract statistical analyses. The software will
provide for the superimposition of configurations of homologous points using
edge-matching, least-squares, and robust methods, the construction of
interpolation grids mapping a reference configuration onto a target
configuration, and the statistical analysis of single and multiple groups of
specimens in linear spaces tangent to precisely defined, but non-Euclidean,
shape spaces. Such capabilities have previously been accessible to researchers
only through routines written for matrix language packages unable to easily
exploit the full potential of these new methods or individual, idiosyncratic
programs designed to illustrate a specific method or concept and performing only
a few of the procedures that make up a complete analysis. The proposed package
will not only serve as a tool for learning and implementing these new methods,
but will be developed in such a way as to facilitate the addition of new methods
currently being developed, such as the incorporation of outline information into
the landmark-based methods. It's modular, C++ coding, and use of cross-platform
interface tools will make it easy to provide versions for popular platform s,
such as the MS-Windows, OS/2, and Mac environments, powerful Unix/XMotif
workstations, and future computer systems. In addition to these new geometric
methods, the package will also provide a complete environment for all aspects of
morphometric work. This will include data acquisition, verification, and editing
capabilities, through modules supporting popular 2- and 3-dimensional
digitizers, modules for the construction and analysis of "traditional" types of
morphometric data such as distance and angular measurements, analysis of outline
data via Fourier, fractal, and eigenshape methods, export capabilities to allow
for subsequent analyses using standard statistical packages, and an extensive
suite of graphical capabilities for the visualization of the results of the
above procedures.