* 9503535
* Acquisition of a High Resolution Research Powder X-Ray      Diffractometer
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Hugo Steinfink, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1996
* USD 155,000.00

9503535 Steinfink This award provides partial support of the purchase of a
state-of- the-art high resolution powder x-ray diffractometer. The primary users
will be faculty, graduate students, research associates, and post-doctoral
students at the University of Texas at Austin. The instrument has been chosen
with accessories to meet the specific needs of the research requirements of the
user group. The instrument will have at least a 4KW generator to produce a high-
intensity x-ray source from a sealed-off x-ray tube. The goniometer will be
based on a theta/theta geometry with a Peltier cooled solid state detector. A
variable goniometer radius will permit an ultimate peak resolution of 0.025 2,
especially important in data collection for Rietveld structure refinement. It
will be equipped with a 486/66 or better computer with software analysis
capabilities equivalent to or better than those sold by Materials Data Inc.
(MDI). The instrument will be equipped with high and low temperature stages in
which the atmosphere can be controlled. A thin film attachment will be part of
the system. This equipment will be situated in an existing laboratory that has
the required space and utilities. %%% Several research topics that require a
state-of-the-art powder diffractometer will be pursued. Its use will be heavily
devoted to the investigation of phase transitions in oxides and chalcogenides as
a function of temperature and atmosphere, to the study of thin films especially
for photocatalytic applications, and the collection of data for crystal
structure refinement by the Rietveld technique. These projects are supported by
a variety of public and private sources. It is expected that these procedures
will constitute the major time allocation for this instrument. In addition to
the furtherance of research projects, the presence of this equipment in the
Materials Science and Engineering Laboratories will provide training of graduate
students in techniques of importan ce in materials science, an area that is
increasingly recognized as indispensable if this country is to maintain
competitiveness and leadership in the Age of Materials. ***