* 9503054
* Upgrading of Electron Microprobe Facility, Department of    Geology and Geography, University of Massachusetts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Michael Williams, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/1997
* USD 33,287.00

9503054 Williams This grant provides $33,287 as one-half support for upgrades to
the Cameca SX-50 electron microprobe facility at the University of
Massachusetts. This facility has become an essential research and teaching tool
for a diverse group of researchers from western New England. One particular
focus of many studies is the integration of high-resolution compositional
mapping (x-ray mapping) with high-precision quantitative analysis. In the five
years since the microprobe was installed, Cameca has made several improvements
to the hardware and software of the SX-50, and the new SX-100, that
significantly improve the quality and efficiency of the instrument.
Specifically, upgrades will be made to four essential subsystems of the SX-50:
(1) autofocusing (2) fast image acquisition, (3) frame buffering, and (4)
replacement of a SUN 3 computer with a SPARC 5. The first two items will allow
users to collect high-resolution qualitative and quantitative data much more
quickly and efficiently. Frame buffering offers a much improved method for
viewing electron images and for integrating these images with other
compositional or optical data sets. The upgraded computer is required for
running the new and dramatically improved version of the Cameca software. The
proposed upgrades are essential for the laboratory to remain a state-of-the-art
research facility and to keep its position as one cornerstone of the analytical
community of western New England. ***