* 9503727
* Acquisition of a Data Analysis System for Droplet Research
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Enrique Lavernia, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 47,150.00

9503727 Lavernia This data analysis system will be dedicated to support
materials research in engineering at the University of California, Irvine, in
the Department of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering, and Department of
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering. The purchase of this state-of-the-art
equipment will be used to support several ongoing research programs of spray
forming processing and controlled droplet deposition manufacturing. This
equipment will demonstrate that the advanced studies made possible by the
proposed data analysis system are novel and useful for enhancing our
understanding of the processing microstructure mechanical properties synergism
in spray forming and controlled droplet deposition processing of materials. This
is an important area for future advances in spray deposition. %%% This droplet
analysis equipment will be used in required junior level laboratory courses for
mechanical and civil engineering students. This will allow the students to
visualize the complex dynamics associated with deforming droplets during
manufacturing, and will directly impact the research activities of approximately
fifteen graduate students. Students will utilize the requested data analysis
system to study a variety of important fundamental phenomena described as
follows. First, the interactions that occur between atomized droplets and
ceramic particles during the manufacture of metal matrix composites using spray
atomization and deposition. Of particular interest will be the study of the
impingement of the composite droplets with the substrate. Also, the data
generated will provide very useful insight into the mechanisms of porosity
generation in discrete droplet processes, and will be used to conduct parametric
studies of droplet solidification and spreading during net form manufacturing
using controlled droplet deposition. The details of droplet deformation and
impingement are experimentally unknown. The experimental data obtained will be
extremely useful il validating existing theoretical models. The information
generated will impact a number of discrete droplet manufacturing processes,
including but not limited to: plasma spraying, spray atomization and deposition,
controlled droplet processes arc spraying, and others. We wil gain insight in to
the mechanisms that govern the evolution of porosity during the manufacturing of
structural materials using discrete droplet processes. Porosity represents one
of the most critical phenomena hindering the commercial exploitation of
manufacturing processes that involve discrete droplets. ***