* 9503793
* Analyzing Algorithms:  Advanced Methods for Recurrence      Equations, Probabilistic Estimates, and Operator Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Alan Siegel, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 07/31/1999
* USD 182,040.00

The goal of this continuing research project is to develop more systematic
theorems and methods for analyzing difficult algorithms. These methods are
briefly characterized as follows: (1) Perturbation theory for recurrence
equations in computer science. Perturbation theory is a mathematical technique
which was developed for analyzing difficult differential equation problems in
mathematical physics. The research objective is to develop a tool kit of
theorems that can apply to recurrences ranging from advanced issues in hashing
to the elementary concerns of basic irregular divide-and-conquer algorithms; (2)
Replacing operator methods in performance analysis. Operator methods also arise
in the analysis of physical methods, and have been used to establish
conservation laws, and compute the time evolution of fundamental quantities such
as energy in complicated physical processes. A variation on these methods has
been used to analyze several complicated processes in computer science,
including coalesced hashing. However, recently it has been shown that coalesced
hashing can be analyzed more completely and more easily by standard analytic
methods. The goal in this part is to capture algebraic properties of operator
methods, to translate them into analytic formulations, and to use these
translated formulations to analyze difficult algorithms; (3) Probabilistic
estimates. A growing number of computer science results use large deviation
bounds, including fault tolerance analysis, the analysis of throughput in
probabilistic situations, and the analysis of probabilistic algorithms. Many
computer science applications introduce varieties of extra constraints, which
render the standard theorems inapplicable. The final goal is to continue
research on probabilistic estimation methods.