* 9503838
* Collective Communication in Wormhole-Routed Massively       Parallel Computers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Philip McKinley, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 07/31/1999
* USD 208,200.00

The supercomputing industry is now dominated by parallel architectures. In many
such systems, memory is physically distributed among processors in order to
achieve better scalability, requiring nodes to communicate through a network. In
order to reduce communication latency, many systems have the wormhole-routing
switching strategy, in which messages are pipelined through and a single
destination, or collective. Communication operations may be either point-to-
point, which involves a single source and a single destination, or collective,
in which more than two processes participate. Collective communication
operations are particularly important in scientific computing, where large data
arrays are distributed over the local memories of the nodes, but are manipulated
through single operations. This research project addresses the design of
collective communication operations for wormhole-routed networks. The research
is intended to explore architectural and algorithmic alternatives in the design
of communications subsystems for next generation wormhole-routed networks. The
project can be divided approximately into four subareas. First, both models will
be used to develop new algorithms for collective operations in addition to those
already under investigation. Target platforms will include both direct networks,
as well as wormhole-routed switch-based interconnects. Second, the resulting
algorithms will be applied in order to support higher-level parallel programming
constructs, such as virtual process topologies, parallel I/O operations and
distributed shared memory. Third, the resulting communication services will be
used to improve the performance of parallel applications, in particular parallel
numerical algorithms. Finally, the use of the new models will be investigated in
wormhole-routed systems that serve purposes other than parallel computing, such
as high speed local area networks. The methods used will be analysis,
simulation, and experimental studies on commercial wormhole-routed systems. The
significance of this research is that it will provide new solutions to the
communication needs of parallel applications. Besides providing a better
understanding of the issues and problems that must be addressed in design and
use of collective operations in wormhole-routing systems, this project will
produce tangible results in the form of new protocols, prototype implementations
of new algorithms, and new applications software, all of which will be made
publicly available for use by other researchers.