* 9503556
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Electronic Materials, Devices, and Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Jack Fitzer, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 03/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9506556 Shieh This award provides funding for the establishment of a multi-
university Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Electronic
Materials, Devices, and Systems between the Center for Advanced Electron Devices
and Systems at the University of Texas - Arlington and the Electronic Devices
and Materials Group at Texas A&amp;M University. The research activities of
these two sites are complimentary and this operation will enable the Center to
expand its research activities and enrich their industrial membership base. This
consolidated Center has expertise in bulk single and thin film growth,
characterization and process modeling of electronic materials, Molecular Beam
Epitaxy (MBE), and Pulsed Laser Deposition (PLD) for the production of multi-
layer and heterostructure devices, rapid thermal processing, fabrication, and
evaluation of devices (fiber-optics sensors, integrated optics, semiconductor
lasers, microwave and millimeter wave circuits and devices, superconductor
devices, ferroelectric devices, and optical instrumentation), device modeling
and simulation. The University of Texas - Arlington will coordinate the
activities between these two research sites during the first two years of
operation. The continuation of this coordination responsibility will be reviewed
and discussed by the Industry Advisory board at the end of the second year. The
Principal Investigators have worked collaboratively in developing this multi-
university Center. They have excellent background and the experiences necessary
to carry out the proposed plan. The universities have also shown strong
commitment in supporting this multi-university Center. This proposal has been
coordinated with Dr. Marvin White, Program Director, Division of Electrical and
Communications Systems. The Program Director recommends the University of Texas
- Arlington be awarded $40,000 for the first year of a five-year continuing
award. ($25,000 for regular support, $10,000 for the administrative support, and
$5,000 for the evaluator). Page 2 Near the end of each 12-month period the
Program Director and/or the Division Director of the Engineering Education and
Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of renewal
criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
industry/university interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which a
collaborative, robust research program is developing; and 3) the extent to which
the support base is developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program
Director will recommend support for the next period of this continuing award.
Jay Lee Program Director, I/UCRC