* 9503168
* A Theoretical and Practical Basis for Applying Formal       Methods to Object-Oriented Programming and C++
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Gary Leavens, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 06/30/1999
* USD 239,998.00

This research seeks a theoretical foundation for specifying and verifying
object-oriented programs, and a practical foundation for the use of formal
methods with the programming language, C++. The project is extending the model
theory and proof theory of abstract data types to help characterize when one
abstract data type is a behavioral subtype of another. Previous work has given
sufficient conditions for behavioral subtyping among abstract data types with
immutable objects. These conditions are based on type specifications, as
reflected in algebraic models of these specifications. Behavioral subtyping
allows modular specification and verification of programs, using static type
information without using case analysis for each subtype. Separately, one proves
that the subtype relationships satisfy the semantic conditions of behavioral
subtyping. An important problem is to find necessary and sufficient conditions
for behavioral subtyping for abstract types whose objects have time-varying
state (i.e., that are mutable), since these types occur frequently in practice.
Needed are ways to prove behavioral subtype relationships from type
specifications. This research would extend the work on modular specification and
verification to languages with mutation and non-determinism. The practical work
is aimed at providing the fast-growing community of C++ programmers with a
foundation for the use of formal methods with this language. Essential to
systematic development of code, program verification, code reuse, and other
formal development activities, is a formal specification language. This project
advances Larch/C++, and interface specification language tailored to specify C++
modules. Tools, including a type-checker for Larch/C++, are being developed, as
are a suite of teaching materials, and tutorial and larger worked examples.