* 9503992
* CISE Postdoctoral Program:  Distributed Real-Time Control   for Rapidly Reconfigurable Manufacturing
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Ralph Hollis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 02/28/1998
* USD 45,903.00

9503992 Hollis The objectives of this project are: (1) providing the
postdoctoral research associate with a rich environment for extending previous
work in distributed real-time control of dynamic systems to the problem domain
principally of manufacturing automation; (2) to contribute in the area of
distributed control to the developing project in miniature factories, and (3) to
provide a means for the associate to broaden the exposure to a wide variety of
research topics within several units of the university. Given the relatively
constant cost of mechanical actuators and mechanisms in contrast to the
continuing advances in price, size, and performance of computers it is
inevitable that computational processes become as pervasive and distributed as
their mechanical counterparts. The intent of this research project is to `egin
exploration of scientifically grounded approaches to the construction of such
systems. Specifically, distributed real-time control systems will be constructed
primarily to support a highly modular (in mechanical hardware, computational
hardware, and software) miniature assembly system. The proposed controller
architecture makes use of an event driven model for parallel processing to
afford the necessarily high levels of software and hardware modularity, both of
which will allow for rapid and efficient system development and reconfiguration
without risking catastrophic failure due to unforeseen computational hardware or
software interactions. ***