* 9503483
* Mathematical Sciences:  Inverse Nodal Problems and Fluid    Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 142,000.00

Hald The investigator undertakes studies il inverse problems and fluid
mechanics. McLaughlin and the investigator have shown that the potential in a
Schroedinger equation on a rectangular domain can be uniquely determined (up to
an additive constant) by the nodal lines, i.e. the set of points where the
eigenfunctions vanish. The present proof assumes that the potential is constant
near the boundaries of the rectangle. This assumption excludes a large class of
potentials and one goal is to remove this restrictive assumption. In the field
of Fluid Mechanics Buttke has recently proposed a very interesting method for
solving Euler's equations for two and three dimensional flows. Using a new
interpretation of the computed velocity kernels, the investigator aims to
establish the convergence of the method. The properties of elastic materials
(such as beams or plates) can be described by elastic parameters. In many
problems the elastic parameters are not available for direct observation. For
example, one cannot see on the surface of the earth that the density changes at
the depth of two miles due to the presence of oil. Similarly, a crack deep
inside a piece of metal may not be observable on the outside. In such cases one
may probe the material by sending waves through it, and study either the
reflections of the waves or the vibrations of the material. One important goal
of the theory of inverse problems is to show that the property of the elastic
material can be inferred from the data thus observed, and to develop efficient
algorithms for estimating the material properties. In engineering, meteorology,
and medicine it is important to be able to compute the movement of a fluid
accurately. Examples are: (1) water running through pipes, (2) the movement of
air in weather prediction, and (3) the flow of blood through an artificial
heart. At present calculations of two-dimensional flows are done routinely, but
it is still a challenge to calculate the mo vement of water in three dimensions,
especially when the water is turbulent. It is a question of having sufficiently
powerful computers, and a very efficient way of describing the flows. The work
of the investigator is focused on numerical methods that are specially suited
for studying the movements of very complicated flows.