* 9503562
* Benthic Fluxes and Sediment Irrigation on the Continental   Margin, N.W. Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* William Martin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/1998
* USD 459,977.00

9503562 MARTIN Benthic fluxes and pore water concentrations of carbon and
related solutes will be determined on a depth transect of the continental margin
in the northwest Atlantic ocean. The proposed study area is the depth interval
from 100-2000m at 71 W, a region that is physically representative of much of
the margin. A complete depth transect in this region will significantly advance
our ability to incorporate margin processes in quantitative models of global
chemical cycles. The proposed measurements will differ from previous flux
determinations on margins in several respects. (1) Flux chamber deployments will
be 4 days long, 2-3 times longer than most deployments in rapidly accumulating,
high-flux sediments. This increased length will define several processes
important in sediments of this type. In situ measurements will be made of solute
transport by macroninfaunal irrigation in offshore margin sediments. Significant
improvements in the signal-to-noise ratio in alkalinity, dell-13C (totalCO2),
and dissolved organic carbon fluxes will be achieved thus providing new
information on the contributions of DOC and above-saturation horizon dissolution
of CaCO3 to the benthic carbon cycle. (2) Flux experiments will be carried out
in duplicate at each of 8 sites, and will be accompanied by extensive, in situ
microelectrode profiling and both high-resolution and "standard" pore water
sampling. Flux chamber and coring operations will be carried out via
submersible, allowing the combination of measurements to be made in a relatively
small, visually homogeneous area. The number an combination of measurements will
allow improved evaluation of intra-site variability over what has been possible
in past experiments, increasing confidence in trends of flux vs. water column
depth. (3) At shallower sites (100-1000m), the increased length of flux chamber
deployments would lead to extensive depletion of O2 in chamber water. To
counteract this effect (with its potentia l undesirable consequences are
designed to maintain the O2 in chambers are designed to maintain the O2 level
close to that of ambient bottom water.