* 9503988
* Postdoc: Parallel Multizone Adaptive Scheme for Multiphase  Systems with Free and Moving Boundaries
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Vishwanath Prasad, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 11/30/1997
* USD 46,200.00

9503988 Prasad The object of the proposed research is to develop a parallelized
multizone adaptive scheme for accurate and efficient simulations of materials
processes of industrial importance. The final software will be able to simulate
three-dimensional transient processes involving diffusion and convection of
heat, mass, and species, and radiation heat transfer together with
melting/solidification, flows induced by buoyancy and capillary forces, and
effects of electrical and magnetic fields. The use of a generalized governing
equation will allow consideration of many different materials with various
phases in a single computational domain. The numerical scheme will employ (a)
the multizone adaptive grid generation (MAGG) technique for the discretization
of physical domains of arbitrary shape, and (b) the curvilinear finite-
volume(CFV) approach for the discretization of the govening partial differential
equations and development of the finite difference equations. An efficient
parallel algorithm suitable for multiphase systems will be developed based on
the massively-parallel distributed-memory MIMD techniques and will take
advantage of the physics of the problem to develop a domain-decomposition
strategy. Load balance, communication, and migration of elements will be given
special attention in the development. The immediate implementation of this model
will be made to the CZ and CCZ growth of silicon single crystals (a project
sponsored by NSF and Ferrofluidics Corporation) and one-step in-situ synthesis
and high pressure MLEK growth of indium phosphide crystals (an AFOSR project).
The proposed parallel computer model will be able to simulate many kinds of
complex materials processes involving free and moving boundaries that are not
possible by the present techniques.