* 9503344
* SBIR Phase II: An Eight-bit Superconducting Analog-to-      Digital Converter with 10GHz Input Bandwidth
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1998
* Paul Bradley, HYPRES, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 03/31/1998
* USD 299,955.00

95-03344 Bradley This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project
will address a new capability for digital data acquisition and recording of high
speed signals over an extended frequency range, from dc to 20 GigaHertz. A new
instrument, called a transient digitizer, will be able to characterize high
speed electronics (or any signature convertible to an electric signal) by
recording these signals and storing them for analysis. Phase I developed a
comparator designed to be the basis of an ultra-high speed analog-to-digital
converter (ADC) with an order-of-magnitude higher performance than is currently
available. Phase II goals are to design, fabricate, and test the full
superconducting ADC system. Superconducting electronics combine very low noise
with the high switching speeds required in fast, high-sensitivity measurements.
An advantage of this approach is that magnetic flux quantitization permits many
precise, equally spaced thresholds with a single comparator. ADCs with this
characteristic require much less complex circuitry and have no need for
resistors with very precise values. Improved digitizers would find extensive
application in high speed electronics designed for optical fiber interfaces,
switching networks, communication, and computers.