* 9503080
* CAREER:  Electron Drag Measurements:  A New Approach to     Physics in Electron Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Thomas Gramila, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

9503080 Gramila Fundamental aspects of electronic properties of semiconductors
are to be studied in a set of experiments utilizing a powerful new measurement
technique. The focus of the measurements is electron- electron interactions,
which can be directly measured with the new technique. Measurements will explore
the influence of disorder on electron systems in detail. The goal is to isolate
for the first time a central physical element of disorder induced effects:
correlations between electrons. Other fundamental issues to be addressed include
electron screening, examined through direct experimental measurement of
corrections to random phase approximation screening calculations. The relevance
of the issues explored in these measurements extends to virtually all electronic
systems, from conventional semiconductors to new reduced dimensionality systems.
%%% The properties of metals and semiconductors can be fundamentally altered by
interaction between the electrons present in these systems. A new measurement
technique, which provides direct and unambiguous measurement of these otherwise
elusive interactions, permits new approaches to important questions in these
materials. The influence of disorder on electronic properties is one area to be
explored in detail. Another area is the degree to which the electrons
collectively shield themselves from external forces and voltages, a complex
phenomena notoriously difficult to calculate directly. The relevance of the
issues explored in these measurements extends to virtually all electronic
systems, from conventional semiconductors to new nanostructured materials. ***