* 9503304
* Acquisition of Surface Electron Spectroscopy Instrumentation
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Kerry Hipps, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1998
* USD 232,500.00

9503304 Dickinson This award is for the acquisition of surface electron
spectroscopy instrumentation to serve a number of faculty and students at
Washington State University who are working in the area of advanced materials
research. The specific instrumentation requested is an electron spectrometer
(ES), combining an Auger Electron Spectrometer (AES), X-Ray Photoelectron
Spectrometer (XPS), and Ultraviolet Photoelectron Spectrometer (UPS), including
the necessary vacuum system, electronics, and data acquisition/data presentation
system. This facility will provide new capabilities at Washington State
University not presently available. The research that will benefit from this
instrumentation includes efforts in thin film synthesis and processing, surface
modification, laser surface interactions, tribology and fracture, and
characterization of materials on an atomic level. AES/XPS allows both
qualitative and semiquantitative analysis of surface composition and, combined
with UPS, provides critical information about electronic and chemical structure.
A key requirement at WSU is that the facility be configured for both direct use
by experiments and for routine surface analysis. To achieve this dual purpose,
we will purchase a complete spectrometer with two load lock sample introduction
ports and temperature controlled sample stage. Because many of the users require
unique vacuum experiments and/or sample preparation and treatment in a
controlled environment, we will build a flexible experimental/sample preparation
treatment chamber to be attached to the main analysis chamber. The use of this
second chamber will be scheduled in large time blocks (about 3-5 weeks) to allow
different users to clean, configure, and use this system to their best
advantage. This combination allows the capability of performing experiments,
growth studies, and/or in situ sample preparation with accompanying surface
analysis under UHV conditions. Simultaneously, without conflict, samples can be
introduced into the analysis chamber from the outside for routine analysis.
Acquisition of this capability is essential for research activities in a number
of departments within the University, including Physics, Chemistry, Mechanical
and Materials Engineering, Geology, Chemical Engineering, and Electrical
Engineering. This activity is organized under two crosscollege organizations.
The Center for Materials Research and the Materials Science Program have been
recently established to address the interdisciplinary nature of Materials
Science. The Center for Materials Research consists of 20 senior participants
from 6 different departments and was formed with the purpose of encouraging
collaborative, crossdisciplinary projects in the area of materials science and
engineering and applied condensed matter science. The Materials Science Program
is the graduate educational arm of the materials science thrust at Washington
State University; the Program was initiated in the Fall of 1990 and is the most
recently created Ph.D. program in the University. In the projects described
below there are a total of 21 graduate and postdoctoral students whose research
will directly benefit from the acquisition of this ES system. There are an
additional 12 students involved in other projects described in this proposal
whose research would significantly benefit from these surface analysis
techniques. It is anticipated that other graduate students and faculty will be
attracted to use this instrumentation once it is acquired and demonstrated. The
AES/XPS system would also provide substantial benefit as an instructional
instrument for both graduate and undergraduate students impacting at least 10
additional students.