* 9503947
* Neutron Imaging System for Materials Characterization       Research at the University of Texas Reactor
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Naeem Abdurrahman, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9503947 Abdurrahman A neutron imaging system (NIS) will be developed at the
Nuclear Engineering Teaching Laboratory (NETL) of The University of Texas at
Austin. The NIS consists of three subsystems: (1) Thomson neutron beam image
intensifier tube sensitive to cold, thermal, and epithermal neutrons, (2) real
time image processing unit consisting of vidicon camera, high resolution
monitor, image enhancement and measurement processor, and printer, and (3) high
performance workstation for image storage, computed tomography, and system
control. The addition of the proposed NIS to NETL existing facilities will
provide a powerful combination of capabilities to address a wide variety of
problems important to materials research. The NIS is the key element in the
development of neutron computed tomography (NCT) for materials characterization.
Computed tomography refers to the cross-sectional imaging of an object interior
from transmission data collected from many different directions. The
significance of this research emanates from the growing need for nondestructive
evaluation techniques with desirable properties that neutron-based methods
provide, including high penetrability through metallic and highly dense
materials, and the neutrons inherent sensitivity to elemental and isotopic
variations of wide range of materials, sample sizes, and geometries. The ability
of the NIS to provide 2-D scans will also facilitate the investigation and
development of 3-D tomography. The combination of NCT and real time neutron
imaging will open doors for new research in areas of materials characterization
and advanced industrial processes, and will help promote and enhance
collaboration with industry and researchers in the field. In addition, the NIS
will be used in other research projects at NETL. A neutron focusing system has
been developed for use with the Texas cold neutron source (TCNS). The NIS will
facilitate the alignment of the focusing system and will allow the determination
of detailed system performance. A prompt gamma activation analysis (PGAA)
facility is also being developed for the TCNS. PGAA is a nondestructive
analytical technique which is useful for major and minor elemental analysis of
materials. The NIS will allow optimum positioning of individual samples for PGAA
measurements and will permit the determination of neutron attenuation factors.
The NIS will also be used as a spatial neutron detector for the small angle
neutron scattering (SANS) instrument and reflectometer being developed. SANS is
used for analysis of polymers, colloids, and ceramic precursors. Neutron
reflectometry is used for analysis in surface chemistry studies and testing of
thin films.