* 9503837
* Development of a Cryogenic Scanning Tunneling Microscope for the Study of Atomically-Fabricated Structures in a Variable Magnetic Field
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Michael Crommie, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 04/30/1998
* USD 133,500.00

9503837 Crommie The scanning tunneling microscope (STM) has recently grown from
being a tool of surface characterization to a tool of surface modification. The
same abilities that allow one to image single atoms can now be used to position
them. Little work has been done, however, involving the controllable
manipulation of single atoms. The fabrication and characterization of atomic
scale structures thus remain a largely untouched scientific frontier. We intend
to develop the next generation atomic manipulation device. This will be
accomplished through the construction of an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) cryogenic
STM. The STM system will be integrated with a UHV surface preparatory facility
capable of growing epitaxial metal films. Magnetic fields up to 3 Tesla will be
applied to the low temperature sample region using a superconducting magnet. The
STM will be used to build nanometer scale structures one atom at a time. These
structures will then be studied under ambient conditions, in the presence of a
magnetic field, and under the influence of a background transport current. The
main objective of this work is to gain a better understandine of the properties
of artificial atomic scale structures and the surfaces that support them. The
proposed instrument will allow a new type of interactive research in condensed
matter physics. Rather than remain passive observers, researchers will be able
to take an active role in the microscopic events unfolding before them. The STM
will become a new pair of hands with which to shape the atomic landscape. For
instance, if it is desired to know the effect of a defect at a particular site
on the surface, then the researcher will put a defect at that site. If it is
desired to know the property of a particular array of atoms, then the researcher
will simply assemble such an array. If the effect of proximity between two
chemical species is desired, then the researcher will push the individual
reactants clos er together and observe the results. The ability to manipulate
matter at so fundamental a level is a significant new capability whose effects
are only beginning to be felt. All fields of science concerned with phenomena at
the atomic scale should eventually be impacted by these developments.