* 9504614
* Mathematical Sciences:  Stochastic Inequalities, Dependence Structures, and Some Associated Limited Theorems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Yosef Rinott, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/1998
* USD 106,942.00

9504614 Rinott Abstract The proposed research centers on stochastic inequalities
and dependence structures which arise in several contexts: a) Multiple tests for
positively dependent test statistics, with the goal of replacing known error
probability rates for independent tests by useful bounds for suitably dependent
tests. b) Prophet inequalities for dependent random variables, which essentially
provide measures on the value of future information in sequentially observed
data. c) Positive and negative dependence inequalities: some conjectures on
correlation inequalities and negative dependence inequalities for random
variables obtained from certain distributions on random graphs are shown to be
equivalent to interesting determinental inequalities. Special cases have been
proved directly, and by numerical calculations. Another conjecture concerns
integral inequalities which extend the well-known van Den Berg-Kesten Conjecture
(rumored to have been proved recently) and suggest interesting new applications.
Special cases of the new aonjecture have already been established using FKG type
and rearrangement inequalities; numerical calculations seem to support these
extensions. d) Limit theorems for dependent random variables, with the goal of
obtaining convergence rates in terms of meaningful characteristics of the
dependence structures, using Stein's method and classical approaches. The
assumption of statistical independence of sampled measurements is basic to much
of classical data analysis. It is relevant when one can assume that the data
arises from repeated controlled experiments in which there is no carryover of
errors between repetitions. However, situations with more complex data are
ubiquitous. The proposed research centers on the study of certain aspects of
samples which consist of observations (random variables) which are not
independent, and various models for dependence structures. Such structures are
also relevant in various models in physics, and certain issues arising in
percolation theory, for example, are also studied. Another aspect of this
research is relevant to statistical large sample theory. A good portion of
statistical theory is based on approximations which are valid only for large
samples. Methods for such approximations for dependent data are investigated, in
order to determine the validity of the theory in complex situation. The quality
of the approximations is important in deciding how large samples must be in
order for large sample approximations to be valid.