* 9504015
* Acquisition of a Network Analyzer for Characterization of   Ceramic Materials for Wireless Communication Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Pradeep Fulay, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9504015 Phule Personal communication services (PCS) represent a burgeoning and
revolutionary family of microwave based technologies (400 MHz to 30 GHz).
Familiar examples include cellular telephones, wireless cable, direct broadcast,
and interactive television. To store, transfer, and filter electromagnetic
waves, components based on ceramic materials are indispensable. New and better
ceramics for wireless communications (CWC), characterized by exceptionally high
quality factors, a relatively high dielectric constant, and adequate temperature
stability will be highly desirable for further miniaturization and enhanced
performance of certain microwave components. The major goal of this program is
to conduct a systematic investigation of the synthesis and processing of
potentially novel ceramic materials for microwave applications. Our research is
being conducted so as to gain deeper insights into the fundamental relationships
between the atomic level defects, heterogeneous interfaces, and the microwave
dielectric properties of ceramic materials. %%% For achieving the central goal
of our research, it is critical to measure the dielectric properties of
materials, in the microwave frequency range (400 MHz to 40 GHz). Using a
microwave network analyzer is the only direct way to characterize such microwave
properties. This award provides funds to acquire such a network analyzer.
Presently, this unit is not available at the University of Pittsburgh. This
instrument will enhance the quality of the research program. Using the network
analyzer, we will be able to experimentally determine the microwave properties
in relation to the composition and microstructure of sintered, polycrystalline
ceramics in the tantalum oxide-zirconia, niobium oxidezirconia, and other
systems. We plan to investigate the influence of composition, and
micorstructural features (such as grain size, porosity, and grain boundary
microchemistry) of samples processed using different sintering time-temperature
profiles. We also seek to understand the influence of controlled levels of
different dopants and impurities on the microwave dielectric constant and
quality factor of different compositions. These properties will be measured at
different temperatures (100- 500 K) so as to elucidate the fundamental
mechanisms that influence microwave properties. ***