* 9504611
* Phase Retrieval Problems in Inverse Scattering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Paul Sacks, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1997
* USD 54,000.00

Sacks The investigator studies the one-dimensional inverse scattering problem of
quantum mechanics, in which the solution to be found is a potential in the
Schrodinger equation, and develops effective numerical methods for computing the
solution. A variety of inverse scattering problems are known to be uniquely
solvable when a complex valued function, known as the reflection coefficient, is
given as data. In many interesting applications, however, the reflection
coefficient cannot be measured, but instead only its amplitude can be determined
experimentally. The phase problem in inverse scattering consists then in solving
the inverse scattering problem despite the lack of phase information contained
in the reflection coefficient. In general these missing data introduce genuine
non-uniqueness into the problem, and one must compensate by making use of other
kinds of information. For example, one might restrict the class of admissible
solutions in some way consistent with the physics of the situation, or
alternatively one might have available some other kinds of data related to the
usual scattering data. Aside from uniqueness questions, there is also a need to
develop accurate and reliable computational techniques. The model problem ---
the one-dimensional inverse scattering problem --- arises in neutr on and x-ray
reflection studies of surface structure. Related problems in optics are also
studied. It is natural in such applications to require the potential to vanish
on a half line, and this substantially, although not completely, removes the
ambiguity due to the missing phase information. A main goal of this project is
to identify various types of further supplementary information whose
specification allows for unique recovery of the potential. Also, numerical
methods are developed for computation of the potential in each case. An
important aspect of the numerical approach developed here is that ultimately it
is only necessary to solve an optimization problem over a relatively small
dimensional parameter space. In a number of areas of science and engineering it
is of interest to characterize the chemical structure of surfaces and interfaces
on very small length scales. Aside from its intrinsic theoretical interest, this
kind of capability has technological applications, especially in materials
science and biology. One experimental technique which has received considerable
attention in recent years is the use of so-called reflectivity data: a carefully
prepared beam of x-rays or neutrons is aimed at the surface whose material
properties are sought, and the reflected beam is carefully measured. Due to the
interaction of the beam with the surface, the reflected beam encodes a great
deal of information about the surface, and one is thus confronted with the
problem of properly interpreting such data. The main goal of this project is to
investigate certain analytical and numerical methods for making such inferences.
The reflected beam may be characterized by amplitude and phase components, but
conventional measuring devices are sensitive only to the amplitude component. It
is well understood that considerable ambiguity in the interpretation of
reflectivity data is associated with the absence of the phase component. To
compensate for this one hopes to use various kinds of supplementary information
which may be available. In this project the investigator seeks to elucidate from
a mathematical point of view how it may be possible to incorporate such extra
information into automatic data processing techniques.