* 9504905
* U.S.-Germany Program:  Dissertation Research in Mechanical  Engineering
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,09/30/1995
* Craig Rogers, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 09/30/1995
* USD 6,700.00

This award supports Eric Flint, a graduate student of Professor Craig A. Rogers
in the Center for Intelligent Material Systems and Structures, Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University, to spend five months carrying out
research at the German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR) in Braunschweig,
Germany. His host for this period of dissertation-related research is Jorg
Melcher, Deputy Head of the Division of Adaptive Structural Systems of the
Institute of Structural Mechanics of DLR. This Institute is possibly the
strongest in Europe in the area of adaptive structural vibration control.
Research at CIMMS is focused on characterizing the electrical and mechanical
behavior of `smart` actuators as part of complex structures. Mr. Flint is
working on intelligent design of such smart system technology. Research in the
German institute has concentrated on building structurally integrated actuators
and designing control algorithms to isolate vibration and control aeroelastic
effects.. Mr. Flint's dissertation research visit will provide an active link
between the U.S. and German research groups, giving CIMSS access to the large
test structures and other types of stack actuators available at DLR. The control
of undesirable vibration and other behavior in truss-like structures by passive
design improvement is reaching its technical limit. Active control offers a way
to further improve the performance range of structures. Adding a method of
putting force into the structure creates force paths which can be used to
control and eliminate excess vibration. A promising approach is multi-layered
stack actuators, which consist of thin layers of active materials that are
mechanically in serial and electrically in parallel. This area of control-
structure interaction is of widespread interest in the U.S. because of its
potential to significantly improve the efficiency and performance of a wide
variety of structural systems, from airplanes to communication antennae, as well
as suppressing vibration in heavy machinery, bridges and certain types of
buildings.