* 9504299
* Mathematical Sciences: Topological Methods in               Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Kari Vilonen, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 92,800.00

9504299 Vilonen The investigator will work on the following subjects, to a large
extent using topological methods: representation theory of Lie groups,
representation theory of algebraic groups, automorphic sheaves and the geometric
Langlands conjecture, and perverse sheaves and micro-local perverse sheaves. The
goal is to develop further the geometric techniques that he used with Schmid in
solving the Barbasch-Vogan conjecture on the one hand and on the other hand the
techniques in his joint work with Mirkovic on modular and integral
representations of algebraic groups. One typical type of a problem in
mathematics is to discover and understand connections beteen things that from
the outset seem unrelated. One of the deepest and most mysterious types of such
connections has been suggested by Langlands and is now generally called a
Langlands correspondence. A main feature of the investigator's work is to
develop geometric techniques to discover and establish such connections. The
situation is indeed the most interesting when the two things to be related are
not geometric but the connection between them is established by geometry. This
is the nature of the investigator's joint work with Schmid that proved the
Barbasch-Vogan conjecture. His other work involves the Langlands correspondence
alluded to above. In his work with Mirkovic he managed to get quite far in
understanding one aspect of Langlands duality by developing new geometric
techniques. ***