* 9504505
* Mechanisms and Kinetic Characterization of Bacteriolysis in  Deposit Feeders
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2000
* Craig Plante, College of Charleston
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2000
* USD 225,000.00

P.I. Plante, Craig J. Proposal #: 9504505 PROJECT ABSTRACT Bacteria serve dual
roles in sedimentary systems: as mineralizers of organic detritus and as food
for protozoans and invertebrates. The biomass, production, and community
composition of bacteria contribute to the character of these roles. The primary
objective of the research is to assess the importance of deposit-feeder
ingestion to both qualitative and quantitative aspects of sedimentary bacterial
communities. The principal animal selected for intensive study is the deposit-
feeding polychaete, Arencola marina. Other polychaetes (Amphitrite johnstoni and
Clymenella torquata), hemichordates (Stereobalanus canadensis and Saccoglossus
kowlevskyi), an apodous holothuroid (Caudina arenata), and a bivalve mollusc
(Macoma balthica) will be investigated for interspecific comparisons. The
mechanisms of lysis, keying on digestive surfactants, will be determined. In
vitro work will examine 1) the digestive kinetics which affect interactions
between surfactants and enzymes; 2) the rate and extent of bacterial digestion,
3) the influence of temperature and reactant concentrations on bacteriolysis,
and 4) the effect of gut exposure time on digestive kinematics. In vivo
experiments with temperature and food quality will be employed to test
predictions resulting from in vitro investigations..