* 9504038
* CS&amp;E Postdoctoral Associate: Parallel Iterative Methods and Preconditioners for the Large, Sparse, Symmetric Eigenvalue Problem
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Yousef Saad, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 12/31/1997
* USD 46,200.00

The numerical solution of the large, sparse, symmetric problem is required by
many scientific and engineering applications, such as electronic structure
calculations. Iterative methods, the only means of meeting these demands, are
faced with two challenges. The first involves degenerate or pathologically close
eigenvalues, and the second involves matrices of very large size that may not
stored. Parallel computing and preconditioning are powerful ways for improving
the performance of iterative methods. This proposal has three major goals.
First, to extend the parallel preconditioned eigenvalue methods that are used in
atomic structure calculations to the complex molecular structure calculations in
solid state physics. Second, to extend the existing eigenvalue codes to solve
for large number of eigenvalues of very large matrices. Third, to explore
further the eigenvalue preconditioning, with application to molecular structure
matrices resulting from finite difference/element discretization techniques.
Preconditioning for large matrices that cannot be stored are also being
examined. Finally, work on domain decomposition preconditioners is continued on
both the application and on arbitrary matrices. Domain partitioning ideas is
being tested in combination with a coarse solve correction on a properly chosen
small system. The aggregation/disaggregation technique is being investigated for
creating the small system.