* 9504064
* CISE Postdoctoral Program: ES Postdoctoral Associate:       Safety and the Human-Computer Interface
* CSE,EIA
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Nancy Leveson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 08/31/1997
* USD 46,200.00

9504064 Leveson Two aspects of the integration of HCI and safety research will
be investigated in this work. The first area of research is the application of
HCI techniques and knowledge to the design of formal specification languages---
both their printed and automated representations. The concept of semantic
distance for formal specification languages will be made operational and its
implications in the design of such languages will be explored. The approach will
involve working with application experts in building real specifications and
using this experience to determine what features of specifications they find
most natural, and exploring cognitive psychology models of human error and how
they can be applied to specification languages to minimize the errors that are
made. The second research topic involves modeling the HCI and performing a
hazard analysis on the model. This work will involve modeling human behavior,
developing analysis techniques to identify potential hazardous behavior of both
the human operators and the computer, integrating these models into the general
model for specification and analysis of critical system properties, and
determining how the resulting information can be used in the design of the
software and the design of user procedures. The subject of how current knowledge
about the safe design of traditional controls can be applied to the design of
computer-based models will be examined and experimental testbeds will be
developed to test the hypotheses. ***