* 9504584
* US-Pakistan Symposium and Workshop on Natural Products      Chemistry, Karachi, Pakistan, January 4-8, 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Philip Le Quesne, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 22,750.00

Description: This project supports the participation by ten U.S. scientists in a
Symposium on the Chemistry of Natural Products, scheduled to be held January
4-8, 1996 in Karachi, Pakistan. The Pakistani organizer is Dr. Atta-ur-Rahman,
Director of the H.E.J. Research Institute of Chemistry at the University of
Karachi. The symposium, and a US-Pakistan Workshop that will follow, will deal
with frontier areas of natural product chemistry. The program will consist of
plenary lectures, session lectures and poster presentations. The topics will
include: physiologically active compounds from Pakistani natural sources and
traditional (Unani) medicinal preparations; marine natural products; new methods
of isolation and separation of secondary metabolites; new approaches to
detection of bioactivity in naturally-derived extracts; advances in the
methodology of structure determination; the potential of Pakistani natural
products as synthons for new medicinal agents; and the role of biotechnology in
Pakistan's science and technology. Scope: This project links some of the most
active US researchers, in natural product chemistry, with one of the best
institutes in the developing countries in the field. The H.E.J. Research
Institute of Chemistry has organized several past symposia on natural product
chemistry, with participation by eminent scientists from around the world, and
with high quality publications resulting from these meetings. The US delegation
is to include at least four scientists with recent doctorate degrees, and two
female scientists. The project will be beneficial to U.S. and to Pakistan
scientists and also to participants from countries in South Asia and the Middle
East which are usually represented. The project will help many of the scientists
in these countries to establish contacts with scientists from the U.S. for
future collaboration.