* 9504133
* Electron Transfer Reactions of Molecules with               Varied Reorganization Energy
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Jack Pladziewicz, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 05/31/1999
* USD 141,000.00

Dr. Jack R. Pladziewicz, Chemistry Department, University of Wisconsin - Eau
Claire, is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to investigate electron transfer
processes. In this investigation rate constants will be measured for the single
electron transfer reactions of a series of hydrazines and their radical cations.
The data will then be used to evaluate the extent to which these reactions fit
current theories for outer-sphere electron transfer. In particular the inner-
shell reorganization energies for the alkyl hydrazine and the extent to which
inner-shell reorganization contributes to the activation free energy for
electron transfer reactions will be determined. By use of cross-reaction rate
constants the self-exchange electron transfer will be estimated for hydrazines
with slow exchange rates or with properties that make them otherwise unamenable
to study. Many chemical reactions involve the transfer of electrons from one
molecule to a second. One factor which influences the rate of these processes
and which is not well understood is the reorganization which a molecule
undergoes upon the transfer of an electron to or from it. This project is
designed to determine the energies of these reorganizations for a series of
nitrogen containing organic molecules and to assess how well current theories
are able to account for the influence of the reorganization on the electron
transfer rate.