* 9504556
* Mathematical Sciences:  Exact Results in Statistical         Mechanics and the Foundations of Quantum Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Sheldon Goldstein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 51,000.00

DMS-9504556 Goldstein The investigator intends to continue his analysis of
Bohmian mechanics, which defines a deterministic dynamical system involving a
novel combination of ordinary and partial differential equations having
remarkable properties. The proposed research involves (1) an analysis of the
possibility of relativistic extensions of Bohmian mechanics, (2) comparisons of
Bohmian mechanics with the major competing alternative formulations of quantum
theory, and (3) an analysis of the foundations of statistical mechanics from a
Bohmian perspective. The importance of the proposed research lies in the
following observations: 1) The foundations of quantum theory, the most
fundamental of all physical theories, continue to be mired in confusion and
incoherence some sixty-five years after its inception. 2) Bohmian mechanics is
the natural embedding of Schroedinger's equation, which is the mathematical core
of almost all interpretations of quantum theory, into a clear, precise physical
theory. It emerges if one merely insists that this equation be directly relevant
to the motion of particles. In other words, Bohmian mechanics arises, roughly
speaking, from Schroedinger's equation when (perhaps naively) we insist upon the
simplest ontology---particles described by their positions---and seek a natural
law of motion for this ontology. 3) All the mysteries of quantum theory find a
compelling explanation in Bohmian mechanics---in effect, in the obvious ontology
evolving in the obvious way! 4) An appreciation of Bohmian mechanics can be the
source of enormous flexibility and clarity when one attempts to apply quantum
theory in new directions---for example, to understand the implications of
macroscopic interference effects---and to new domains, such as quantum
cosmology. 5) The underlying principle behind the value of Bohmian mechanics is
that it really does help to formulate physical theories with sufficient clarity
that they can genuinely be understood.