* 9504492
* Mathematical Sciences:  Construction and Analysis of        Algorithms for Degenerate Variational and Parabolic Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Noel Walkington, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 67,000.00

Walkington The investigator studies physical problems involving phase changes
and their numerical approximation. In general these problems exhibit one of two
distinct traits; either the solutions take on the character of a free boundary
problem where the unknown boundary separates the phases, or the phases are
finely interspersed. The former are modeled by degenerate parabolic equations.
While the theory for these equations is well developed, this is not the case
with the discrete theory for their numerical approximation. For example, the
investigator in collaboration with J. Rulla has only recently established
optimal rates of convergence of the classical Stefan problem in a dual Sobolev
space; however, rates of convergence of the energy in the space of integrable
functions is still an open question. Even less is known about approximations of
the mean curvature equation that arises, for example, when the interface between
the phases has more structure. The investigator also studies the approximation
of problems that exhibit fine phase mixtures. Because these problems involve
structures that are much finer than any feasible mesh, the investigator utilizes
the recent theory of Young measures to characterize the fine scale behavior.
This theory shows that the fine scale behavior is far from random and in many
cases can be characterized by a the (macroscopic) Young measure. The
investigator studies and analyzes algorithms that approximate the Young measure.
In this project, the investigator develops efficient ways to computationally
model problems arising in the environmental and material sciences. One
interesting feature of these problems is that they often exhibit interfaces
where different materials meet. For example, when modeling the spread of
pollutants, the single most important quantity is the location and motion of the
interface between the pollutant and the clean environment. Problems in the
material sciences often involve very fine scal e phenomena involving interfaces
between different phases of the same material. This phenomenon is ubiquitous,
being observable, for example, in most metals. However, the fine scales also
present many obstacles when analyzing such materials. The investigator develops
the computational tools to circumvent these problems, providing another step
towards the automation of the design and development of modern (and traditional)
materials.