* 9504309
* Maastrichtian and Paleocene-Eocene Environmental Changes    in the Tethys Region of Tunisia, US-Tunisia Cooperative     Research
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Gerta Keller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 19,353.00

Description: This project supports cooperation between Dr. Gerta Keller,
Department of Geological and Geophysical Sciences, Princeton University, and Dr.
Dalila Zaghbib-Turki, Department of Geology, Faculty of Science at the
University of Tunis. The project is to study the Paleocene-Eocene (P-E) maximum
warming and the Maastrichtian maximum cooling in the expanded high sedimentation
records of Tunisia, in order to provide a record from the marginal Tethys that
allows testing of current climate change scenarios. Analytical methods will
include high resolution biostratigraphy, quantitative assessment of benthic and
planktic foraminiferal changes, and stable isotopic analysis of benthic and
planktic foraminifera and clay mineral analysis. Scope: This project allows a
cooperative activity that provides the US team access to some of the most
continuous P-E and Maastrichtian low-latitude sections, and allows the Tunisian
Team access to laboratory facilities at Princeton University. The project
enhances cooperative science and the training of post-docs and graduate
students, and provides the scientific community with a critical database for
testing various hypotheses regarding the P-E greenhouse warming and Maastrictian
glaciation. The project meets the objectives of the Division of International
Programs in linking US scientists with foreign scientists when the expertise and
capabilities are complementary, and where the project could lead to long term
collaboration and to mutually beneficial results.