* 9504946
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Low-Dimensional Topology   and Geometric Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Ulrich Oertel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/2000
* USD 72,800.00

9504946 Mosher This research project is focussed on negative curvature in the
sense of Gromov. The principal investigator (working jointly with U. Oertel) has
proved a "Lamination Theorem" which says that for a compact cell-complex X,
exactly one of two alternatives holds: either X is negatively curved in the
sense of Gromov, or there is a 2-dimensional lamination mapping to X with
certain properties, namely the lamination has a transverse measure of Euler
characteristic zero, and the map from the universal cover of a leaf to X is
least area. The primary aim of this project is to use the Lamination Theorem to
investigate the "weak hyperbolization conjecture" for a 3-manifold M, which says
that M is negatively curved in the sense of Gromov if and only if the
fundamental group of M has no Z+Z subgroup. The strong form of this conjecture
has been one of the greatest challenges in 3-manifold theory. The weak
conjecture should be a significant step in proving the strong conjecture, in
light of recent work of Cannon on characterizing hyperbolic 3-manifold groups,
and work of Gabai on the topological rigidity problem for hyperbolic manifolds;
if these various projects can be completed, then the hyperbolization conjecture
would be proved. This research project is also concerned with several other
topics, in particular: understanding properties of automatic and biautomatic
groups; the geometric group theory of mapping class groups; constructions of and
properties of pseudo-Anosov flows on 3-manifolds. Group theory, the mathematical
study of symmetry invented by E. Galois in the 1700's, has for much of its
history been a subject of abstract algebra, despite its geometric origins.
Starting with work of M. Gromov, J. Cannon, W. Thurston and others in the 1970's
and 1980's, the newly emergent field of geometric group theory has returned
group theory to its origins. The basic problem, proposed by Gromov in his 1983
address to the International Congress of Math ematics, is to take a "group" (an
abstractly described collection of symmetries) and to understand its geometry.
As a particular case of Gromov's program, suppose that S is a 3-dimensional
space, much like the space that we inhabit, and suppose that G is a certain
group of symmetries of S; in this situation Thurston conjectured in the late
1970's that the geometry of G should fall into a list of specific classes. In
most cases Thurston's conjecture says that G should have "hyperbolic" geometry,
a type of geometry that describes how 3-dimensional space fits into
4-dimensional space-time in relativity theory. The main thrust of the current
research project is an attempt to prove Thurston's "hyperbolization conjecture."
Recent work of D. Gabai, J. Cannon, and the investigator wih U. Oertel suggests
a three-step approach to proving the hyperbolization conjecture, and this
project is concerned with one step, the so-called "weak hyperbolization
conjecture." While this is an ambitious project, the investigator expects it to
be productive; if it is completely successful, and if the other two steps are
finished as the work of Cannon and of Gabai suggests, then the hyperbolization
conjecture will be proved. ***