* 9504248
* Automated Reasoning in Software Engineering
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Stephen Garland, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 07/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

The aim of this research project is to increase the benefits and to reduce the
costs of automated reasoning across a wide variety of applications. The project
both supports and derives motivation from the ongoing development of the Larch
Prover (LP), an interactive proof assistant for multisorted first order logic.
Experience with previous versions of LP suggests four important ways to improve
the cost/benefit ratio: reducing the amount of detail required in proofs,
supporting modular descriptions of theories and proofs, closing the gap between
the logical and operational meaning of theories, and integrating LP into
applications. To reduce the amount of detail required in proofs, the project
seeks to combine different reasoning techniques in seamless and efficient ways.
Early versions of LP emphasized equational term-rewriting. A recent version
reduced the length of many proofs by using cooperating decision procedures for
the theory of equality and for linear arithmetic. The project is exploring
fruitful interactions between equational term-rewriting and decision procedures.
The project is addressing both logical and operational issues for using
independently developed logical modules in larger proofs and for ensuring that
proof scripts are replayable after changes to formalizations. For almost all
applications of automated reasoning, there is an unavoidable gap between logical
content (e.g., the consequences of a specification) and operational content
(e.g., the proof techniques and/or sequence of lemmas required to prove a
particular consequence). The project is studying how to narrow this gap, where
possible, and how to provide useful information about the nature of the gap,
particularly when proofs fail. Finally, the project is seeking to improve the
cost/benefit ratio for formal reasoning by integrating LP into applications. The
goals of tighter integration are to enable users to think in application-
specific terms, to make LP work better in the context of particular
applications, and to understand the interface reasoning tools should present to
applications. The project is seeking to achieve tighter integration by
eliminating the need for transcribing designs and by developing application
specific improvements in LP's expressive and deductive power (e.g., for
reasoning about probability).