* 9504317
* Symbiotic Evolution of Neural Networks in Sequential        Decision Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Risto Miikkulainen, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/1999
* USD 259,523.00

Sequential decision tasks appear in many real-world domains, including control,
resource allocation, routing, and scheduling. The objective of this project is
to develop a new approach to sequential decision making based on symbiotic
evolution of neural networks. In symbiotic evolution, a population of neurons
are evolved with genetic algorithms to cooperate and form decision-making
networks. Diversity is maintained in the population as part of the task and the
system can find good solutions efficiently even in difficult tasks with sparse
reinforcement. In the proposed project, symbiotic evolution will be analyzed
both theoretically and experimentally, the algorithm will be further developed
and applied to complex real-world domains such as local-area network management,
and a practical high-level interface will be developed that will allow rapid
application of the method to new domains. The main scientific contributions of
the research are expected to be: (1) a novel, powerful method for extracting and
encoding problem-specific knowledge automatically for sequential decision
making, and (2) a thorough understanding of the role of diversity and
cooperation in genetic algorithms. The development of the general application
interface should also benefit many practical fields, including control
engineering, military science, and operations management. The main hypotheses to
be tested are: (1) Pattern recognition and generalization capabilities of neural
networks can be used to implement effective and robust sequential decision
making strategies;(2) Genetic algorithms can discover powepful problem-specific
decision-making strategies even under sparse reinforcement; 3) By making
population diversity an essential part of the task, symbiotic evolution can
develop solutions to harder problems and do it more efficiently than standard
genetic algorithms.