* 9504871
* Mathematical Sciences: Cohomological and Homotopical Methods in Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* James Stasheff, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 91,100.00

9504871 Stasheff The investigator's research is concerned with application of
techniques he developed earlier in his study of classifying spaces and rational
homotopy theory and combining those techniques with developments introduced ad
hoc by physicists. Currently he is particularly concerned with four classes of
problems: (I) homotopy associative differential graded algebras and Lie analogs,
particularly as they occur in string field theories and spin n-algebras, (II)
the homological aspects of reduction of constrained Hamiltonian systems, both
classical and quantum, as embodied in the BRST formalism and the Batalin-
Fradkin-Vilkovisky complex and its generalizations, (III) the homological
aspects of Lagrangian and more general exterior differential systems, both
classical and quantum, as embodied in the anti-field formalism of Batalin-
Vilkovisky and its generalizations, (IV) the combinatorial topology of
compactifications of certain moduli spaces, particularly as related to operads,
knot theory and higher categories. All of these involve "higher dimensional
algebra" for which 1-dimensional diagrams are inadequate. Although defined in
greater and more abstract generality, such structures as they occur in or are
inspired by mathematical physics are the focus of this proposal. Over the last
decade or so, work in some areas of mathematical physics, especially particle
and string theory, has made increasing use of cohomological techniques. In some
cases, physicists independently rediscovered tools the investigator had invented
or developed in earlier research projects; more recently, planned interaction
and collaboration has led to physicists' being aware of and hence making use of
concepts he had invented, e.g., strong homotopy Lie algebras. Further
development of these techniques within the physical context has begun to have an
effect on more purely mathematical research, for example in exterior
differential systems. Thus, as often happens, this in terdisciplinary activity
has proved to be a two-way street, and further mutual benefits are anticipated.
***