* 9504105
* Ribosomal DNA Sequences in Marine Yeasts:  A Model for      Identification and Quantification of Marine Eukaryotes
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2001
* Jack Fell, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 05/31/2001
* USD 635,063.00

9504105 Fell Using molecular techniques for rapid and accurate determination of
community structure, this research will determine fungal biodiversity and
population biomass of two distinctly different groups of micro-fungi: the
basidiomycetous yeasts and the oomycetous genus Halophythophora. Both groups
have important roles in detrital based food webs. The research program will
include laboratory and field studies. Laboratory studies will complete the data
bank of know species as a basis for determining community structure in the
field. New procedures will be developed with preliminary emphasis on
quantitative PCR (QPCR) using laser detected infrared labeled primers. Field
research will center on reef and mangrove habitats. Using a combination of
classical microbial techniques and molecular methods, the community structure
and relative abundance of known and unknown culturable fungi species will be
determined. The identity of these species will be ascertained by automated DNA
sequence analysis and nucleotide alignment with the data bank. Species-specific
regions will be located and primers developed to test the accuracy and
sensitivity of PCR techniques in estimating community structure. Through the use
of PCR and QPCR, the occurrence of unculturable species and population densities
will be estimated. The techniques developed in this research can be applied to
population analyses of other micro- or macro-eukaryote communities.