* 9504099
* Interferometer Instrumentation for Characterization of      Micro-mechanical Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1996
* Thomas Kenny, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/1996
* USD 106,000.00

9504099 Kenny, Thomas This project is concerned with the design, fabrication,
and characterization of micromechanical structures and devices. Emphasis is on
the characterization of the fabricated micromechanical structures. Accurate non-
contact measurements of mechanical properties are also very important. This
instrumentation will be used in support of several experiments, including
characterization of tunneling sensors, study of mode shapes in micromachined
sensor components, and fundamental characterization of mechanical
microstructures, with emphasis on evolution of characteristics with
environmental parameters, such as pressure or temperature. This interferometer-
based measurement system is on its way to becoming a standard for
micromechanical structure characterization in industry, and represents a unique
resource in the academic community. It will provide a fundamentally new
capability for microstructure characterization, and enable graduate students to
carry out measurements using equipment which they can expect to encounter in
industry after graduation. This instrumentation represents an invaluable
enhancement in the device testing capabilities at Stanford as uell as an
opportunity to carry out ground-breaking research into the fundamental
properties of micromechanical structures.