* 9504891
* Mathematical Sciences:  Asymptotic Methods for Order        Restricted Inference in Survival Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Richard Dykstra, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 30,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504891 PI: Jens Praestgaard Institution: University of Iowa
Title: Asymptotic Methods for Order Restricted Inference in Survival Analysis
ABSTRACT: The purpose of the research is to develop large-sample theory for
inference from survival data when the unknown parameters exhibit order
restrictions. Such restrictions occur frequently in survival analysis. For
example, if a clinical trial involves administering a drug in increasing doses
to the cohorts under study, then the survival curves computed for each group
should be ordered according to dose level. In linkage analysis, for the purpose
of mapping a quantitative genetic trait, it may be known that the trait under
study is more prevalent for one genotype than for others. Although appropriate
estimators in these settings are known, their distributional properties have not
been studied. Thus, order restricted methods are often not used when it would
potentially help the data analysis. For estimation purposes it would give
estimators with higher degree of accuracy. For testing purposes it would give
higher power to be able to consider order restricted alternatives. The research
centers on investigating statistical methods in the presence of order
restrictions. These restrictions occur often in biotechnological problems. For
instance, in a clinical trial to determine drug efficacy, it is often the case
that the drug is administered in increasing doses. In genetical linkage analysis
it is often known that a certain genotype lowers the time until the onset of a
disease more than do other possible genotypes. If the interest is on determining
the drug efficacy (in the first case) or finding out where the gene is located
(second case), then the statistical methods, which separate the noise in the
data from the signal, must incorporate these known orderings. The investigators
study ways of incorporating such information. They believe that the resulting
statistical method ology will be more appropriate than present methods for
dealing with biotechnological data where such orderings are present.