* 9504259
* Investigation of Factors Affecting the Performance of       Electrical Contacts to Gallium Nitride
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Suzanne Mohney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 11/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9504259 Mohney This Research Planning Grant focuses on studies to understand
fundamental materials science aspects of thermally stable electrical contacts to
group III nitrides, primarily Gallium Nitride (GaN). Thermodynamic calculations
will be used, along with x-ray diffraction and electron probe microanalysis of
bulk phase equilibria samples, to determine key features of the solid phase
diagrams in the Metal-Ga-N systems. This investigation will aid in the selection
of thermally stable contact materials. In addition, because of the high vapor
pressure of N2 over GaN and the presumed role of N vacancies on the carrier
concentration in GaN, the gas phase equilibria are expected to exert a greater
influence on the thermal stability and electrical properties of contacts to GaN
than they do for contacts to the other III-V semiconductors. Both novel and
conventional methods to control the GaN point defect concentration and the
contact/GaN barrier height will then be evaluated for their potential to
engineer the electrical properties of those contacts that are already attractive
from the standpoint of thermal stability. These methods will include attempts to
manipulate the N vacancy concentration immediately beneath the contact/GaN
interface to influence the n-type carrier concentration. The role of the work
function of the contact material on the barrier height and subsequent
performance of the contact will also be evaluated. %%% While this project will
focus primarily on the development of electrical contacts to Gallium Nitride, it
will also be of benefit for future design of contacts to other group III
nitrides, and will contribute to a greater understanding of materials issues for
these semiconductors. During the planning period of the project, at least two
model systems will be selected to test ideas for controlling the electrical
properties and stability of contacts to Gallium Nitride. The planning period
will aid the PI in accomplishing enough prelimin ary work to show the promise of
ideas or to modify them based on the data acquired. Thus, support during the
planning period will aid the PI in preparing a more competitive full proposal.
***