* 9504277
* Implementation of the Biological Bulletin - Marine Models   Electronic Record (BB-MMER), an Electronic Journal at the   Marine Biological Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Michael Greenberg, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,067.00

The Biological Bulletin, an eclectic, 97-year-old journal published by the
Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL) in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, will
collaborate with the Information Systems Division of the MBL to produce an
electronic companion: the Biological Bulletin Marine Models Electronic Record
(BB-- MMER). This new journal, distributed via the World Wide Web, will publish
practical information about nonmammalian marine organisms that are useful in
basic biological and biomedical research. Marine organisms and the preparations
made from them have served as experimental models for more than a century, and
their use has led to many fundamental discoveries, particularly in developmental
biology, neurobiology, and cellular physiology. Unfortunately, neither the
particulars of collecting, maintaining, and culturing these organisms, nor the
detailed protocols, recipes, and bibliographies essential to their use in
experimental science, are published in traditional journals due to limitations
of space. Thus the details that underlie the findings are lost, or must be
rediscovered in different laboratories. The BB--MMER will approach this problem
in two ways: as a traditional scholarly journal; and as a novel electronic
database available to scientists everywhere in the world. First, like its hard-
copy cousin, the BB--MMER will solicit and accept contributions, and these will
be reviewed by the Biological Bulletin's stable of referees. All papers accepted
for publication and distributed by the BB--MMER will therefore be genuine,
citable journal articles. Concurrently, the staff of the MBL's Information
Systems Division will use the Mosaic environment to develop hypertext linkage
and data management features for the journal. Each BB--MMER contribution will be
presented hierarchically: i.e., first the title page containing an abstract and
a table of contents; then (by option) the body of the paper, and finally (by
option) step-by-step laboratory protocols and other detailed materials in
appendices. Superior illustrations will be provided in color or black-and-white,
and video segments will be included eventually. Publishing a journal
electronically can improve indexing, retrieval, and multiple use. Moreover,
electronic publishing enables authors to modify or upgrade previously published
work. But most value is added by the linkage and management features that are
made possible by the electronic environment. Thus, users of the BB--MMER will
not only be able to obtain comprehensive information about a large selection of
model organisms and their tissue preparations, but also to compare protocols,
recipes, preparations, or other units of information called from many different
papers. And this facility will become more fruitful with time, as the size and
complexity of the database increases.