* 9504242
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Statistical Computation and        Computational Geometry"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Daniel Naiman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1998
* USD 150,000.00

Geometric tools are developed that will provide key developments in
computational statistical theory and methodology. The research direction is to
develop and study probability bounds for the probability content of convex
polyhedra with special structure via the "abstract tube method." Accounting for
this geometric structure can lead, in some cases, to explicit and easy to
calculate bounds for error probabilities, and in other cases to greater
efficiency in the Monte-Carlo evaluation of error probabilities. This research
which is at the interface between computational statistics and computational
geometry, will produce an expanded collection of tools for constructing
practical and sharp probability bounds for a vast array of applications.
Particular focus is given to obtaining new bounds for the probability content of
bodies in higher dimensions using methods that arise from the study of lower
dimensional problems with similar structure. There is an abundance of real world
applications in which stochastic models are utilized to make critical decisions
based on probability calculations. For example, probability calculations are
used to determine how likely a modeled system is to fail. This applies to
systems such as a bridge, an ecosystem, a human body, or a manufacturing method.
The research explores ways in which special model structure for situations such
as these can be exploited to produce more efficient and precise probability
calculations. This new methodology should be directly applicable to
manufacturing and quality control, structural and system reliability,
environmental regulation, and a host of other areas.