* 9504939
* Workshop on Quantum Impurity Problems, Sponsored by The     Institute for Fundamental Theory; Gainesville, Florida;     February 24-26, 1995
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1996
* Peter Hirschfeld, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1996
* USD 2,500.00

9504939 Hirschfeld This grant provides partial support for the workshop "Quantum
Impurity Problems" to be held February 24-26, 1995 at the University of Florida.
The topic of the workshop has been chosen to maximize the possibilities for
overlap and constructive exchange between condensed matter physics, field
theory, and mathematical physics. Quantum impurity problems have attracted great
attention in recent years due to strong interest in mechanisms for the breakdown
of Fermi liquid theory in the context of high-temperature superconductivity, the
development of nanofabrication techniques for realization of artificial
impurities on a mesoscopic scale, and successful application of new theoretical
methods such as conformal field theory and the extrapolation of lattice problems
to large spacial dimensionalities. The workshop will bring together workers from
all of the above fields to share ideas, in keeping with the interdisciplinary
purpose of its sponsor, the Institute for Fundamental Theory at the University
of Florida. %%% This grant provides partial support for the workshop "Quantum
Impurity Problems" to be held February 24-26, 1995 at the University of Florida.
This workshop will bring together scientists, both experimentalists and
theorists, from a variety of subdisciplines to share ideas in an
interdisciplinary way on topics and techniques related to quantum impurities in
materials. The support will help junior researchers and students attend this
workshop. The workshop is unique, not part of a continuing series, and in an
emerging research area. For the above reasons, the Materials Theory Program
feels support is a wise investment of program resources. ***