* 9504783
* Conference on Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy II
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504783 PIs: Gutti Babu, Eric Feigelson Institution: Penn. State
University Title: Conference on Statistical Challenges in Modern Astronomy II 2.
Abstract for the project. This award will support a cross-disciplinary
conference on statistics and astronomy. In recent years, astronomers have shown
considerable interest in applying advanced statistical techniques such as
errors-in-variables regression models for measurement error problems, survival
analysis for surveys with nondetections, and clustering algorithms for galaxy
distri`utions. Communication between the two communities was elevated by the
successful cross-disciplinary conference organized by Babu and Feigelson in
August 1991, the first such meeting in the U.S. Since then, interest on
methodological issues has grown among astronomers, with nearly 200 papers
published annually in the astronomical literature on statistical issues. The
proposed conference will feature lectures by distinguished statisticians on
advanced methods applicable to astronomical research. The proposed conference
seeks to bridge the gap between the communities of astronomers and
statisticians, exposing researchers and students to issues of common interest.
The sessions will begin with an invited lecture by a statistician describing
important new developments relevant to a class of astronomical problems.
Applications and suggestions to tune the methods for the needs of the astronomy
community will be discussed by astronomers. Specific data analysis problems and
methods will then be addressed in contributed presentations. There is
considerable opportunity for young researchers in both fields to pursue
methodological problems encountered in modern astronomy.