* 9504423
* Mathematical Sciences: Topological Quantum Field Theories   and Related Invariants in 3- and 4-Manifold Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Louis Crane, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 116,700.00

9504423 Yetter This project deals with topological quantum field theories in
dimensions 3 and 4, primarily from the point of view of their construction and
study by algebraic and combinatorial means. In particular, the investigators are
engaged in the completion of computational details and the construction of
examples of the "Tornado Formula" of Crane and Frenkel, a construction of 4D
TQFT's from initial data given by a "Hopf category," and the examination of a
fully bicategorical generalization of the Crane/Yetter invariant. The
investigators have already shown that any 3D (resp. 4D) TQFT with physically
reasonable factorization properties (which should be satisfied by the "full
Donaldson/Floer and Seiberg/Witten theories) has an associated monoidal category
and (internal) Hopf algebra (resp. monoidal bicategory) and formal Hopf category
object therein) and are studying how general this phenomenon is. It is the
investigators' hope that algebraic/combinatorial constructions for invariants
sensitive to PL (equiv. smooth) structure on 4-manifolds may be found in the
course of the project. Several related lines of research-- constructions of
"quantum" invariants of 2-knots and Seifert surfaces, and the study of the
HOMFLY and Kauffman skein categories with a view to finding new initial data for
the construction of TQFT's--are also being pursued. Topological quantum field
theories are a lively new area of research into the structure of spaces of
dimensions 3 and 4. So named because of their topological nature and their
structural properties, which fit into Dirac's formalism for quantum mechanics,
their study has revealed surprising connections between the structure of
manifolds, classical algebraic structures, and statistical and quantum physics.
This project will contribute to the unfolding of the rich algebraic structures
implicit in spaces of the dimension(s) in which we live. Although the
investigators' techniques are primarily algebraic in fl avor and foreign to most
physicists, some noted relativists have expressed the belief that constructions
of the sort studied in this project hold the key to finding and understanding
the much sought quantum theory of gravity. ***