* 9504425
* Mathematical Sciences:  Resampling Methods in Model         Selection and Sample Surveys
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Jun Shao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 75,000.00

Proposal: DMS9504425 PI: Jun Shao Institution: Univ. of Wisconsin - Madison
Title: Resampling Methods in Model Selection and Sample Surveys Abstract: This
research involves the following areas of investigation. (1) The investigator
studies the theoretical properties of various data-resample model selection
methods in linear and nonlinear regression, generalized linear models, time
series and multivariate analysis. New and advanced methods will be developed in
problems where the existing methods lead to unsatisfactory results. (2) Data-
resample methods that can be applied to complex survey data with imputed missing
values will be developed. This includes modification and adaptation of the
existing data-resample methods which are not suitable for complex survey data.
(3) The investigator's study of the theoretical properties of the data-resample
methods include investigations of the asymptotic (large sample) properties and
the fixed (small) sample performances of the data-resample methods. The relative
performances of different methods will be assessed. The results will be given in
a form which can be easily adopted as a guide for practical applications. (4)
The data-resample methods usually require repeated computations of some given
statistics. In model selection and sample survey problems the size of the data
set is usually large so that the computation required by some data-resample
methods may be cumbersome. The investigator studies some efficient methods for
computations. Statistical analysis is usually based on a data set that is a
sample from a population which is a collection of values of some variable of
interest. Since the sample is only a part of the population, conclusions drawn
based on the sample are subject to certain statistical errors. A method for
assessing statistical errors, called the data-resample method, takes many sub-
samples from the sample by treating the sample as the population, and makes
inference by applying th e analogous relationships between the sample and the
population to the sub-samples and the sample. This method has caught on very
rapidly in recent years because (1) the existence of inexpensive and fast
computing facilities ensures that this computer-intensive method can be
implemented; (2) this method sometimes provides more accurate and/or stable
solutions than the traditional methods that are commonly used; (3) the
theoretical derivations required in applying the traditional methods are very
difficult when the problem under consideration is complex. Although there are
many developments in using this method over the last two decades, the recency of
this technique has left many questions unanswered which are relevant to
practical application. The aims of this research are in the area of development,
evaluation, and application of many types of data-resample methods in various
complex statistical problems.