* 9504488
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Foundations and Applications of    Bayesian Probability Theory"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Bruce Hill, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Professor Hill proposes to continue to develop the Bayesian theory of
probability of B. de Finetti and L. J. Savage with respect to foundational
issues that have important implications for applications of Bayesian inference
and decision theory, and to continue the development of such applications as
have been initiated by him. These center about the Bayesian nonparametric
procedures A(n) and H(n) of Hill (1968, 1988b, 1993a), and the tail-index
estimator of Hill (1975). For any epsilon &gt; 0, it is proposed to constuct
explicit exchangeable processes in a finite model, that satisfy the A(n) and
H(n) assumptions exactly, apart from a set of observational values with
probability at most epsilon. It is also proposed to extend the Bayesian methods
of forecasting of Hill (1993c, 1993d) using the theory of generalized urn
processes of Hill, Lane, Sudderth (1980, 1987) and the splitting process models
of Hill (1993a). Professor Hill proposes to continue to develop the Bayesian
theory of probability of B. de Finetti and L. J. Savage with respect to
foundational issues that have important implications for applications of
Bayesian inference and decision theory, and to continue the development of such
applications as have been initiated by him. These center about the Bayesian
nonparametric procedures, A(n) and H(n) of Hill (1968, 1988b, 1993a) and the
tail-index estimator of Hill (1975). It is also proposed to extend the methods
of forecasting of Hill (1993c, 1993d) using the theory of generalized urn
processes of Hill, Lane, Sudderth (1980, 1987) and the splitting process models
of Hill (1993a). These methods make use of the Bayesian theory of optimal
decision-making for the purpose of predicting time series that arise in
business, economics, and engineering.