* 9504345
* Surface Raman Spectroscopy and Electrochemistry of          Interfacial Solvent Structure at Metal Electrodes and       Modified Electrodes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Jeanne Pemberton, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 09/30/2000
* USD 804,550.00

Comprehensive spectroscopic and electrochemical investigations of the
interfacial structure of metal electrodes and self assembled monolayer (SAM)
modified electrodes form the focus of this research project. In work supported
by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, surface Raman spectroscopy will
be used to probe metal electrodes in situ and emersed under potential control.
In addition, ultra high vacuum methods will be used to prepare model systems
which mimic the behavior of these electrochemical interfaces. Surface Raman
spectroscopy, as well as other surface spectroscopic probes, will be used to
characterize these model systems. Electrode surfaces modified by organic
overlayers will also be probed using these methods. A detailed understanding of
the structure of electrochemical interfaces is crucial to the design of many
electrochemical systems and sensors, ranging from fuel cells to environmental
monitoring devices. The work supported here develops and applies methods for the
structural characterization of these interfaces to a range of well controlled
model systems. The information gained from these studies will be invaluable in a
wide range of technological applications of electrochemistry.