* 9504589
* Mathematical Sciences:  Some Estimation and Computation     Procedures in Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Suojin Wang, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 14,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504589 PI: Suojin Wang Institution: Texax A&amp;M Title: SOME
ESTIMATION AND COMPUTATION PROCEDURES IN STATISTICS Abstract: The primary
objective of this research is to develop new theory and methods in some
important classes of statistical problems in the areas of sampling, missing data
analysis and measurement error models. The research topics are motivated by
practical problems and the main focus is on estimation and (approximate)
computation procedures. The research aims to significantly advance statistical
knowledge in these areas, and improve some current practices in survey agencies
in particular. In attacking some of the proposed problems, small sample
asymptotic methods are desired. The potential use of accurate saddlepoint
approximations in these problems is studied. In other proposed problems, large
sample asymptotic methods are investigated. The research topics include kernel-
type estimations in regression when data are partially missing or measured with
error; sub-domain estimation in sample surveys; and new and optimal estimation
of the distribution function of a finite population. In this research project
new statistical theory and methods are developed and investigated in statistical
problems that bear practical importance. The accuracy and simplicity are the
main criteria in developing such statistical methods. They have direct
applications in various agencies, such as the Bureau of Labor Statistics, to
improve the accuracy and speed of the current statistical practice. Furthermore,
this research advances the science and technology in the Federal Strategic Areas
of high performance computing and the statistical aspects of biotechnology.