* 9504950
* Mathematical Sciences:  Computational Techniques from       Geometry and Statistical Physics Applied to Fluid Mechanics and Interface Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2002
* James Sethian, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2002
* USD 958,088.00

Sethian The investigator and his colleague study the motion of singularities in
solutions of differential equations, in particular, the motion of interfaces as
described by level-set methods and applied to problems in interface motion, and
the motion of vortices in three space dimensions, as described by vortex methods
and other Lagrangian techniques. The interface techniques exploit Hamilton-
Jacobi methodology coupled to upwind schemes for hyperbolic solvers; new work
focuses on developing fast methods, methods for multiple interfaces, and the
incorporation of effects of visibility, surface diffusion, and reflection/re-
emission in surface profile motion. The vortex motion through Lagrangian methods
develops machinery from renormalization methods and polymer analysis from
statistical physics applied to fluid phenomena through linkage with Shenoy-
Williams methodology, and Kosterlitz-Thouless formulations. The investigators
develop methods to follow the motion of interfaces and vortices. Such problems
arise in flows of materials, for instance, and whenever the places where objects
or materials meet or end change with time. These are common situations
throughout science and engineering. The work is applied to a number of areas. In
etching, deposition, and lithography in the manufacture of microelectronic
components, the work is used to analyze process steps leading to higher yield
and efficiency of electronic devices. In image enhancement, segmentation, and
recognition applied to medical imaging, the work leads towards automatic
software for recognizing cardiac data in CT and MRI scans. In grid generation,
the techniques are used to develop new techniques for building grids around
complex bodies, as required in aircraft and engine design. The Lagrangian and
vortex particle work focuses on generation of large turbulent structures in
wakes, motions of polymers in superfluids, and fundamentals of
superconductivity.