* 9504407
* Maximum Likelihood Estimation of Radial Basis Function      Neural Networks for Process Control
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Lyle Ungar, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 05/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

Abstract - Ungar Radial Basis Functions (RBFs) are a class of artificial neural
networks for process control applications. Commonly, the k-Means clustering
algorithm is applied to the predictor ( independent variables), after which a
linear regression layer maps the hidden unit activations to the appropriate
responses (dependent variables). The PIs plan to explore an RBF architecture
which is suited to statistical analysis. The statistical model underlying the
architecture is a mixture model in which the mixture coefficients are radial
basis functions and the mixture components are constant or polynomial functions.
Depending on the assumptions used to generate the model, different
generalizations of radial and elliptical basis functions result. This allows the
use of the expectation maximization (EM) technique for finding maximum
likelihood estimators of the parameters. In addition, algorithms will be
developed to partially invert the networks, estimate the local prediction error
of the network, recognize novel data points, automatically select the number of
basis functions, and incrementally update the network efficiently as data are
collected. The techniques will be tested on real data from chemical plants,
compared to other approximation methods with respect to speed and accuracy, and
modified as needed to achieve fast, accurate, and robust performance. This is a
coordinated project between two investigators, a mathematician and a chemical
engineer, at two different institutions. Industrial data are to be provided by
the DuPont Company.