* 9504117
* The Pigment-Labeling Method:  Calibrating the Method and    Understanding its Limitations
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Ralf Goericke, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/1999
* USD 299,999.00

P.I.: Goericke Proposal #: 95- 04117 PROJECT ABSTRACT To understand the controls
of primary production in the world ocean, variations of phytoplankton biomass
and primary production must be understood as a function of physical, chemical
and biological parameters. Ideally, one would determine primary production as
the sum of the products of phytoplankton taxon specific biomass and growth
rates. Although this approach is currently not possible, phytoplankton biomass
and growth rates can be measured using the chlorophyll-labeling method, which as
introduced a decade ago. Taxon specific growth rates can, in principle, also be
determined from the 14C labeling of carotenoids. However, these potentially
powerful methods have been used on a limited basis because a mechanical
understanding of what is being measured was lacking. This research will study
the 14C labeling kinetics of chlorophyll a and carotenoids in nitrogen limited
continuous cultures of microalgae grown under constant light to extend previous
research to other carotenoids, groups of algae, and conditions of nutrient-
limited growth. The study will also determine pigment-labeling kinetics in algae
grown under a diel photocycle and algae subject to growth irradiance changes to
assess the limitations of the method when it is performed under conditions of
uneven growth. The results of this study will aid other members of the research
community in the interpretation of the pigment labeling experiments.