* 9504418
* Mathematical Sciences: Curvature and Topology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Stephan Stolz, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 67,000.00

9504418 Stolz The principal investigator studies the question of which manifolds
admit Riemannian metrics of positive scalar (respectively Ricci) curvature.
According to the Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg conjecture, a spin manifold admits a
metric of positive scalar curvature if and only if an `index' obstruction
vanishes. This conjecture has been proved (by the principal investigator and his
coauthors) for spin manifolds whose fundamental groups have periodic cohomology.
Moreover, a "stable version" of this conjecture has been proved for manifolds
with finite fundamental groups (in the "stable version" one allows the manifold
to be replaced by its product with sufficiently many copies of the "Bott-
manifold," an eight-dimensional spin manifold that represents the periodicity
element in real K-theory). The principal investigator works on proving the
"stable" conjecture for all spin manifolds whose fundamental groups satisfy the
Baum-Connes conjecture. Moreover, he suspects that the Gromov-Lawson-Rosenberg
conjecture does not hold in general, and tries to find new "unstable"
obstructions to the existence of positive scalar curvature metrics. Concerning
positive Ricci curvature, the investigator is pursuing a proof of his conjecture
that the existence of a positive Ricci curvature metric on a spin manifold with
vanishing first Pontryagin class implies the vanishing of its Witten genus. This
involves a "Weitzenboeck formula " for the Dirac operator on the free loop space
of this manifold. These projects fit in the general framework of trying to
relate the topology of a manifold (qualitative information about its global
shape) and its geometry (quantitative information about its local shape). For
2-dimensional manifolds (like the surface of a ball or a tire), a nice
classification has been known for a long time: Two such surfaces have the same
topology (i.e., they can be deformed into each other if we think of them as
being made of thin rubber) if and only if they have the same number of "holes"
(the surface of a ball has no holes, the surface of a tire or a cup has one
hole, and a pretzel has two holes). Moreover, if a surface has "positive
curvature" in the sense that the angle sum in each triangle whose edges are
geodesics (shortest curves) is larger than 180 degrees, then this surface has
the same topology as the surface of a ball. It is a major goal of modern day
mathematics to generalize these results to higher dimensional manifolds (e.g.,
our universe is a manifold of dimension 3, Einstein's space-time has dimension
4, and manifolds of dimension 10, resp. 26, play a crucial role in the
theoretical physics of the attempted unification of the four fundamental
forces). ***