* 9504827
* Global Optimization of Process Models Incorporating         Detailed Chemical Kinetics Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Robert Carr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 12/31/1998
* USD 204,351.00

Abstract - Carr 9504827 Chemical engineering is concerned with the design,
construction, operation, and control of complex processes. The associated system
geometry can be complex because the chemical reactions involved take place
within a time- and space-varying environment and/or the reactions themselves may
be very complex, entailing hundreds of species participating in a network of
many more reactions. Optimization of the system or process may require a global
search through a parameter space of high dimension, each step of the search
requiring integration of the chemical-kinetic equations and the equations of
mass and heat transport with time-dependent boundary conditions and spatial
inhomogeneity. Large demands are thus made for quantitative information on
reactions rates and for computing power. This research will address the problem
by proceeding along two fronts: (1) the development of numerical analytic and
visualization tools, and (2) the application of the available tools to kinetic
and reactor models of varying complexity. The PIs plan to develop a data
parallel code for the local optimization of large sets of ordinary differential
equations/differential algebraic equations (ODEs/DAEs) on the CM-5 (connection
machine) at the Minnesota Supercomputer Institute. An augmented Lagrangian code
has been developed and another code incorporating successive quadratic
programming will be written. These codes will be tailored for simultaneous
optimization and solution of the underlying ODEs/DAEs via orthogonal collocation
and used to study larger and more detailed kinetic models for methane oxidation.
One dimensional transport and simple turbulence models may also be included. The
next stage of development will be to construct a code for Bayesian stopping
rules in conjunction with multistart random search. The construction of a small
step methane oxidation kinetic mechanism will follow. It will be optimized to
match the output of the full kinetic scheme in a simple reactor in t he vicinity
of the global optimum of the latter.