* 9504463
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Extended Linear Modeling with      Splines"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Charles Stone, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 135,000.00

proposal number: DMS-9504463 PI: Charles Stone Institution: UC Berkeley Title:
Extending Linear Modeling with Splines An abstract for the project In many
statistical models of current theoretical and practical interest, the log-
likelihood function depends linearly on the one or more unknown functions. The
theory and methodology of such models, referred to as extended linear models,
are particularly tractable when the models are concave; that is, when the log-
likelihood depends concavely on the unknown function or functions. Among the
class of concave extended linear models are ordinary, logistic, probit, Poisson
and other generalized linear models, multiple logistic regression (which is
useful in multiple classification), hazard regression (for survival analysis),
and models for the estimation of density and conditional density functions. In
the context of such models, polynomial splines and their tensor products are
natural building blocks for constructing finite-dimensional estimates of
infinite-dimensional main effects and loworder interactions, and the resulting
ANOVA decompositions provide an insightful tool for data analysis. In this
research, the corresponding nonadaptive theory and closely related adaptive
methodology will further be developed and refined in a variety of settings. In
particular, an attempt will be made to establish uniform rates of convergence
first in the regression context and then for other extended linear models, where
the maximum likelihood estimates are intrinsically nonlinear. The theory for
spectral density estimation in the context of a stationary time series will be
extended to handle mixed spectra. The theory and methodology for survival
analysis will be extended to include time-dependent covariates and directly to
fit a flexible proportional hazards (Cox) model without modeling the dependence
of the hazard function on time. The methodology and theory that have already
been develo ped for extended linear models will be modified to handle neural
spike train processes that occur in neurophysiology and event history analysis,
which is commonly used in sociology and other social sciences. This research is
part of the investigator's long-term research program in statistics, which began
two decades ago. Prior to that time, the emphasis on statistics had been on
parametric modeling, which involves fitting models with a fixed, finite number
of unknown parameters. At that time, the investigator joined the small cadre of
statisticians working in the field of nonparametric modeling. A half-dozen years
later, the investigator further specialized his research program to what
essentially amounts to the synthesis of parametric and nonparametric modeling;
specifically, flexible parametric models are employed that have increasingly
many parameters as more and more data become available. A decade ago, the
investigator began another long-term project: teaching and simultaneously
writing a textbook for an upper-division or graduate-level first course in
probability and statistics in which the statistics portion is presented in an
innovative manner suggested by this synthesis of parametric and nonparametric
modeling. (The textbook will be published this summer.) This educational
project, in turn, has had a catalytic effect on the investigator's research
program. Moreover, in the direction of human resource development to improve the
civil infrastructure, the investigator has used the positions of Teaching
Assistant for the course and Research Assistant on previous NSF grants to
recruit Ph. D. students, train them in teaching and in the investigator's
research program, and place them in academic and industrial research positions.
Recently one such former student, who currently has a tenure-track position at a
leading American statistics department, assisted an American software company in
winning a small SBIR contract to create a commercial software implementation of
the state-of-the-art survival analysis methodology that was developed by the
investigator and this and another former student. The resulting product should
prove very useful in biotechnology. Another former student, who has a permanent
position at one of America's leading research labs, has continued a
methodological development initiated in his Ph. D. Dissertation and successfully
applied this methodology to improve the quality of the IC manufacturing process
of the Lab's parent company. Hopefully, the investigator's continued research
and training of Ph. D. students and his related collaborations with former Ph.
D. students will have more such worthwhile consequences. ??