* 9504471
* Mathematical Sciences: Polynomial Invariants in the Theory  of Knots
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Louis Kauffman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9504471 Kauffman This project investigates invariants of knots, 3-manifolds and
higher dimensional manifolds that arise from state summation models, quantum
groups and topological quantum field theory. This includes work on the structure
of the Jones polynomial, on Vassiliev invariants, and on connections with
quantum field theory and molecular biology, as well as techniques and
conjectures about the use of functional integration in topology. In the last
decade, knot theory has encountered an awakening through the infusion of a
remarkable collection of techniques from mathematical physics and a series of
interrelationships with molecular biology, chemistry, and theoretical physics.
The principal investigator is one of the key figures in the inception of this
relationship with physics (statistical mechanics) via his introduction of the
use of state summation models for polynomial invariants of knots and links. In a
state summation model the knot is regarded as a miniature physical system, and
topological properties of the knot are seen as averages of physical
interactions. These models have grown to encompass techniques from quantum field
theory and have been useful in topology and its applications to the study of
molecular interactions in biology and chemistry. In topology these techniques
apply to the structure of three- and four-dimensional spaces as well as to
knots. This means that these techniques are essential to the architecture of
three- dimensional structures - from molecules to networks of communication,
from atoms to galaxies. All fields of science are based on the structure of
space. What is particular to this project's topological study is that it
articulates the topological components in large networks of which knots are the
principal example. Such networks are the basis of significant structures such as
RNA and DNA, where topology is the key to interaction. In fact, the introduction
of topology in these subjects is, from the viewpoint of this principal
investigator, just the beginning of a larger interplay, where topology is seen
as the basis for studying the recursive and circular architectures of complex
systems. A galaxy, a society, an organism and a physical system all have in
common the stability that arises through closed systems of circular
interactions. Such interactions have traditionally been treated via cybernetics
and computer modeling. These topological investigations add a new dimension to
cybernetics and complex systems, providing new questions and a host of new
problems. All these issues are treated in the new book "Knots and Applications,"
edited and contributed to by the principal investigator. ***