* 9504027
* Japan STA Program:  Liquid-Phase Cracking of Waste Plastics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* David Bodily, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 08/31/1997
* USD 35,076.00

9504027 Bodily This award supports an 18-month Science and Technology agency of
Japan Fellowship for Dr. Jyi-Perng Wann at the National Institute of Resources
and Environment (NIRE). He will collaborate with Drs. Yoshiki Sato, Tohru Kamo,
and S. Futamura of the Hydrocarbon Research Laboratory of NIRE. Professor David
Bodily of the Chemical and Fuels Engineering Department, University of Utah will
also participate in the project. The research is aimed at improvements in the
recovery of polymers and monomers from mixed waste plastics by selective solvent
dissolution and depolymerization at low-severity conditions. Hilderbrand's
regular solution theory will be used to select solvents for the dissolution of
waste plastic mixtures. The mixtures are difficult to separate by physical
processes, and contamination by plastics such as polyvinyl chloride creates
conversion and disposal problems. Processes such as incineration and pyrolysis
cause potential air pollution problems and low recovery of the energy contents
of the plastics. The combined liquid-phase process has the potential to recover
high yields of high-quality materials from plastics. Chemical characterization
of the recovered products will provide for determination of the composition of
reaction products, aid in the selection optimal reaction conditions, provide
information for the understanding of reaction mechanism, and verify the
effectiveness of the propose recovery scheme. ***