* 9504974
* Mathematical Sciences:  Sparse Matrix Problems:  Data       Structures, Algorithms, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Mark Law, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 250,500.00

Davis This project addresses a range of sparse matrix problems, from data
structures, to algorithms, to applications. The unifying theme is the
unsymmetric-pattern multifrontal method: its implementation, data structures,
and applicability to difficult sparse matrix problems in semiconductor device
and process simulation. The unsymmetric-pattern multifrontal method encompasses
both the multifrontal technique and an approximate degree update algorithm that
is much faster (asymptotically and in practice) than computing the true degrees.
Although this method uses upper bounds, the ordering quality for both the
unsymmetric (Markowitz cost) and symmetric (minimum degree) algorithms does not
suffer. The investigator and his colleagues develop parallel factorization and
ordering algorithms based on these approaches. They also develop parallel memory
allocators (a fast-fits algorithm), a dynamic task graph (dynamic, since the
pivot ordering determines the task dag), the development of both pessimistic and
optimistic synchronization methods for frontal matrix ``collision'' in the
combined uni/multifrontal approach, and other distributed data structures (such
as a distributed priority queue for finding pivots of low approximate degree)
required for these algorithms. The algorithms and data structures they develop
are applied to semiconductor device and process simulation. This is a
challenging application, placing a burden not only on the numerical
factorization, but on the symbolic ``overhead'' as well. The problems in this
domain are based on irregular, adaptive grids (both 2D and 3D). Both direct
methods and iterative methods are used. The iterative method used is a
preconditioned biconjugate gradient algorithm, with an incomplete LU
factorization as the preconditioner. The investigators develop and employ an
incomplete multifrontal factorization algorithm, and a multifrontal-based
approach for computing the sparse inverse for use as a prec onditioner. The
parallel methods the investigators develop are widely applicable to many
computationally intensive problems, in particular the modeling of complex
physical phenomena: structural stress and fluid-flow in and around the space
shuttle, thunderstorms and tornados, circuits and semiconductor devices, the
mixing and combustion of complex turbulent reacting flows, the flow of oil in a
reservoir, the optimal distillation of gas and petroleum products, and so on.
Parallel sparse matrix algorithms and the data structures they require can help
to solve these problems. Where will a tornado hit? How fast can you make a CPU
chip run? How can automobile emissions be reduced and gas efficiency be
increased at the same time? How do we get more gas out of the same amount of
crude oil, and how do we get more crude oil out of an oil reservoir? Answering
these questions accurately requires a great deal of computation - and much of
that computation involves large, sparse matrices. High-speed computation is
required - it does no good to predict where a tornado will hit after it has
already passed by and done its destruction. Thus the need for parallel
algorithms and data structures. The methods the investigators develop are made
widely available to researchers in these and other areas. To ensure that the
methods are in fact useful for ``real world'' problems, they are incorporated
into a widely-used semiconductor simulation package, the Florida Object-Oriented
Device/Process Simulator (FLOODS/FLOOPS). FLOODS/FLOOPS is in use in dozens of
companies and universities, and its methods form the basis of many commercial
semiconductor simulation packages.