* 9504953
* Mathematical Sciences:  Homotopy Algorithms for Solving     Sparse Polynomial Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Tien-Yien Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1998
* USD 67,000.00

Date: Fri, 19 May 1995 10:19:42 -0400 (EDT) From: Tien-Yien Li
&lt;li@math.msu.edu&gt; To: thaler@nsf.gov Subject: Re: Proposal DMS-9504953
Mime-Version: 1.0 Dear Dr. Thaler: Thank you for your message concerning the
partial funding of my proposal DMS-9504953. Homotopy algorithms for solving
sparse polynomial systems Recently, it has been proved that modeling the sparse
structure of a polynomial system by its Newton polytopes leads to a major
computational breakthrough in solving polynomial systems by homotopy methods.
The PIÄ±s "random product homotopy" approach proposed in the project intends to
construct a start system for the homotopy in random product form with its Newton
polytopes containing those of the target system. On the other hand, the
"polyhedral homotopy" based on an elegant formula for computing the mixed volume
can find all zeros of a polynomial system by following much fewer, in most
occasions the exact amount of, homotopy curves. Polynomial Systems occur
everywhere in Mathematics, Science and Technology. Very small systems are easily
solved by hand, but larger systems cannot reliably be so solved, if at all. The
project aims to implement a portable solver using the latest in polynomial
system solving algorithms and capable of being incorporated into applications
programs. Research will be carried out to advance the state of the art and our
understanding of polynomial systems; additionally, various application areas
will be studied, such as kinematics, control theory, geometric modelling, and
biochemistry in which problems reducible to polynomial system solving arise.