* 9504349
* RUI: Applications of Classical Inference Techniques to Multiple-Valued Logics and to Prime Implicate Algorithms
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Erik Rosenthal, University of New Haven
* Continuing grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 08/31/1999
* USD 151,614.00

This project is for research in computational logic. The areas of research stem
directly from prior analysis of the structure formulas in negation normal form.
That work raised many questions and led to explorations in several directions.
Substantial results at the propositional level, preliminary experimental at the
first order level, and certain theoretical results that the most important of
these may be path dissolution, a rule of inference that is strongly complete at
the ground level. This project continues exploration of this and related
inference mechanisms, largely through experimentation. One major thrust is to
further the implementation of the techniques developed earlier. The current
first order system (``Dissolver'') is a solid platform on which the following
techniques may be tested: link selection; computing prime implicants;
backtracking; theory links and dissolution; and star chains. While abstract
proof-theoretic questions are of interest in their own right, enhancing the
performance of Dissolver is an important motivation for the theoretical work in
this project. The investigations into multiple-valued logics largely fit the
category; the study of the following issues contributes to the development of
Dissolver: dissolution and multiple-valued logics; dissolution, analytic
tableaux, and distributive law; quantifier duplication, proof length, and
cycles; algorithms for computing prime implicants; and induction and equality.