* 9504867
* U.S.-Mongolia Cooperative Research: Systematic and Eco-     logical Research in Northern Mongolia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Frank Gill, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 06/30/1998
* USD 162,828.00

*** 9504867 Goulden This is a three-year cooperative research project proposed
by Drs. Clyde Goulden, Jon Gelhaus, and Gary Rosenberg, the Academy of Natural
Sciences of Philadelphia and Dr. Ravchig Samya, the National University of
Mongolia and the Khan Altai Foundation. This proposal is to support the travel
of the P.I. and three scientists from the Philadelphia Academy of Natural
Science, and the training of one junior Mongolian scientist in the U.S. for
research related to this study. This project is to begin a long-term cooperative
program to study the biodiversity of national parks in Hovsgol Nuur, Northern
Mongolia. The goals of this study are to establish a biological data base for
Mongolian national parks and through educational opportunities for Mongolian and
U.S. graduate students, to encourage young scientists to study systematic
biology and ecology in the national park system in Mongolia. This is an
important study of an ancient system with relatively low anthorpogenic impacts
and essentially no information on the biology of the system. This is an unique
environment for understanding the natural processes of speciation without
significant human intervention. In addition to scientific benefits, the
potential gains from human resource development are likely to be significant,
since once the site is established, it can be used as a living laboratory to
train the junior scientists from the U.S., to encourage the Mongolian scientists
to study systematic biology and ecology, and to help Mongolian scientists
organize the ecological information needed to protect this system. ***