* 9504541
* Dynamic and Static Stability and Safety Limitations of Lift Slab Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Rusk Masih, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,913.00

9504541 Masih Theoretical evidence as well as practical accidents have pointed
out that under certain loading conditions the lift-slab structures are at the
threshold static and dynamic instability. The instability of the structure is
created by stacking the heavy mass of several slabs at high levels, while the
structure cannot be braced laterally, since the bracing will inhibit the lifting
process. During construction stage or under lateral loads, such an instability
situation becomes highly undesirable. This project undertakes an investigation
to the limitations within which the structure remains statically and dynamically
stable. The project would also include a study of the ways and means of the
safety precautions used and necessary recommendations to improve them.
Theoretical studies to improve the design of lift-slab structure, performance
against earthquake forces, and to recommend ways to strengthen the existing
lift-slab structures to withstand possible future earthquakes will be conducted.
Such improvement should help to avoid tragedies like those which happened in
Armenia during the 1988 earthquake. Computer analysis will be made to study
limitations as: the stacking schemes of the parked slabs, the safe relationship
of those schemes with the geometry of the structure, the limits of safe dynamic
load and its frequency to maintain safe lifting process, and the safe temporary
connection of the parked slab to the columns. ***