* 9504842
* A Database System for Neuronal Pattern Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Michael Gabriel, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 08/31/1999
* USD 310,365.00

The goal of this award is to develop an information handling system that will
make routine the storage, organization, retrieval, analysis and sharing of
experimental and simulated neuronal data. Much current knowledge about brain
function is based on analysis of firing patterns of individual neurons. Neural
modeling generates massive simulated data sets that need to be processed,
analyzed and compared with experimental data. The ultimate aim is to develop a
set of tools, techniques and standards that can be disseminated to help meet the
needs of a large community of neuroscientists who work with neuronal data. An
information system for neuronal time-series data involves several interrelated
components. The first is a database component for organized storage of large
data sets, and efficient search and retrieval of data meeting specific criteria
of interest. A second component is the establishment of conventions for data
representation and transfer so that time-series records can be processed
independently of the format in which they are stored. The third component is a
suite of tools for data analysis and visualization that provides a flexible and
intuitive means of processing the data. To achieve full operational status
several steps are required: a) activation to full on-line status of the
currently participating pilot laboratories; b) enhancement of the database
search and query functionality; c) specification and implementation of the time-
series data protocol (TSDP); d) development of TSDP-compatible analysis and
visualization tools. Finally, these steps must be carried out within an ongoing
cycle of performance testing, evaluation and improvement.