* 9504495
* Mathematical Sciences:  Flexible Regression and             Classification
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Trevor Hastie, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 07/31/1998
* USD 225,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504495 PI: Trevor Hastie Institution: Stanford University Title:
Flexible Regression and Classification Abstract: The research concerns several
research directions with a common theme: to push widely accepted but limited
statistical tools in more adventurous directions, while retaining some of their
attractive features, such as model interpretability. Specifically, the research
involves the development of: a) nonparametric extensions of logistic regression
for multiclass responses, including additive, projection pursuit and basis
expansion techniques, as well as rank reduced models similar to Fisher's LDA; b)
a new adaptive algorithm for basis selection, similar to Friedman's MARS model,
which uses a natural penalized criterion to simultaneously select variables and
shrinks their coefficients; c) a technique for locally adapting the nearest
neighbor distance metric to combat the curse of dimensionality. Many important
problems in data analysis and modeling focus on prediction. Some important
examples include computer assisted diagnosis of disease (e.g. reading digital
mammograms), heart disease risk assessment, automatic reading of handwritten
digits (e.g. zip-codes on envelopes), speech recognition, to name a few. This
research is about enriching the current toolbox of well established statistical
models in a natural way to address some of these more complex scenarios. Often
new exotic techniques, such as neural networks, are ``black boxes'' that appear
to produce good results, but do not provide the analyst with an interpretable
model, diagnostics or similar feedback to give them confidence that the box has
produced sensible results. Statistics can play an active role in these important
prediction and data analysis problems through the development competitive and
defensible models. This research does just that by creating a blend between the
well understood classical techniques and the new techniques that allow for model
exploration.