* 9504257
* Molecular and Biochemical Basis for Stable Carbon Isotope   Ratios in Hydrothermal Vent Ecosystems
* GEO,OCE
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1998
* Colleen Cavanaugh, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/1998
* USD 255,000.00

9504257 Cavanaugh Studies of stable isotopes allow valuable insight into various
aspects of carbon cycling. For example, such stable carbon isotope data have
been used to lend support to the putative dependence of several hydrothermal
vent animals on organic matter produced by chemosynthetic endosymbionts.
Unfortunately the observed isotope fractionations in various ecosystems have not
always been readily understood, leading to equivocal conclusions regarding
tropic relations between species in a given ecosystem. Again, the hydrothermal
vent ecosystems provide an example of this. del13C values measured for symbiotic
bivalves (del13C = -27% to -35%) mimic those of free-living chemoautotrophs,
indicating the symbionts' nutritional role. In contrast, the food sources are
less clear for tubeworm-chemoautotroph symbioses since these tissues exhibit
surprisingly heavy stable isotope values (del13Cs = -9 to -35%). While a number
of theories have been presented, the heavier isotope values for the symbioses
have never been adequately explained. The recognition of different Rubisco forms
being expressed may have far reaching implications, beyond interpretations of
carbon cycling at hydrothermal vent ecosystems. The recent discovery of a form
II Rubisco in a dinoflagellate indicates that this enzyme is not confined to the
bacterial autotrophs, and may well explain the isotopically heavy del13C values
of organic matter recovered from the open ocean. Accurately resolving the
effects of various forms of the carbon fixation enzyme, Rubisco, may have a
tremendous impact on interpretation of del13C data in ecological and
paleontological studies. ***