* 9504399
* Protection and Translation in Multimodel Multiprocessors:   The MIP FUGU Workstation
* CSE,EIA
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Anant Agarwal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael Foster
* 07/31/1998
* USD 800,000.00

This project is extending the Alewife multiprocessor to explore two aspects of
future scalable multiprocessors. One aspect is protection. Protection is
required on accesses to hardware resources, with as little software overhead as
possible. For example, when a message sender and receiver are part of the same
application, they should be able to directly access network hardware. The other
aspect is address translation, so that each application can have its own address
space. All processors executing an application must have the same address space,
however. To ensure this, memory mapping hardware is placed at each node of the
multiprocessor, and must be kept coherent. The FUGU system provides three modes
of interprocessor communication. Shared memory is provided by hardware
synthesized messages among nodes, which maintain cache coherence. Short messages
can be sent directly by performing loads and stores to I/O registers that are in
each node's address space. Longer messages are managed by a DMA engine that is
separate from the processor. Translation and protection for shared memory and
for short messages are provided by hardware enhancements that maintain coherence
in the translation lookaside buffers and ensure that messages are received only
by the processes that they are addressed to. For long messages, only minimal
support for address translation is provided by the hardware since the need for
such translation is likely to be rare. Any needed translation will be provided
by software.