* 9504791
* Mathematical Sciences:  Large Scale Properties of           Interacting Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Jeremy Quastel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1997
* USD 36,000.00

9504791 Quastel Abstract The investigator is studying the large scale behavior
of interacting particle systems. In these models large systems of particles
evolve statistically according to a simple local rule for which there are
certain conserved quantities. The goal is to show that on a macroscopic scale
the conserved quantities evolve according to deterministic conservation laws
which usually take the form of nonlinear partial differential equations. Of
particular interest are the transport coefficients and how they arise from the
microscopic dynamics, in particular in the nongradient models where there is a
net effect of fluctuations. Several types of nongradient models will be studied:
Models of disordered systems, models of surfaces and interfaces, and lattice gas
models for the incompressible Navier-Stokes equation. A fundamental, and still
largely open, problem is to understand how large systems of microscopic
particles organize themselves to produce the collective macroscopic behavior we
see in the world around us. The investigator is pursuing this goal on models in
which the microscopic dynamics has some degree of randomness. The research
includes models of transport in disordered media which come from condensed
matter physics, models of surfaces and interfaces, and lattice gas models for
incompressible fluid flow. Besides providing a rigorous justification for the
macroscopic conservation laws, other important consequences of these
investigations are intrinsic formulas for transport coeffiaients, and precise
estimates of the deviations of these microscopic systems from their macroscopic
limits.