* 9504457
* Mathematical Sciences: Arrangements of Hyperplanes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Hiroaki Terao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/1999
* USD 154,000.00

9504457 Orlik This work applies tools developed in the theory of arrangements to
several problems arising from the theory of Aomoto-Gelfand hypergeometric
functions. A twisted de Rham complex is of special interest. It is particularly
important to compute the dimension of the top cohomology group and to find an
explicit basis for it, because this cohomology group may be identified with the
space of hypergeometric functions. The present approach is by using similar
complexes with different and simpler coboundary maps. In particular, a complex
of logarithmic forms and the Orlik-Solomon algebras are studied. The calculation
of the cohomology of these complexes is usually easier than the twisted de Rham
complex itself. The aim is to prove that under certain conditions these
cohomology groups are isomorphic to the twisted de Rham cohomology groups.
Another goal is to use Morse theory to find twisted cycles that give a basis for
the twisted de Rham homology. The study of arrangements of hyperplanes is a new
branch of mathematics on the interface between topology, algebra, algebraic
geometry, combinatorics, and analysis. Applications include coding theory,
computer science, spline functions, and physics. The present work is related to
hypergeometric functions, representations of Lie groups, Knizhnik-Zamolodchikov
equations, and conformal field theory. These last topics are of great interest
to mathematicians and theoretical physicists. ***