* 9504948
* Electronic Structure of Interfaces, Defects, and Dopants    in Wide Band Gap Nitride Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Kevin Smith, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 01/31/1999
* USD 298,911.00

9504948 Smith This collaborative, interdisciplinary research project includes a
comprehensive determination of detailed electronic structure of thin film
refractory metal nitrides and cubic boron nitride grown by state-of-the-art
cyclotron resonance-assisted MBE and ion-assisted pulsed laser deposition
methods. The electronic structure of defects and dopants in these nitrides, the
electronic structure of the interface between the films and their substrates,
and between the films and metal overlayers will be studied. Additionally, the
chemical reactivity of the films (in particular, when defective or doped) will
be investigated in order to understand the nature of elementary chemical bonding
and adhesion of these nitrides to both substrates and overlayers, and to
understand the chemical stability of the films at elevated temperatures. The
electronic structure will be studied using complementary photoemission, inverse
photoemission, and soft x-ray fluorescence spectroscopies. Soft x-ray
fluorescence will be further developed on the project since it has the advantage
that electronic structure can be determined in the presence of external electric
or magnetic fields, and at elevated temperatures. %%% The primary goal of this
program is to develop a fundamental-understanding of the electronic and photonic
properties and the epitaxial growth and processing of wide bandgap semiconductor
materials so that they can be exploited in the realization of a variety of
advanced electronic and photonic devices. An important feature of the program is
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area of materials and processing research. This
research will contribute to improving the general performance of advanced
devices and integrated circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications. ***