* 9504301
* Inorganic and Organic Nitrogen Uptake Dynamics in the       Equatorial Pacific during the Second Mesoscale Iron         Enrichment Experiment (Iron Ex II)
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1995,03/31/1998
* William Cochlan, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9504301 Cochlan This study will investigate the nitrogen dynamics of a natural
planktonic community in response to iron enrichment. The stable isotope 15N will
be used to quantify nitrate, ammonium and urea uptake in the equatorial Pacific
Ocean, a high-nutrient, low-chlorophyll (HNLC) area, during the next mesoscale
iron enrichment experiment (Iron Ex II) scheduled for May-June, 1995. The study
will obtain accurate and quantitative data of the nitrogenous nutrition of the
natural assemblage that will determination whether or not iron fertilization
enhances new production. The size- spectrum of nitrogen utilization will be
determined by using different pore-sized filters to collect particulate material
after short-term incubations, since cell size is thought to be a major factor
controlling the sinking flux of material from the surface waters (i.e. export
production, which is related to new production). All nitrogen uptake rates of
total and size- fractionated samples will be corrected for the effects of
isotopic-dilution which may occur during the experimental incubation periods, a
condition which otherwise could result in serious underestimation of calculated
nitrogen uptake rates of urea and ammonium. The heterotrophic contribution to
total community nitrogen uptake will be determined by utilizing size-
fractionation techniques and specific metabolic inhibitors to distinguish
between heterotrophic bacteria and autotrophic phytoplankton. Additionally, the
radioactive isotope 3H will be used to determine the changes in heterotrophic
bacterial production as a result of iron fertilization, and these data, together
with estimates of bacterial abundance, will provide an estimate of growth rate
for the heterotrophic assemblage. The nitrogen uptake rates determined for
autotrophs and heterotrophs, together with quantification of dissolved organic
nitrogen (DON) released during normal 15N-tracer incubations and its effect on
traditional measures of uptake, will allow for accurate estimations of new and
regenerated production in the experimental ecosystem. The experiments in this
proposed nitrogenous nutrition study are a key component in the next mesoscale
iron enrichment study, and their results will be critical for a comprehensive
understanding of the ecosystem response to iron enrichment during Iron Ex II.