* 9504476
* Matheamtical Sciences: Homotopy Theory and its Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Paul Goerss, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 06/30/1999
* USD 209,600.00

9504476 Mitchell Mitchell, Goerss, and Devinatz will investigate homotopy theory
and its applications to algebraic K-theory. The objective is to enhance our
understanding of fundamental problems in both subjects, including the K-theory
of fields and rings of integers, the nature of homotopy inverse limits, and the
generating hypothesis in stable homotopy theory. (1) Mitchell will work on the
homotopy theoretic aspects of algebraic K-theory, focusing on questions relating
to the Lichtenbaum-Quillen conjectures for rings of algebraic integers. In
particular, he will study further the cohomology of the general linear group of
such rings of integers. (2) The principal aim of Goerss's research is to address
the question of computing homotopy inverse limits in general and in the
particular case of homotopy fixed points for the type of group action that
arises in algebraic K-theory. Secondary to this main project is a study of
certain types of Hopf algebras, and a study of the question of recovering
homotopy invariants of a space from its cochains. (3) Devinatz will work on the
chromatic point of view in stable homotopy theory. In particular, he is
interested in the circle of ideas surrounding Hopkins's chromatic splitting
conjecture and in its relevance to the generating hypothesis. More basically,
the projects of Mitchell, Goerss, and Devinatz all involve the relationship
between the field of algebra -- especially the theory of numbers -- and the more
"geometric" field of homotopy theory, which may be defined as the study of
phenomena that remain unchanged under continuous deformations. Mitchell plans to
interpret number theoretic invariants in terms of homotopy theory and then to
use the techniques of homotopy theory to gain new insights into number theory.
These insights might be difficult to obtain using only algebraic techniques.
Goerss will be working on a number of projects. One involves developing
techniques in homotopy theory which should p rove useful in Mitchell's program.
Another of Goerss's projects turns the flow around -- namely, he will attempt to
understand certain homotopy invariants in a completely algebraic way. Devinatz
will also use algebra to gain insights into homotopy theory. In Devinatz's
project, the algebraic framework is better understood; however, the algebra
involved is rather complicated. Devinatz must therefore try to extract enough
information from the algebra to provide the desired homotopy theoretic
information. All three investigators are also interested in providing more
expository accounts of the circle of ideas surrounding their work; these
accounts should make it easier for graduate students to enter and master the
field. ***