* 9504561
* Mathematical Sciences:  Stochastic Modelling with           Applications to Markov Chain Monte Carlo Methods and Design and Analysis in Systems Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Sean Meyn, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1998
* USD 105,000.00

9504561 Tweedie Abstract This project aims to extend the stability theory mf
Markov processes, and consider its application to two specific areas, namely the
behavior of Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods and the analysis of complex
network systems. The theoretical work will involve (a) methods of evaluating
model stability and instability, which will include both discrete and continuous
time Markov models; (b) development of performance measures for stable models,
and specifically comparison of rates at which such models achieve a stable
regime; (b) detailed behavior of stochastically ordered or partially
stochastically ordered models; and (d) robustness of system design against
perturbations in assumptions. One application of these methods will be to MCMC
methods, which are currently revolutionizing Bayesian and computational
statistics methods, and under this project it is hoped to develop on-line
convergence criteria, methods of evaluating convergence rates, and ways of
speeding up these algorithms. The other area of application is in the analysis
of complex network, queueing and storage systems. The specific types of such
application envisaged include the currently high-priority area of manufacturing
systems, and more general queueing systems with feedback, for which the
stability and performance results to be developed are well suited. In evaluating
many complex systems, there are two steps where mathematical models, especially
those in probability and statistics, play a critical role. The first step is in
describing the system. This research addresses the modeling of ``manufacturing
networks'', currently of central importance in the high-technology manufacturing
sector. Here the aim is to describe the way in which items such as semiconductor
components move around the various machines which work and rework components to
get to a final product. As with many models, the mathematics that describes such
manufacturing systems also describes other systems, such as the movement of bits
over an information network. The work proposed here will attack the vital
question: when is such a system stable, in the sense of running in equilibrium
rather than developing problems which cause shutdowns, backlogs or overflows.
This modeling step helps define the crucial parameters that describe ranges when
systems can be controlled: the second step is then in estimating such
parameters, and here it is proposed to work on new simulation methods that
enable such estimation to take place. These " Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithms" have very wide applicability, but are themselves "complex systems",
and just as with real systems, they can develop overflows and backlogs in usage:
the work here should provide methods of control for MCMC algorithms leading to
faster and more accurate methods of simulation. These simulation methods have
found application in a huge range of areas, from pattern recognition, to
agricultural experiments, to clinical and epidemiological areas, to
environmental assessments: the research supported in this proposal therefore
propagates to usage in very many areas indeed.