* 9504470
* Mathematical Sciences:  Statistical Inference for Large     Spatial and Space-Time Datasets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Michael Stein, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9504470 PI: Stein Institution: University of Chicago Title:
Statistical Inference for Large Spatial and Space-Time Datasets Abstract: This
research considers both applied and theoretical problems arising in statistical
analysis of spatial and space-time data. The applied aspect is the detailed
modeling and analysis of stratospheric ozone levels as measured via satellite at
over 30,000 locations daily for over a decade. The goal is to model the data at
the high level of spatial and temporal resolution it is taken and not to
aggregate over space and/or time as has been done in all previous statistical
analyses of these data. To reach this goal, it will be necessary to consider in
detail the nature of the measurement process and the space-time variations of
ozone concentrations due to such factors as long-term trends, seasonal effects,
variations both within and across latitudes (which are quite different) and
possibly the relationship of ozone to meteorological conditions. The immense
size of this dataset provides a strong connection to the theoretical aspect of
this proposal: the study of asymptotic problems in the analysis of spatial data.
In particular, a fixed domain asymptotic approach, in which the number of
observations in some fixed region of space increasing, is adopted. Using this
approach, this research studies the asymptotic properties of spatial
periodograms for estimating the high frequency behavior of the spectral density
of a stationary random field and the effect of misspecifying spectral densities
on prediction problems. The ultimate goal is to connect these two problems and
to understand the effect of estimating spectral densities on subsequent
predictions. Satellite based instruments measure numerous aspects of the earth
and its atmosphere with high resolution in space and time. For example, the
Total Ozone Monitoring Spectrometer (TOMS) measures ozone levels at over 30,000
locations daily, providing a much grea ter level of detail than can possibly be
attained using ground-based instruments. However, this high spatial resolution
has not been put to much use, as statistical analyses to date of this dataset
have been on ozone levels averaged over large regions. Using 10 years of TOMS
records as a test case, this project develops statistical and computational
methods for analyzing the spatial-temporal structure of large, high-resolution
geophysical datasets. This research aims to provide a better understanding of
the space-time dynamics of stratospheric ozone and hence the opportunity to more
accurately assess the effect of anthropogenic emissions on ozone levels, a
problem of worldwide environmental concern. The methods developed in this
research may prove useful in analyzing other large satellite based space-time
datasets, such as meteorological conditions relevant to global climate change.
In addition, this research studies theoretical properties of statistical methods
when applied to large spatial and space-time datasets.