* 9504102
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research:  Femtosecond Pulsed  Laser Machining of Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD)-Diamond
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Palaniappa Molian, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 03/31/1996
* USD 23,217.00

9504102 Molian The feasibility of a novel femtosecond pulsed excimer laser
processing technique for precision machining of chemical vapor deposition
(CVD)-diamond films will be investigated. Femtosecond pulsed laser ablation of
diamond is expected to be significantly different from that of currently
practiced nanosecond or longer-pulsed laser ablation because of its capability
to provide extreme intensities and larger absorption depth/thermal diffusion
distance ratios. Femtosecond lasers can offer an entirely new spectrum of laser-
diamond interactions that can alter dynamics of ablation products (energy and
mass distribution), nature of particle emission (ionized, neutral, etc.) and
associated phenomena namely plasma formation and shock propagation.
Consequently, there will be a greater degree of atomization of material to be
removed, reduced thermal component of ablation, absence of clusters and
particulates on the machined surfaced, and less probability for the
transformation of diamond to graphite. Such effects ultimately lead the proposed
machining technique to be a high precision, contamination-free, time efficient
procedure for craggy CVD-diamond films that requires low bulk temperature during
machining. It is anticipated that this novel laser processing scheme will not
only refine the existing laser-processing techniques but also surpass all other
diamond micromachining techniques and, additionally, generate new applications
in other areas of research such as deposition of thin films.