* 9504562
* RUI:  A New Method to Obtain Highly Accurate Three          Dimensional Analysis of Crack Propagation and Stress        on Composite Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 12/31/1997
* USD 45,544.00

Oh The investigator develops numerical methods for solving three-dimensional
crack propagation problems. In order to obtain any practical solutions for crack
propagation, the Finite Element Method (FEM) requires use of either graded
discretizations (very small elements near the crack front, larger elements
elsewhere) or special singular basis functions. The graded discretizations make
the computation very expensive, while singular basis functions destroy the nice
band structure of the FEM. Thus, the standard FEM is impractical for accurate
numerical simulation of 3-D crack propagation. The accuracy of the FE solution
depends on the regularity of the true solution. The investigator studies a new
method, called Method of Auxiliary Mapping (MAM), to deal with three-dimensional
singularities: vertex, edge, and edge-vertex. To remove the ineffectiveness of
the FEM in the presence of singularities, MAM transforms a region where the
stress functions are singular to a region where the transformed stress functions
are of higher regularity. The investigator also studies three auxiliary mappings
for these purposes. The annual cost of fracture-related damage in the United
States (human injury and loss of life aside) has been estimated at more than $10
billion. Metal fatigue has been cited as the probable cause of several recent
airline accidents, and the airworthiness of aging fleets is a national concern.
Material failures are a major concern for other large engineering structures
(ships, bridges, nuclear power plants, hydroelectric dams, and so on). Thus, for
effective inspection and preventive maintenance programs, an accurate fracture
analysis is demanded. However, because of the complicated geometry and
nonlinearities that characterize fracture mechanics, the use of analytical
techniques is very limited and in most cases not practical. Numerical methods
seem to be the only feasible approach for such analysis. On the basis of very
successful results o f the stress analysis for plane elasticity problems, the
investigator studies a new method that should yield highly accurate numerical
simulation of three-dimensional fracture analysis.