* 9504284
* NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program:            Bluff Body Aerodynamics, Turbulent Wakes, and Boundary      Layers
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Hiroshi Higuchi, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 08/31/1997
* USD 58,341.00

This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Hiroshi Higuchi of the
Department of Mechanical, Aerospace, and Manufacturing Engineering at Syracuse
University and Professor Motoki Hinada of the Research Division for Space
Systems Engineering at the Institute of Space and Astronautical Science (ISAS).
Project funding will enable Dr. Higuchi to spend four months in Japan, resident
at ISAS, in order to study the flow-bluff-body interaction problem related to
space recovery systems. The project has the potential to have an important
influence on the infrastructure of aerodynamics through the sharing of
information and joint technological advances arising from the close cooperation
with the research group in Japan. This proposal brings together research
engineers from two countries working in the area of fluid dynamics. The U.S.
engineer will have the opportunity to become familiar with research techniques,
data, equipment, and facilities at ISAS while contributing to the overall
research effort. Additionally, the extended visit by Higuchi will help him to
establish a personal and pr ofessional link with a leading researcher in Japan.
It is also hoped that this visit will initiate a long term cooperative agreement
for exchange of scholars and students between Syracuse University and ISAS.
Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange
and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration.