* 9504400
* Fundamental Studies of Gallium Arsenide Surface Passivation for Improved Semiconductor Manufacturing
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* W. Henry Weinberg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1998
* USD 381,779.00

9522566 Badzian This research project aims for fundamental understanding of
diamond films formed by chemical vapor depostion(CVD), and approaches this goal
through the hypothesis that defects in CVD diamond may be due to stacking faults
within sp3-bonded carbon rather than arising from sp2 hybridization. Studies
will be conducted to determine the atomic structure of tetrahedral forms of
carbon, different than cubic and hexagonal, using microwave plasma chemical
vapor deposition. Additives to the methane-hydrogen plasma, such as B, N, O, Si,
Ni, Ti, will be used to influence reaction pathways on the growing diamond
surface, and to modify the crystalline structure during growth. Atomic
resolution structure of diamond surfaces will be studied by scanning tunneling
microscopy, reflection high and low energy electron diffraction; other materials
characterization techniques include Raman spectroscopy, X-ray diffuse
scattering, photoluminescence, XPS and Auger spectroscopy. Cold neutron depth
profiling will be done in collaboration with NIST. %%% This project will be
important to the utilization of the unique electronic, thermal, and mechanical
properties of diamond films through improved basic understanding of their
crystalline structure, and the relationships gained between structure,
properties, and processing. An important feature of the program is the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***