* 9505824
* The Structure and Function of Human Serum Transferrin
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Richard Ikeda, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F VEcI @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c
t P o o l VEcI VEcI 4 @ F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6
; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia
steinberg @ =1 9: @ mv e = e " " " " " " " \ \ \ \ \ t ~ \ # C # Ã• u f T 4 # " #
" " " " 6 D " " " " 4 9505824 Ikeda Transferrin is a monomeric glycoprotein of
679 amino acids ( 80,000 MW) that is folded into two homologous domains. It is
the protein responsible for solubilizing and transporting circulating iron.
There is one iron binding site in the N terminal domain of transferrin and one
iron binding site in the C terminal domain. In both domains the bound iron atom
is held by six ligands. Four ligands (an aspartic acid, two tyrosines, and a
histidine) are provided by the protein and two ligands are provided by a
synergistically bound carbonate anion. The synergistic anion is required for
iron binding and it has been hypothesized that the carbonate is specifically
anchored within the iron binding clefts of both domains o f transferrin by a
conserved arginine. Although the iron ligands in the binding clefts of
transferrin are identical and the sequence and structure of the two domains are
nearly identical, the thermal stability and iron binding properties of the N and
C terminal domains differ. It has been hypothesized that the differences in the
thermal stabilities of the two domains of transferrin are caused by differences
in the thermal stabilities of one or both of the component substructures of the
two transferrin lobes, while the differences in the iron binding properties of
the N and C terminal domains of transferrin have been attributed to differences
in the amino acids that line the iron binding clefts of the two domains. The
goals of this study are to test these hypotheses. Specifically: 1 ) N and C
terminal half transferrin will be expressed in Pichia pastoris (yeast) and the
general integrity and activity of the recombinant N terminal and C terminal half
transferrins will be confirmed. This will prove that recombinant half
transferrins can be produced quickly and easily. 2) Hybrid half transferrins
will be produced by exchanging the subdomains of N and C terminal half
transferrin, and the recombinant proteins will be used to determine whether the
differences in the thermal stability and iron binding activity of N and C
terminal half transferrin are caused by one or both of the component
substructures of the half transferrins. 3) Half transferrin mutants will be
constructed. The mutants will then be used to begin to test the hypothesis that
the involvement of Arg124 and Arg456 in the binding of the synergistic anion
makes these amino acids essential for iron binding by N and C terminal half
transferrin. These experiments will be the first to compare and contrast similar
mutations in both domains of transferrin. This should increase our knowledge of
the mechanisms of iron binding by transferrin and will help us to understand how
transferrin functions to solubilize iron. %%% Iron is essential for blood
production and cell growth. In short, it is essential for human life; however,
iron is almost insoluble in physiological solutions. Consequently, it must be
solubilized so that enough iron is available for proliferating cells. In humans,
the protein that is responsible for binding, solubilizing, and transporting
circulating iron is human serum transferrin. Structurally, transferrin is a 679
amino acid protein that is folded into two domains. One domain is formed by
amino acids 1 to 331, while the nearly identical second domain is formed by
amino acids 339 to 679. There is one iron binding site in each domain of
transferrin, and although the sequence and structure of the two domains are
nearly identical, the thermal stability and iron binding properties of the two
domains of transferrin differ. The goals of this project are to use recombinant
DNA technology to separately produce each domain of transferrin, and to study
the separated domains of transferrin to determine why the nearly identical
domains exhibit different iron binding characteristics and different thermal
stabilities. These studies will help us to understand how transferrin binds
iron, and how the iron binding characteristics of transferrin allow the protein
to solubilize and transport iron. *** @ ....()()))()() ; S u m m a r y I n f o r
m a t i o n (