* 9505766
* Collaborative Research: Recovery of Vertebrate Faunas after the K/T Boundary, Tullock Formation, Eastern Montana
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Carl Swisher, Berkeley Geochronology Center
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/1998
* USD 42,748.00

Swisher 9505766 The first objective of the project will be to refine the
stratigraphic correlations of over 100 Early Paleocene vertebrate fossil
localities in eastern Montana already discovered and sampled. Here widespread
coal/lignite beds bracketing many fossil localities contain interbeds of
sanidine-bearing bentonites excellent for 40Ar/39Ar dating with a potential
resolution of 0.1%. Preliminary studies using criteria described by Swisher et
al. (1993) indicate that high resolution 40Ar/39Ar age determinations, in
conjunction with microprobe analysis of interbedded volcanics and detailed
magnetostratigraphies, are capable of providing precise identifications of
individual coal/lignite beds throughout the area. The resulting chronology will
provide the basis for testing hypotheses of correlation of Early Paleocene local
faunas from Montana with those known from New Mexico, Alberta, and intervening
areas. Interpretations of the processes and rates of biotic recovery after mass
extinctions involve competing hypotheses concerning the relative significance of
local survival, cladogenic diversification, and immigration from refuge areas.
Our preliminary results show the Early Paleocene, Puercan North American Land
Mammal Age (NALMA), as recognized in eastern Montana, had a duration of ca. 1
Ma. Puercan and early Torrejonian NALMA (Middle Paleocene) local faunas can be
ordered in at least four temporal units. Analysis of the systematic
relationships of the mammals and other vertebrates in these stratigraphically
well-controlled local faunas will provide the basis for much more refined tests
of hypotheses concerning the evolutionary processes operative during the
recovery of the terrestrial biota after the Cretaceous mass extinction than
previously possible. Locality and systematic data will continue to be recorded
in computer-based curatorial systems at the University of California Museum of
Paleontology and will be readily available to the research community.