* 9505600
* A 3D Data Base for Electron Microscopy and Related Fields ofUltrastructure
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Joachim Frank, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 08/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

Several techniques of three-dimensional imaging are about to revolutionize the
study of macromolecular assemblies, subcellular structures, and their
interactions. 3D electron microscopy and confocal light microscopy are obvious
examples. These techniques produce large amounts of data stored in various
formats and accessible only through special arrangements with the authors. Only
few aspects of a structure represented by a low-resolution density distribution
can be captured in scientific publications. There is a large potential for "data
mining" by other researchers within the same field or overlapping fields that is
currently unused because the data are virtually inaccessible. With this
application to the Databases Activities Program of NSF, the PI wishes to
continue and expand a joint US-Europe initiative for the establishment of a
distributed database that would accommodate ANY low-resolution (non-atomic) 3D
data produced by using various experimental methods (EM, LM, x-ray, etc.). The
proposal builds on an existing prototype that was developed jointly by the PI
and Dr. Jose Maria Carazo in Madrid and that is already publicly accessible
through Mosaic/WWW. According to the proposal, Dr. Carazo will visit the
Wadsworth Center twice, for a period of five months each, to continue the design
and testing of the distributed database and associated software tools, in close
interaction with the PI and his group. A graduate student in Computer Science,
who will be supervised by the PI and Dr. Daniel Rosenkrantz at SUNY, will design
new tools allowing segmentation data to be entered and used in complex 3D data
queries, as for instance required in docking of two low-resolution structures,
or in the comparison of two structures that have a part-whole relationship. We
plan to organize a workshop in mid-term (to be jointly funded by the European
Government) that will bring together scientists from centers of 3D
ultrastructural imaging and specialists in the areas of scienti fic databases
and networking. With the workshop we seek to solicit critical input and start a
discussion on how responsibilities might best be shared in the screening of data
and how to ensure continuity of the endeavor.