* 9505907
* Nuclear Structure and Metazoan Origins of Replication
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1998
* USD 375,000.00

9505907 Gilbert Successful development of the first cell-free system in which
DNA replication is preferentially initiated at a physiologically utilized origin
of replication has been achieved by this laboratory. These initial observations
will be fully investigated by using a combination of cell and molecular
biological tools to identify the components of nuclear structure that designate
an origin of replication. Specific aims are: 1. To determine if origins of
replication are designate at the time of nuclear assembly, 2. To determine if
pre-designated origins in Gl nuclei are disrupted by a Xenopus early cleavage
mitotic cycle, 3. To determine if the mammalian nuclear membrane is necessary
for site-specific initiation of replication in Xenopus egg extracts. %%% DNA
replication is central to the life cycle of every living organism and, although
much is known about the process in simple organisms, the regulatory mechanisms
in higher eukaryotes are largely unknown. DNA replication initiates within
defined chromosomal loci in eukaryotic cells but naked DNA in systems derived
from metazoan organisms do not have any such requirements. This proposal
describes a novel approach based upon the hypothesis that DNA replication in
metazoan chromosomes is regulated by aspects of nuclear structure that cannot be
easily reconstructed when starting with cloned DNA templates. Cell-free extracts
from Xenopus eggs provide an excellent model system in which to test the
hypothesis that the structural and functional organization of the nucleus is
crucial in regulating DNA replication. *** ??