* 9505886
* Nuclear Excitation by Single-Quantum Annihilation of        Positrons
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Kelvin Lynn, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 10/31/1998
* USD 137,335.00

9505886 Palathingal When the electromagnetic energy released as a positron gets
annihilated in flight with a bound atomic electron in the Coulomb field of the
nucleus, meets the energy criterion for resonance absorption, the excitation of
the nucleus could be a possible result. There are major discrepancies between
the results of calculations of this phenomenon and the available experimental
data. The various experiments conducted so far have all suffered from common
disadvantages. They utilized whole spectra of positrons derived from radioactive
sources and thick targets. Metastable states of the nucleus were studied for
periods of a few life times. The results were not accurate, and were prone to
ambiguities for interpretation. In view of this, experiments have been called
for that would use monoenergetic positrons and thin targets. Such studies will
be undertaken utilizing the Dynamitron at Brookhaven and at ORELA at Oak Ridge
National Lab. Short-lived states will be studied, that would make a continuous-
running beam experiment possible. Thin targets of varied thickness will be used.
Secondary effects that might contribute to the nuclear excitation alongside the
single-quantum annihilation, proposed by differing theoretical models, would be
explored. It is expected that data could be derived that would be accessible for
unambiguous interpretation, and would lead to a clear understanding of the
physical processes underlying the phenomenon. ***