* 9505599
* Structure-Property Relations for Polymer Interfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Glenn Fredrickson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 110,000.00

9505599 Fredrickson With the advent of powerful new surface characterization
techniques, a number of experimental groups have reported on the surface
segregation and wetting behavior of multicomponent polymer blends, as well as
block and random copolymers. Surface energy differences between components are
generally assumed to be responsible for producing the inhomogeneous composition
profiles in such systems. Very recent experiments on model polyolefin blends and
copolymers, however, have shown that a strong correlation exists between
interfacial thermodynamics and the difference in conformational properties
(i.e., backbone flexibilities) of the components, leading to an alternative
entropic explanation for surface segregation. Theoretical calculations based on
the self-consistent field theory of Edwards will be performed to place these
experimental observations on a sound theoretical footing. Besides exploring
surface enrichment in such "conformationally asymmetric" polymer blends and
copolymers with small heats of mixing (e.g., polyolefins), calculations will be
performed to investigate interfacial thermodynamics and wetting behavior in
blends of "architecturally asymmetric" polymers, such as mixtures of linear and
star polymers composed of the same chemical repeat unit. An examination of
surface enrichment is also planned for molten polymer blends that contain star-
block copolymers, and for which broken conformational and architectural
symmetries may compete. The objective of these studies if to develop structure-
property relations that will facilitate the rational design of polymer
interfaces for engineering applications. The theoretical work proposed will be
coordinated with parallel experimental efforts currently underway. %%%
Theoretical research will be conducted on the properties of polymer surfaces. In
particular, the question of why certain types of polymers tend to migrate to the
surfaces of polymer mixtures and solids will be explored. While having
fundamental interest, this problem is also of high technological interest since
it impacts our ability to coat and paint plastics. ***