* 9505963
* Routing and Scheduling of File Transfer in Packet -         Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Rahul Simha, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1998
* USD 55,091.00

9505963 Mao Data traffic in networks has always been dominated by file
transfers. In today's high-volume applications like the Internet bulletin
boards, most files are simple text files. In the future, files are expected to
consist of hypertext documents, with significant audio and video components.
Already, a few seconds of low-quality audio occupy hundreds of kilobytes. These
numbers are indicative of the large sizes of future multimedia files. Other
applications of the future which are thought to involve large file sizes are
those arising from scientific applications, large-scale databases and network-
wide system backups. In this proposal the principal investigators take issue
with the notion that large files should be routed as small files conventionally
are -- by breaking up the file into packets and relying on packet routing
algorithms. They examine and propose to study the problem of scheduling large
file transfers. Past approaches traditionally avoid collecting information
across networks to schedule particular files, simply because the overhead of
doing so overwhelms any benefits accrued in computing optimal schedules.
However, when file sizes are very large and are also known in advance of
transmission, it makes eminent sense to collect information and compute good
schedules, thus utilizing network resources efficiently. The researchers will
formulate a file transfer scheduling problem, argue its importance, assess
shortcomings in the available research on this problem and outline issues for
future research. *** ******* Darleen Fisher Program Manager Networking and
Communications Research Program 4201 Wilson Blvd. Room 1175 Arlington Va 22230
(703) 306-1949 (703) 306-0621 (FAX)