* 9505076
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Settlement Patterns  of the Sola Valley, Oaxaca, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Gary Feinman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Feinman Under the direction of Dr. Gary Feinman, Mr Andrew Balkansky will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an archaeological
survey of the Sola Valley which is located in Oaxaca Mexico. While very little
work has been done in the region, it is known to contain several large sites
which include mounded architecture and carved stelae. Mr. Balkansky and
assistants will aim for 100% coverage of the valley floor. All sites will be
located and surface artifacts such as ceramics and stone tools will be
recovered. On this basis it will be possible to reconstruct the population
history of the valley and determine how settlement and political organization
changed over time. The Oaxaca region is important to archaeologists because of
the prehistoric state which was centered at Monte Alban and which arose there.
Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arise and through
extensive research at the Monte Alban site it is now possible to trace the
development at this core in some detail. However it is also necessary to
understand how this state expanded and to do this one must look at peripheral
areas such as the Sola Valley. The research which Mr. Balkansky will conduct
will shed new light on the process of state formation and the strategies
employed for state expansion and incorporation of new regions. This research is
important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the rise of complex
societies. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and assist in
the training of a promising young scientist.