* 9505450
* Mathematical Sciences:  Applications of Modern Hamiltonian  Mechanics to the Attitude Dynamics of Satellites
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1995,12/31/1996
* J Maddocks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jean Thiebaux
* 12/31/1996
* USD 71,000.00

9505450 MADDOCKS It is proposed to investigate recent progress in advanced
theoretical dynamics within the context of the practical mechanics problems that
arise in the determination and control of the attitude dynamics of artificial
satellites. The project will be carried out in collaboration with Computer
Sciences Corporation (CSC). The underlying motivation is that a postdoctoral
associate could facilitate and exploit a two-way transfer of technology in which
the modern analytical and numerical expertise that is available in the
University, is tested in the light of the expertise available at CSC, namely an
extensive knowledged of traditional mechanics approaches, and of practical
questions that arise in flying satellites. The project will comprise case
studies of specific operational satellites and comparison with actual flight
data. The mathematical techniques that will be considered include applications
of i) the non- canonical Hamiltonian formulation of Arnol'd to predict so-called
gravity-gradient and other perturbation effects on the attitude dynamics of
satellites, ii) modern Hamiltonian formulations of rod models to describe the
dynamics of antennas and booms, and iii) applications of symplectic and energy-
momentum integrator in high accuracy numerical simulations. The associated
physical effects to be investigated will include i) coupling between attitude
and orbit dynamics due to finite satellite size, and internal and external
damping, ii) spin-up dynamics and instability resonances, and especially iii)
effects of flexibility of satellites. The final objective is improved
understanding of the attitude dynamics of satellites that will lead to robust,
efficient and accurate numerical simulations.