* 9505383
* Flora of North America North of Mexico:  Phase III
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Nancy Morin, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 12/31/1998
* USD 920,001.00

Flora of North America (FNA) is a project undertaken by the community of
systematic botanists to provide authoritative, up-to-date information, to a wide
range of users and in a variety of media, on the names, relationships,
characteristics, and distributions of the 20,000 species of plants that grow
outside of cultivation in North America north of Mexico. Flora of North America
presents an assemblage of knowledge resulting from original research as well as
a fresh consideration of any previous studies, including recent experimental
research, field work, study of herbarium specimens, and careful analysis of
previous literature. Particularly important is the unique integration of
knowledge of the taxa throug hout their range in the U.S., Canada, and
Greenland. Many of the treatments present for the first time, and possibly the
only time, knowledge that results form a researcher s lifetime of study of a
group of plants. The treatments also incorporate results of recent research that
otherwise might not have become available to nonspecilalists for many decades.
This project is a binational collaboration between U.S. and Canadian botanists
that has been endorsed by the American Society of Plant Taxonomists, the
American Bryological and Lichenological Society, the Canadian Botanical
Association, and the Botanical Society of America. It is the only research
program to have been so endorsed. Thirty institutions have committed major staff
time and facilities to the successful completion of the Flora, and hundreds of
botanists in the U.S., Canada, and elsewhere are contribution their time and
expertise to the project. Specific products of Flora of North America include
fourteen printed volumes and a CD-ROM, a new relational database, a variety of
Internet- accessible information services, including traditional gopher
services, a full-featured FNA World Wide Web site, WWW/Mosaic interfaces to
online, multimedia publications, and an SQL-compliant Mosaic interface to FNA s
relational data. these products contain data on taxonomic relationships,
toxicity, economic use, and other biologically important information that are
received from specialists, edited by project staff and editorial committee
members, reviewed by taxonomic and regional specialists, and put into final form
for delivery in Internet and in print. Additional and up-dated information is
received form a variety of sources, evaluated by the information management
committee, and integrated into the database. Flora of North America provides a
unified framework for basic and applied research dealing with North American
plants and plant products. Diverse kinds of information that have been carefully
verified by project staff and reviewers are av ailable form a single source in a
uniform format, and differing taxonomic opinions form many widely used
references are reconciled and related to an authoritative standard. Plant
anatomists and morphologists, ecologists, phytochemists, evolutionary
biologists, and molecular biologists in addition to our fellow taxonomists, all
need accurate, complete information in order to circumscribe their studies
appropriately, to select representative taxa for detailed investigations in
large groups, and to interpret their results in relation to the massive body of
data now available for many groups. Information in the database, particularly
when linked with precise locality data found on herbarium specimens, can be
analyzed to discover correlation s among geographical distribution, co-
occurrence with other organisms, genetic relationships, and morphological
chemical attributes. Flora of North America provides a gold mine of information
for further research.