* 9505151
* Mathematical Sciences:  Adaptive Estimation:  New Tools,    New Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* David Donoho, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph M. Rosenblatt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 950,000.00

Proposal: DMS 95- 05151 PI(s): Iain Johnstone - 1981, David Donoho - 1984
Institution: Stanford Title: Adaptive Estimation, New Tools, New Settings
Abstract: The research develops fundamental tools in theoretical statistics to
aid understanding of such adaptive procedures, and shows how to tune them so
they are noise-cognizant and stable. Underlying the approach are a) the idea of
oracles, which know perfectly well how to adapt representations ideally, b) the
idea that the goal of adaptation in the presence of noisy data is to quantify
how closely realizable procedures (which do not have privileged information
about the object) can mimic an oracle, and c) the design of procedures coming as
close as possible to the oracle. The project also develops methods for comparing
different adaptation schemes by comparing oracles of different kinds, for
example time-frequency oracles and time-scale oracles. This is an outgrowth of
our earlier results on wavelets, where this approach was used to show that
wavelets have a property of being nearly-ideally spatially adaptive. In addition
a computational environment is being developed for implementing and
systematically testing such approaches. As a further outgrowth of the proposers'
earlier work on wavelets, the project studies a number of improvements and
extensions of wavelet shrinkage, for example in the directions of
classification, confidence bands, correlated data and selection of orthogonal
bases. This research seeks to develop statistical theory and computational tools
in the general area of adaptive methods of representing and analyzing signals,
images and other objects. On the one hand, this project is prompted by the
extremely high interest in adaptation on the part of people working in fields of
signal processing, image processing, time-frequency analysis, speech processing
analysis. New signal representations appear in these fields almost daily, along
with new principles fo r selecting representations. Such representations are
useful for data compression, which is not the main interest here; but they are
also useful for noise removal and signal interpretation, which are important
areas for statisticians to consider. On the other hand, this project is prompted
by the goal of developing statistical theory which can give clear understanding
of such adaptive schemes. Some of the most highly adaptive schemes being
suggested in signal processing pose a real challenge to traditional statistical
thinking. For example, some adaptation schemes search (either explicitly or
implicitly) through thousands or millions of representations of a signal in
order to arrive at their final result. A statistician, when thinking about
applying such methods to a noisy signal, is by training forced to ask to what
extent the result merely reflects the effects of snooping through noise,
detecting pseudo-structure which actually due to noise, and due to the vigorous
search. The research seeks to develop fundamental tools in theoretical
statistics to aid understanding of such adaptive procedures, and shows how to
tune them so they are noise-cognizant and stable. This project may have two
spin-offs. First, some of the results may be stimulating and/or useful to the
community of ``inventors of adaptive procedures'' in signal, image, speech, and
time/frequency, and related communities. Second, the theoretical work may
stimulate statisticians to take more interest in making further contributions in
such directions.