* 9505498
* Development of Conducting Polymer Ion Selective             Microelectrodes for Use in Environmental and Biomedical     Analyses, US-Egypt Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Paul Bishop, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 35,000.00

Description: This project supports cooperation between Drs. Paul Bishop,
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, and Harry Mark, Department of
Chemistry, at the University of Cincinnati, and Dr. Ahmed G. Abdo, Department of
Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Cairo. The target of the proposed
work will be the analytical applications of conducting polymers as anion and
biological molecule sensors in a 3-electrode set-up and in flow systems, as well
as ion selective electrodes and preconcentration devices. Typical examples of
these applications are in the fields of anion determination for water quality
and pollution control and the determination of some biological molecules of
biomedical and industrial interest. Conducting polymers and functionalized
polymers prepared by chemical and electrochemical synthesis will be used. It is
hoped to develop novel analytical techniques in the fields of anion, cation and
molecular analyses where novel detectors are needed for aqueous environmental
and biomedical samples, which are of primary concern in the U.S. and in Egypt.
Conducting polymer micro-electrodes will also be designed for effective in vivo
analysis in human body fluids and inter- or intra-cellular examinations. The
latter application has not been extensively exploited and productive efforts are
anticipated. Scope: This project will allow a cooperative activity between Dr.
Mark who has expertise in electrochemistry and organic polymers; Dr. Bishop
whose expertise is in biodegradation of toxic organics and transport in
biofilms, and Dr. Abdo who is a recent Ph.D. (from U. Cincinnati) with expertise
in analytical applications of polymers and chemical sensors, as well as
electrochemistry. The project involves a visit by Dr. Abdo to Cincinnati for two
months, and one visit by a US participant to Cairo in each of three years. The
results of the research could have some profound applications, and could lead to
economic and environmental benefits, for both countries. The project meets the
objectives of the Division of International Programs in linking US scientists
with foreign scientists when the expertise and capabilities are complementary,
and where the project could lead to long term collaboration and to mutually
beneficial results.