* 9505982
* Collaborative Research:  ICPMS and Laser Ablation-ICPMS     (LA-ICPMS) for the Determination of Metals in Fluid         Inclusions:  A Pilot Study
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Joaquin Ruiz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/1996
* USD 19,300.00

9505982 Ruiz This proposal intends to evaluate the use of ICPMS and LA-ICPMS for
the determination of trace elements, including rare earth elements (REE) in
fluid inclusions. Preliminary data shown in this proposal suggest that the bulk
leachate analyses of well characterized samples are useful and also indicate
that it is possible to analyze single fluid inclusions by LA-ICPMS. perfecting
these techniques may allow us to directly analyze fluids from various stages of
hydrothermal systems which in turn will further our understanding of the
transport of metals in ore-forming fluids. We will accomplish three main goals
during this study: (1) fully develop the crush-leach ICPMS for analyzing bulk
inclusions for REE and other petrologically and economically important trace
metals, (2) evaluate the full potential of LA-ICPMS for the study of single
fluid inclusions, (3) conduct a detailed ICPMS study on bulk fluid inclusions
and LA-ICPMS study on single fluid inclusions from the Bingham, base metal
porphyry system in order to determine which fluids carried the bulk of the
metals in this system. Bingham was chosen because it is very well studied and
contains large inclusions in quartz. Studies as the one proposed here are needed
to constrain current debates on sources of metals in deposits associated with
silicic magma systems.