* 9505100
* PaleoBank, a Relational Data Base for Paleontology:         Subfamily Muricinae (Gastropoda) and Order Labechiida       (Stromatoporoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Roger Kaesler, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/2000
* USD 268,536.00

This proposal seeks support for two pilot studies to develop and test the
prototype of PaleoBank, an electronic, relational data base for invertebrate
paleontology. Plans for PaleoBank involve its eventually encompassing all
invertebrate organisms with a fossil record or, for extant genera, with a
reasonable likelihood of becoming a part of the fossil record. This effort will
develop and test data-capture software that can be used by taxonomists to enter
information into the data base. PaleoBank will not involve retrofitting outdated
taxonomic information from the literature into an electronic format. Instead, it
will be based on the latest information provided by specialists, who will
contribute information through user-friendly, data-capture software written with
the FoxPro data base management system. PaleoBank will focus on genera, but
contributors will also be encouraged to enter information on species. They will
be required to enter taxonomy, morphology, biostratigraphy, biogeography, and
bibliography. In addition, they will be encouraged to enter a number of kinds of
e cological and environmental information. PaleoBank will be distributed through
such means as World-Wide Web and CD-ROM. Two groups of organisms have been
selected for the pilot studies. The subfamily Muricinae, is perhaps the most
thoroughly studied major group of snails. The other taxon is the order
Labechiida of the class Stromatoporoidea, a group of extinct, calcareous,
spongelike organisms. The research will be important in advancing knowledge in
two ways. First, the number of taxonomic specialists with a synoptic view of the
evolution and systematics of a large group of organisms is rapidly dwindling.
Specialists die, retire, change fields, and narrow the scope of their
investigations to cope with the explosion of knowledge. When it is developed,
PaleoBank will provide a means of capturing the taxonomic knowledge of these
specialists and of allowing a broad range of biologists, paleontologists, and
nonspecialists to use that information in their studies. Second, although the
principal purpose of the proposed research is to develop and test data-capture
software, data bases on the Muricinae and Labechiida will be interesting in
their own right. The muricine snails are important biostratigraphically and
paleoenvironmentally, and a comprehensive data base will facilitate their use in
solving geological problems. Moreover, they occupy a high position in the food
web of reef ecosystems and can be use to assess the deterioration of those
environments as a result of pollutional stress. One of the most active areas of
research in paleontology is the study of mass extinction. The Labechiida, having
survived a major mass-extinction event, can provide important information on the
role of mass extinction in the history of life and the patterns of life s
recovery from such decimating events.