* 9505049
* Mathematical Sciences: Computation of Stability Information and Global Error Estimation with Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 70,000.00

Van Vleck The investigator analyzes the behavior and stability properties of
differential equations under discretization. In particular, methods are
developed for the efficient computation of stability information and global
error estimation for large systems of ordinary differential equations. The
research is focused in two areas. The first area is to determine methods for
accurately computing Lyapunov exponents and related quantities. This includes
analysis of methods and their errors and the development of robust software to
determine not only the Lyapunov exponents but also an estimate of the error in
their computation. The second area is in the study of backward and shadowing
error analysis as a means for characterizing global error when solving nonlinear
differential equations numerically. The investigator applies these concepts to
discrete in space, continuous in time difderential equations that arise in the
biological and physical sciences. The ultimate goal of this project is to
analyze, develop and implement algorithms for the long-time, large-scale
computation of approximate trajectories for systems of lattice differential
equations. While computing trajectories the codes simultaneously obtain global
error estimates and finite time Lyapunov exponents or kinematic eigenvalues and
the associated growth/decay directions. This research is expected to yield
contributions in the areas of dynamical systems, numerical analysis and applied
modeling. The goal of this project is to provide improved accuracy in
simulations of models corresponding to large scale physical and biological
processes. With more accurate simulations these models may be studied in greater
detail and this should lead to improvements in the models. Because of the large
scale nature of the models the investigator employs distributed and parallel
computing environments. The techniques to be used to increase the accuracy of
the simulations rely on mathematical techniques in dynamical systems and
numerical analysis. In particular, the investigator develops techniques that
attempt to isolate the potential for error. He is particularly interested in
determining the directions in which approximate solutions, obtained during
simulations, expand and contract. Additionally, he wishes to determine the rate
at which this contraction and expansion takes place. This allows to determine
which directions in the approximate solution are susceptible to error growth
(i.e. the directions corresponding to expansion) and which directions are less
susceptible to error growth (i.e. the contracting directions). Ultimately, the
contraction and expansion information is to be incorporated into the simulation
software. This information is used to control the error in the simulation and
estimate the final error in the approximate solution. The methods are aimed at
showing that near the approximate solution there exists an exact physical
solution. This may be an exact solution of a slightly different model or an
exact solution for the model being studied but starting from a slightly
different sample.