* 9505228
* Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowship Award
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Wendy Bohrson, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 05/31/1999
* USD 72,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F % @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l &amp; ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; ; o o ; Bohrson, Wendy A. EAR-9505228 This is a carefully
thought-out proposal to document changes in crust and mantle structures during
high-magnitude extension by integrating structural, geochemical, and
geochronological data in a well-exposed section of the Basin-and-Range. Over 4.5
km of volcanic rocks characterized by heterogeneous compositions and structural
histories render the northern Eldorado Mountains of Nevada a remarkable target
for investigating the interdependence of magma composition, magma volume, time,
and extension rates. The data permit the PI to (1) address the genetic link
between extension and magmatism, (2) to quantify the changing roles that crust,
lithosphere, and asthenosphere have during rifting, and (3) document the
magmatic evolution of a continental rift zone. By focusing on a restricted
locality, the approach minimizes the complexities inherent in regional studies
that compare areas with diachronous tectono-magmatic histories. The work will
provide constraints on the evolution of mantle source regions, the contribution
of the crust to magma genesis, and the thermal and chemical consequences of
extension on crust and lithosphere. It represents one of the few studies that
explicitly links rates of extension with changes in eruptive style, magma
volume, and composition, and thus will provide fundamental constraints for
understanding the tectono-magmatic history of areas affected by large-magnitude
extension. Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( %
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Bohrson, Wendy A. National Science Foundation Judy
Hannah @ # @ @ k @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; ; e = e Q &gt; @ @ @ y T X K &gt; &gt;
p Bohrson, Wendy A. EAR-9505228 This is a carefully thought-out proposal to
document changes in crust and mantle structures during high-magnitude extension
by integrating structural, geochemical, and geochronological data in a well-
exposed section of the Basin-and-Range. Over 4.5 km of volcanic rocks
characterized by heterogeneous compositions and structural histories render the
northern Eldorado Mountains of Nevada a remarkable target for investigating the
interdependence of magma composition, magma volume, time, and extension rates.
The data permit the PI to (1) address the genetic link between extension and
magmatism, (2) to quantify the changing roles that crust, lithosphere, and
asthenosphere have during rifting, and (3) document the magmatic evolution of a
continental rift zone. By focusing on a restricted locality, the approach
minimizes the complexities inherent in regional studies that compare areas with
diachronous tectono-magmatic histories. The work will provide constraints on the
evolution of mantle source regions, the contribution of the crust to mag