* 9505910
* Osmoregulation and Contractile Vacuole Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Richard Allen, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 345,000.00

9505910 Allen Osmoregulation is the process by which all cells establish their
water and salt balance keeping the cell's cytosol slightly hypertonic or
isotonic to its external environment. In fresh water protozoa the organelle
generally regarded to be responsible for osmoregulation is the contractile
vacuole complex (CVC) which is thought to secrete a hypotonic solution. However,
as cellular membranes are permeable to water, how these or any cells can
accumulate, store and expel water or hypotonic solution uphill against a
concentration gradient of water remains a paradox. This project studies the
poorly understood CVC organelle system with electrophysiological,
immunocytochemical and cell biological methods. The model organism selected is
Paramecium, a ciliate which offers the advantages (1) of having recognizable and
separate CVC compartments for fluid uptake, fluid transport and fluid
storage/expulsion and (2) of allowing an easy assay for determining total
cellular fluid output. The host laboratory has extensive experience with this
cell and its CVC, having studied in detail its CVC ultrastructure. Monoclonal
antibodies to different parts of the CVC of this ciliate are available from
preliminary work. An understanding of how osmoregulation is achieved in
"primitive" single-celled eukaryotes will establish the fundamental principles
on which multicellular organisms may have fashioned their own osmoregulatory
systems as they evolved. (1) Ion-selective microelectrodes are used to determine
the ionic contents of the in vivo CV fluid. (2) The electrical potential,
capacitance, and ionic conductance of the CV membrane is measured and compared
with the values found for plasma membrane. Membrane ion channels and
electrogenic pump activity are discriminated electrophysiologically and
pharmacologically, usine specific ion channel and pump blockers. Patch-clamping
is used on isolated CV membrane to determine the properties of individual
channels or pum ps. (3) Confirmation that 15 nm "peg" structures represent the
V-type H+ ATPase is made using monoclonal antibodies to specific polypeptides of
the pump. The tubules containing the pump are isolated and characterized using
the techniques of molecular biology. (4) A fluid segregation mechanism is
proposed. The effects of osmotic stress on the CVC is studied to see if these
effects are consistent with the mechanism. The outcome of these studies
contribute to an understanding of the basic mechanism of osmoregulation in this
single-celled fresh- water eukaryote as well as give a start on understanding
CVC regulation and provides a step in the eventual understanding of the path of
evolutionary development of osmoregulation in higher animals. %%% Cells must
maintain their content of salts and water at a concentration which is favorable
for life even though the cells live in a harsh environment. If these
concentrations waver from the norm, the cell will not be able to carry on its
metabolic functions and will die. This project is an exploration of how a single
cell living in fresh water is capable of secreting water to maintain the proper
balance of water and salts. Protozoa have a contractile vacuole system (CVC)
which presumably does this job. However, what is not understood is how the water
is accumulated within this CVC since all membranes including those surrounding
the CVC are permeable to water. One way around the paradox would be for the cell
to pump salts into the CVC to maintain a solution within the CVC equal in salt
concentration to the cell's cytoplasm. In this way water would enter the CVC and
there would be net backflow of water into the c cytoplasm. Both water and salts
would then be secreted from the cell. However, what salts the cell is capable of
continually excreting remains unknown. Thus the investigation is undertaken to
determine what the contents of the CVC are in the fresh water protozoan
Paramecium, thereby determining what the ce ll is excreting through its CVC. (1)
Ion- selective microelectrodes are inserted into a living CVC to measure the
concentration of different ions. (2) Microelectrodes are also used to determine
the electrical potential, resistance, and capacitance of the CVC membrane. Clues
about the types of ion channels and ion pumps driven by the electrical potential
across the membrane will be followed-up with experiments using drugs which block
specific channels or pumps. The biochemistry of individual ion carriers can be
determined using by assaying the electrical properties in an isolated patch of
membrane (patch clamping). (3) Using monoclonal antibodies against pump
components, the identity of the pump can be verified visually. (4) A probable
mechanism of how the CVC works in this protozoa is suggested and tested. This
study gives us clues about how osmoregulation (the balance of salt and water in
cells) is made possible in nature and how this process may have evolved from
"simpler" forms of life to its present state in higher organisms.