* 9505953
* Aqueous Size-Exclusion Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Paul Dubin, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 03/31/1999
* USD 234,646.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program,
involves the continuation of an experimental and molecular modeling research
program studying solute retention phenomena in size exclusion chromatography
(SEC). Professor Paul L. Dubin and his students at the Indiana University -
Purdue University at Indianapolis have selected various model compounds of
defined geometry that are indicative of spherical and asymmetric solutes which
exhibit ideal and non-ideal elution characteristics on porous glass SEC
stationary phases. The impetus of this study is to derive rigorous theoretical
relations which correlate the chromatographic partition coefficient of various
solutes with their size and geometry. In addition, Professor Dubin will
incorporate electrostatic effects to model protein separation by SEC. The
retention characteristics of several highly purified model proteins will be
measured at Superose 12 stationary phases. Electrophoretic light scattering and
capillary zone electrophoresis techniques will also be used to characterize high
molecular weight analytes. Aqueous size exclusion chromatography is commonly
used to assay molecular weight distribution and identify mixtures of complex
synthetic and natural water soluble polymers. Retention order in this technique
is based on the size based partitioning of analyte throughout varying sized
pores of the stationary phase, with those solute having geometries equivalent to
that of the packing being retained longer on the column. However, in cases where
geometric considerations do not solely govern interactions between the solute
and the stationary phase, the retention characteristics of analytes at SEC
stationary phases can be quite different from that of the calibration standard,
which can lead to gross errors in the measurement. Prof. Paul Dubin and his
students at Indiana University will use various model compounds and molecular
modeling algorithms to derive a fundamental retention theory which relates
retention of polymeric solute with solute size.