* 9505941
* North America Research Fellows Program:  The Ecology and    Evolution of Host Use
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* Judith Becerra, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 05/31/1999
* USD 65,387.00

9505941 Becerra This award is under the North American Research Fellows Program,
which enables U.S. scientists and engineers from the United States, Canada and
Mexico, to visit research establishments in one or both of the other two
countries for periods of three to twelve months. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Judith X. Becerra to
work with Dr. Daniel Pinero at Ciudad Universitaria (UNAM) in Mexico. A second
year of support will be provided by the Postdoctoral and Junior Investigator
Research Fellows Program, to work with Dr. Michael Hammer at the University of
Arizona. This research will involve comparison of DNA phylogeny of the
chrysomelid genus Blepharida with the evolution of chemical and morphological
traits of its host, the genus Bursera. The PI will also determine whether
adaptive traits in plants and insects have evolved under each other's evolution
by testing whether the ages of the associated clades of plants and insects are
equivalent. The U.S. portion of the award will be spent estimating the probable
dates of origin of species of Bursera and Blepharida by calculating the rates of
nucleotide substitution in the ITS (Internal Transcribed Spacer) sequences
obtained, following the molecular clock hypothesis. This research will provide
the first evaluation of the significance of plant defensive chemical compounds,
defensive plant morphology, and counterdefensive insect morphology and behavior,
for the evolution of host exploitation by phytophagous insects. ***