* 9505620
* Direct Stability Assessments of Network-Preserving Power    System Models: Analysis, Foundations and Methodology
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Hsiao-Dong Chiang, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 267,065.00

9505620 Chiang Despite its significant progress, the direct method still suffers
from several limitations which prevent it from both off- line and on-line
applications. These limitations may be classified into: modeling limitation,
scenario limitation, function limitation and accuracy limitation. These
limitations must be removed or significantly improved before direct methods can
be actually used by power utilities. A major limitation of direct methods in the
past has been the simplicity of the models used in various direct method
implementations in software programs. Much of this limitation will be overcome
by the work presented in this proposal. The second limitation has been that
direct methods apply to first swing instability only. The proposed project will
enhance direct methods in such a way to provide useful information for
identifying multi-swing unstable cases. A third limitation has been the accuracy
and reliability of direct methods. This limitation will be significantly
improved by the work (BCU method) to be developed in this research for network-
preserving power system models. This proposal seeks, from both computational and
theoretical viewpoints, to remove or improve much of the limitations in direct
methods and make them viable for on-line direct stability analysis of practical
large-scale power systems ***