* 9505678
* Molecular Structure and Function of the Arabidopsis RPM1    Disease Resistance Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Jeffery Dangl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1997
* USD 232,968.00

9505678 Dangl A detailed understanding of the molecular events leading to plant
disease resistance is of both practical importance and basic interest. This
proposal takes complementary genetic and cell biological approaches to dissect
the structure and function of a particular resistance gene, called RPM1, from
the model plant Arabidopsis. Continuing analysis will identify new genes
required for the expression of RPM1-dependent disease resistance. The four
target areas of research are: 1. structure-function analysis of the RPM1
protein, 2. its subcellular localization and topology; 3. the number and nature
of other plant proteins with which it interacts and ; 4. genetic identification
of other loci required for its function. %%% It has long been recognized that
plants contain genes whose function is triggered by the presence of specific and
corresponding genes in particular isolates of infecting pathogens. This "gene
for gene" interaction is responsible for activation of the array of biochemical
and cellular events leading to a disease resistant state. In addition, the
initial recognition event can induce a longer lasting, systemic and pathogen
non-specific immunity" termed systemic acquired resistance. The recent cloning
of several plant disease resistance genes, and the corresponding pathogen genes
which trigger their action, presages fundamental breakthroughs in understanding
the molecular and cellular responses of plant disease resistance. One such plant
gene, RPM1, from the model plant, Arabidopsis, will be analyzed at the molecular
and cellular level. The protein encoded in the gene will be analyzed for its
structure-function, its subcellular localization and topology and the number and
nature of other plant proteins with which it interacts. Other genetic loci
required for its function will be sought. ***