* 9505685
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematical and Experimental       Studies of Blood Flow in Collapsible Carotid Arteries       with Stenoses
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Dalin Tang, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 158,265.00

Arteries with high grade stenoses may collapse under physiological conditions.
The collapse may lead to accelerated fatigue and rupture of the fibrous cap of
the plaque into the bloodstream with subsequent blockage of small arteries
downstream. That can lead directly to heart attacks and strokes. The
investigator and his colleague use mathematical, computational and experimental
methods to study this collapsing process. Mathematical models have been limited
primarily to one-dimensional models because of the difficulty in handling the
collapsing tube, whose shape is unknown and changing. A three-dimensional
nonlinear viscous mathematical model with free moving boundaries is introduced
and a novel numerical method is developed to solve the model. The numerical
method uses solutions of the longwave asymptotic expansions as the numerical
initial condition and a boundary-iterative method to find the unknown moving
boundary and the flow velocity and pressure. Experiments are performed to define
the pressure-area relationship (tube law) for the elastic tube models and to
quantify the exact pressure-flow conditions for tube collapse in a laboratory
set-up. The laboratory experiments and in vivo measurements provide data for the
formulation and verification of the mathematical model. The validated model
together with its numerical solutions form a basis for further investigations of
the collapsing process. Results obtained will be useful for early detection and
prevention of stenoses, identifying the causes of rupture of plaque caps, and
quantifying physiological conditions under which collapse may occur. While
physiological dimensions of the carotid arteries and related parameter ranges
are used in the computations and experiments, the methods developed in this
project will be useful in a broad range of applications where free moving
boundaries are involved. Plaque collecting in an artery can narrow it; this
narrowing is called a stenosis. Just like wat er flowing in a narrowed channel,
the blood will flow faster past a stenosis. In certain conditions, this can
cause the artery to collapse. Then the plaque may break up in the bloodstream
and subsequently block small arteries downstream. That can lead directly to
heart attacks and strokes. The investigators study this collapsing process,
using mathematical, computational and experimental methods. Previous models have
been limited primarily to one-dimensional models because of the difficulty in
handling the collapsing tube, whose shape is unknown and changing. This project
develops a three-dimensional mathematical model that accounts for the blood flow
and the change in shape of the collapsing artery, and a novel numerical method
to solve the model. One of the investigators conducts experiments to determine
the pressure-area relationship (tube law) for the elastic tube models and the
exact pressure-flow conditions for tube collapse in a laboratory set-up. The
laboratory experiments and in vivo measurements provide data for the formulation
and verification of the mathematical model. Results obtained will be useful for
early detection and prevention of stenoses, identifying the causes of pupture of
plaque caps, and physiological conditions under which collapse may occur. The
numerical methods developed in this project will be useful in other applications
where free moving boundaries are involved.