* 9505025
* Survey of the Parasites of Small Mammals of the Sevilleta   National Wildlife Refuge
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Donald Duszynski, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* James Woolley
* 07/31/2000
* USD 378,698.00

The 100,000 ha Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge (SNWR) in central New Mexico
lies in a transition zone that straddles several major biomes of the Southwest:
Great Basin Shrub-Steppe, Mogollon Pinon-Juniper Woodland, Great Plains
Grassland and Chihuahuan Desert. In the past six years (1989-1994),
collaborating with the University of New Mexico s Long Term Ecological Research
(LTER) program, 3,235 rodents (28 species, in 4 families) were collected and
identified from permanent collecting sites on the three major habitat types
(grassland, desert/creosote, woodland) of the SNWR. Hosts were necropsied for
endoparasites (protozoa coccidia , helminths) and some ectoparasites. This
project will identify a nd analyze all the parasites found in these hosts and in
hosts that will continue to be collected during the next three years of this
study. By 1998, the project will have put in place the means to easily identify
and monitor the parasites form all mammalian hosts caught through the year 2000
on the LTER Phase II grant, and into perpetuity on subsequent renewals. The data
to be collected will be unique for several reasons: 1) This will be the first
complete inventory of a natural assemblage of parasites form all mammalian
(rodent) hosts in three different communities, each form a distinctly defined
geographic locality (habitat type) over the period of a decade, and beyond; 2)
This study is part of a multidisciplinary approach to address conceptual issues
of climate change on ecosystem structure and function at multiple scales
(individuals, communities, etc.) and correlative data from these related studies
will strengthen and contribute to the robustness of this data set; and 3) As the
only parasite study on any of the LTER projects nationwide, it will provide an
ideal model, and perhaps incentive, for parallel long-term studies of parasite
communities to be examined in a variety of other habitat types, and form a
variety of different perspectives, at other LTER sites in the network. Upon
completing this work the project team will be able to use these long-term data
to try to understand the dynamics of natural host-parasite assemblages.
Hypotheses then can be erected to test/address at least questions: How do the
different parasite communities colonize, mature, climax and senesce over time
(or do they?)? Do they vary in response to abiotic ( climate change) and/or
biotic (dispersal, colonization) factors? What temporal/spatial scales, and
among what kinds of organisms, do coevolutionary processes influence the
community organization of these parasites? Studies of the dynamics of multiple,
coexisting species are confined primarily to microtine rodents and have hinted
that multiannual cyc les tend to be synchronous (Brown and Heske 1990). Are
similar patterns seen for parasites of our desert rodents? Answers to these
questions relating to community structure, as well as to questions concerning
parasite biodiversity on the SNWR, can be addressed partially or completely by
the information gathered on the parasite species infecting rodents collected on
the SNWR. Initial emphasis of the work will be on identifying all the parasites
collected, by processing to completion what will eventually be 9 consecutive
years of parasite data, and on training the undergraduate and graduate students
involved in the art of taxonomy and nomenclature of parasitic protozoans and
helminths, to begin to supply some of these answers.