* 9505760
* Determination of the Role of Molybdenum and Nitrogen on the Conditions Inside Occluded Corrosion Sites In Stainless     Steels
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Robert Kelly, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 06/30/1999
* USD 219,098.00

DMR-9505760, PI-Kelly: This represents a new approach to the understanding of
occluded cell chemistry in localized corrosion. An advanced solution analysis
technique, capillary electrophoresis, is employed that is capable of detecting
nanogram quantities of a wide variety of ions in small solution volumes. The
combination of this high sensitivity and the ability to determine the ionic
speciation (e.g., sulfur as sulfide versus thiosulfate) makes capillary
electrophoresis a valuable tool in understanding solution chemistry and
electrochemistry which have impact on corrosion resistance. By using this
technique to probe the progression of the solution chemistry within occluded
cells, new insights into the fundamental processes controlling corrosion pit
initiation and propagation are possible. Ion sensitive field effect transistors
(ISFETs), capable of measuring pH changes over a wide range, allow the
spatiotemporal variations in pH inside occluded sites to be followed with sub-mm
and sub-sec resolutions. By combining these techniques, the local conditions
inside occluded sites on stainless steels is measured in unprecedented detail.
The experimental work is coordinated with the development of an improved
mathematical description of the development and maintenance of occluded site
chemistry. ***Such understanding will have a major impact on the development of
strategies for the prevention and mitigation of pitting, crevice corrosion and
stress-corrosion cracking. This work has a wide variety of potential
applications including aging aircraft and long-term storage of high-level
nuclear waste.***