* 9505745
* Spatial Geometric Constraint Solving Using Constructive     Geometry and Homotopy Continuation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Elisha Sacks, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1999
* USD 263,367.00

The project develops the theory and implementation of a practical spatial
geometric constraint solver that integrates symbolic methods from constructive
geometry with numerical methods from homotopy continuation theory. Geometric
constraint solvers are a key component in modern Mechanical Computer-Aided
Design systems, and offer a critical technology for increased productivity,
rapid response manufacturing, and agile manufacturing. Effective solvers exist
for planar constraints, but spatial problems of moderate size exceed the
capabilities of many research solvers. The solver being developed will cover the
broad class of problems specified by distance, angle, and incidence constraints
among points, lines, and planes. It will solve small problems interactively and
problems of moderate size in a few seconds. Using a constraint graph whose nodes
represent elements and whose edges represent constraints, a constraint analysis
will decompose the constraint problem into a series of small construction
problems that can be solved efficiently using preprocessing. Elementary
constructions will be carried out algebraically, more complex construction steps
by homotopy continuation. The hybrid algorithm combines the robustness and
completeness of symbolic methods with the uniformity and efficiency of numerical
methods.