* 9505523
* U.S.-Russian Cooperative Research on SO2 and Trace Metal    Fluxes from Kudriavy Volcano, Kurile Islands (Russia)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Stanley Williams, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 07/31/1997
* USD 29,350.00

9505523 Williams This U.S.-Russian Cooperative Research grant is for "SO2 and
Trace Metal Fluxes from Kudriavy Volcano, Kurile Islands (Russia)" is between
Dr. Stanley Williams of Arizona State University and Russian scientists from:
the Institute of Experimental Mineralogy (Moscow), the Institute of Volcanic
Geology and Geochemistry (Petropavlask-Kamchatsky), and the Institute of
Volcanology and Geodynamics (Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk). Kudriavy volcano is a perfect
location of studying metal fluxes from magmas due to its extremely high fumarole
temperature (up to 940 C), strong gas flux, common calc-alkaline andesitic
composition, and the lack of a hydrothermal system which would interact with the
magmatic gases to change their composition. Studying metal fluxes at these
purely magmatic high temperature conditions will help further to constrain the
mass of metals degassing from calc-alkaline magma bodies, in general. The
research will: (1) measure SO2 flux by COSPEC and determine rare metal fluxes;
(2) direct fumarole gas sampling to determine the isotopic composition of O, H,
S, C, N, and He in highly magmatic, arc type volcanic gases and investigate the
effects of temperature on the isotopic compositions; (3) make inferences on the
ultimate origins of the rare metals using obtained data; and (4) measure SO2
flux from other volcanoes nearby on the Kurile Arc: Baranski, Ivan Grozniy, and
Burevestnik. This proposed research in geological sciences fulfills the program
objectives of advancing science by enabling leading experts in the U.S. and
Russia to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. The workshop will also be used to promote
the interest of graduate and undergraduate students in particle physics. ***