* 9505480
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Mechanism of   Fermi Level Pinning at Metal-Semiconductor Nanojunctions    Fabricated by STM Tip
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,09/30/1996
* William Tong, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/1996
* USD 40,300.00

9505480 Tong The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral Fellows
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. William M. Tong to work with Dr. Paolo
Perfetti at the Instituto di Struttura della Materia in Italy. The goal of this
proposal is to fabricate metal- semiconductor conductor junctions of atomic
scale and probe their electronic structure as a function of their sizes and
other parameters. The tool to perform these experiment is the scanning tunneling
microscopy (STM). Small islands of most metals can be deposited by field
ionizing metal atoms from a pretreated tungsten tip. The electronic structure of
these junctions is investigated by scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS), which
is essentially the IV curve of the islands. This study will not only allow
exploration of the relatively uncharged area of nano-island deposition, but it
will also help gain a better understanding of the Fermi Level (FL) pinning
mechanism in the near-atomic limit by mapping out how the density of states
(DOS) evolves as a function of island size, local defects, dopant levels, and
other factors. ***