* 9505562
* Practical Techniques for the Design, Specification,         Verification, and Implementation of Concurrent Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Philip Lewis, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 02/29/2000
* USD 308,036.00

Over the past decade, researchers have developed tools that offer automated
support for applying formal methods to the design and analysis of concurrent
software systems. In principle, these tools allow system designers to utilize
formal system verification techniques without requiring them to know all the
details of the underlying mathematical theories. In practice, however, the
impact of the tools has been limited because of the relatively small scale of
the problems they can handle and because of their lack of support for more
traditional development methods for software, such as structured design
techniques, simulation, and debugging. This research project aims at extending
the applicability of existing automated formal techniques for concurrent systems
to problems of real-life scale and complexity. The focus is on two broad issues:
(1) increasing the efficiency and scalabity of existing approaches; and (2)
enhancing the usability of existing techniques by integrating them with more
traditional software development methods. More specifically, it seeks to develop
advanced state-space management techniques for checking system specifications
against logical properties expressed in the modal mu-calculus, and techniques
for graphically conveying diagnostic information for systems that fail to meet
their logical specifications. The impact of the research is being assessed by
analyzing several real-life applications, such as sliding-window communications
protocols and cache coherency protocols for distributed shared memory. This
research builds on the investigators' prior work on the Concurrency Factory, an
integrated toolset for specification, simulation, verification, and
implementation of concurrent systems. *** _