* 9505888
* Hydrogen Bonding and Proton Transfer:  A Cooperative Ab     Initio Quantum Chemical and Matrix Isolation Experimental   Study
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Janet Del Bene, Youngstown State University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 07/31/1999
* USD 316,000.00

Professor Janet E. Del Bene at the Department of Chemistry, Youngstown State
University, and Professor Willis B. Person at the Department of Chemistry, the
University of Florida, are supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program at NSF. This support is for a joint theoretical
and experimental research program to systematically study the intermolecular
interactions in a number of hydrogen bonded complexes. Professor Del Bene is
determining very accurate ab initio wavefunctions for the complexes and using
these wavefunctions to obtain structures, binding energies, and vibrational
frequencies. Professor Person is performing measurements of the infrared spectra
for these complexes in solid rare gas matrices. The theoretical and experimental
efforts are closely coupled and coordinated and this joint effort provides a
level of understanding of the infrared spectra and bonding properties that could
not be achieved by either effort alone. The focus of the work supported by this
grant is to elucidate the structural and vibrational properties of complexes
with strong hydrogen bonds. A range of strengths of the proton donors and
acceptors are systematically considered for the complexes being studied.
Hydrogen bonding is an extremely important phenomenon which occurs widely; it
determines the properties of a large number of systems ranging from condensed
water to complex biomolecules. Despite extensive studies of hydrogen bonding,
there are important open questions about the significance and interpretation of
the experimental infrared spectra and about the theoretical understanding of the
bonding character. In particular, there are questions about the degree of proton
transfer in a given complex and the consequences of this transfer for properties
of the complex. Professors Del Bene and Person are bringing special
qualifications to resolve these difficult questions especially because they are
able to directly relate Professor Person's experimental observations to
Professor Del Bene's theoretical characterization of the bonding character.