* 9505075
* Mathematical Sciences:  Stein's Method and the Zero Bias    Transformation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Larry Goldstein, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 06/30/1997
* USD 79,000.00

9505075 Goldstein Abstract In the past two decades, Stein's method has become an
increasingly valuable tool for obtaining bounds for distributional
approximations of certain sums of dependent random variables by the normal or
Poisson. The investigators propose to explore a new distributional
transformation, coined the ``zero bias transformation,'' and an associated new
coupling that may be used in conjunction with Stein's method for obtaining
bounds to the normal for sums of random variables having particular dependence
structures. The new coupling can be used to shed light on certain questions
where previous methods have yielded only an incomplete picture. In addition,
when approximating the sum of symmetric dependent random variables, or those
having vanishing third moment, the zero bias coupling is natural and promises to
yield smaller bounds on the approximation error. The zero bias technique has
numerous potential applications to cases of both local and global dependence,
for instance, to nonlinear sampling and rank statistics. Moreover, the zero bias
transformation may be defined for general random objects such as random measures
and diffusions, with applications to Empirical Central Limit Theorems for
dependent observations, and a process treatment of the Wald Wolfowitz theorem.
The normal curve is used extensively in a variety of statistical applications,
such as when sampling a large lot of goods for quality control, or in opinion
polling. In real situations the normal curve is often only an idealization of
something too difficult to compute. In the context of sampling, better accuracy
of the normal approximation comes with larger sample sizes, but sampling is
typically expensive or time consuming. Therefore, it is useful to have an idea
of how well the normal curve approximates the true situation for small and
realistic sample sizes. The normal curve approximation also appears in a variety
of other, often more complex, statistical contexts. There exist a number of
approaches for assessing the accuracy of the normal approximation, each best
suited to a particular need. In adding to these techniques, the investigators
are developing a new method which improves on those existing, for some
situations. For instance, use of the new method, applied in the sampling
context, would result in more reliable statistical conclusions drawn from
realistic samples.