* 9505418
* Compact, Low-Noise, Diamond Dynodes
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,12/31/2000
* George Brandes, Advanced Technology Materials, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 12/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

*** Brandes 9505418 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
exploring a low-noise, high-gain dynode useful for incorporation into a low-
cost, high-performance photomultiplier tube (PMT). PMTs have unmatched
sensitivity for visible or ultraviolet wavelengths. Existing PMTs, however, are
inadequate or prohibitively expensive for many applications where sensitivity
and gain must be combined with stability and reduced noise requirements. Phase I
showed that semiconducting diamond's unique properties could be exploited to
create a low-noise, high-gain dynode for PMTs. It was found that unoptimized
boron-doped diamond has high secondary electron yields, the electron emission
energy is low, the electron energy distribution is small, the yield is unaltered
by air exposure, and the lifetime is equivalent to conventional dynodes.
Further, semiconducting diamond won't charge unlike some conventional materials.
Phase II will optimize the growth of diamond for secondary electron emission
applications and clarify the electron transport and emission mechanisms. In
collaboration with a PMT manufacturer, this phase of the project will be
directed toward design, development and testing of a low-cost, high-performance
photomultiplier tube incorporating diamond dynodes. Phase III, activities will
focus on scaling up the process to enable volume production of the diamond based
photomultiplier tubes. The commercial applications for photomultiplier tubes and
other electron multipliers are many, including medical applications and imaging,
oil well logging, pollution monitoring, nuclear and high energy physics, and
spectroscopy. Availability of low-cost, high-performance, diamond-based PMTs
would increase their use in a wide variety of such applications. ***