* 9505083
* U.S.-Argentina Workshop:  Molecular Cell Biology of         Endocytosis and Intracellular Transport; Mendoza, Argentina,October 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Philip Stahl, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1996
* USD 41,585.00

95005083 Stahl This U.S.-Argentina Workshop award supports travel expenses of
the P.I., Dr. P. Stahl, Washington Univ. , Saint Louis, MO., five other senior
scientists, and three post-doctoral fellows to the workshop which will be held
at the Universidad de Cuyo, Mendoza, Argentina, in October, 1995. Travel
expenses will also be provided for five South- American Fellows, from countries
that are not covered under bilateral agreements with NSF. Some expendable
supplies and services related to the workshop will also be covered. The
Argentine co- organizer is Dr. Luis Mayorga of the Universidad de Cuyo, Mendoza;
other Argentinean scientists involved in the workshop are Drs. Lopez and Sosa,
also from the Univ. of Cuyo, and Dr. Maccioni, from Cordoba University. Over the
past decade significant progress has been made in the understanding of the
cellular and molecular basis of intracellular transport. Fundamental processes,
such as secretion, endocytosis and mitosis, processes requiring selective and
specific membrane fusion events, are increasingly open to study. Applications of
new techniques to a variety of cellular systems, both in plants and animals
provides unique opportunities to further expand the level of understanding of
vesicular transport. The workshop will provide a unique opportunity to explore
these developments, by gathering a small group of scientists from several
laboratories from North and South America to exchange ideas about their work on
the cell and molecular biology of intracellular transport. The workshop will
substantially enhance and extend a very productive international collaboration
between U.S. and Argentinean scientists, as well as scientists from other Latin
American countries. The workshop will also provide an opportunity to engender
long term interactions among faculty and students. This is particularly
attractive, since the students will be, for the most part, in the formative
years of their training, and wi ll be in an optimal position to benefit from
potential international exchange. ***