* 9505474
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Synthesis      Characterization, and Catalytic Testing of Ti-and           V-Metallosilicates
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Eric Lowenthal, Individual Award
* Fixed Amount Award
* Susan Parris
* 12/31/1996
* USD 34,764.00

9505474 Lowenthal The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral Fellows
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Eric E. Lowenthal to work with Dr. Paul
Ratnasamy of the National Chemical Laboratory in Pune, India. The initial
research under this award will focus on the evaluation of Ti- and
V-metallosilicates, specifically, the larger pore materials, V-NCL-1 and
amorphous titanosilicates, for the catalytic, gas-phase partial oxidation of
propylene using molecular oxygen diluted in an inert gas such as argon or
helium. Experiments to assess the activity and product selectivity of these
catalysts, as well as to collect reaction data suitable for micro kinetic
analysis of relative reaction rates will be carried out in fixed-bed
microreactors. Product identification and analysis will be carried out using a
combination of gas chromotography and mass spectrometry. The production of
deeper oxidation products than epoxides such as alcohols, aldehydes, and ketones
will be of scientific and industrial interest. Such products could indirectly
establish the nature of the surface intermediates in the propylene-oxygen
reaction network on these metallosilicate materials. The nature of the partial
oxidation product slate could direct readily implemented catalyst or reaction
condition modifications. ***