* 9505461
* Mathematical Sciences:  Workshop on Bayesian Statistics     in Science and Technology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Nozer Singpurwalla, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1997
* USD 15,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9505461 PIs: Robert Kass, Constantine Gatsonsi, James Hodges,
Nozer Singpurwalla Institution: Carnegie Mellon University Title: Bayesian Case
Studies Workshop, October 1995 Abstract: The symposium entitled ``Bayesian
Statistics in Science and Technology: Case Studies III'' held at Carnegie-Mellon
University in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, includes extended presentations of
applications of Bayesian methods. These applications are in problems in which
the statistician is an integral member of the research team. The objectives of
the symposium are to: (1)identify and focus attention on specific implementation
and theoretical problems that hinder applications of Bayesian methods, and to
identify candidate solutions; (ii) provide a forum in which the interplay
between statistical theory and practice will be explored in the context of
concrete research projects; (iii) provide a small-meeting atmosphere within
which junior investigators and graduate students can explore substantial
Bayesian applications with experienced researchers; and (iv) produce a volume
containing well-documented case studies and data sets suitable for use by
researchers, practitioners, educators and students of applied statistics and
other quantitative fields. Today there are increasing amounts of background
information available to scientists undertaking an investigation. It is
important to utilize previousknowledge effectively in designing studies and
analyzing data. Bayesian statistical methods are tailored to this purpose. There
have been many recent advances in Bayesian statistical theory and computation,
but scientific meetings rarely spend substantial time discussing successful
applications of these methods to substantive scientific problems. This symposium
concentrates attention solely on applications of Bayesian statistics. The
application areas range from economics to population biology . The result will
be the elucidation of the interplay between theory and practice and the
identification of successful methods that will point to important directions for
future research. The interactions and dynamics of the workshop will be captured
and disseminated via video tape and in the more traditional written form of a
conference proceedings.