* 9505956
* Ampermetric Biosensor Based on Oxidoreductases "Wired" with  Redox Macromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Adam Heller, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 05/31/1998
* USD 388,000.00

This research project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program, targets the development of direct amperometric affinity electrodes for
application as immunosensors and DNA probes. These devices will expand the newly
created class of biosensors based on "wired" redox macromolecules. In these
amperometric sensors, substrates selectively undergo electron transfer with
redox proteins which in turn undergo electron exchange with amperometric
electrodes. "Wiring" of redox processes is accomplished through immobilization
of enzymes at electrodes in an imidazole-substituted polyacrylamide hydrogel
containing coordinated osmium wherein substrate analytes are afforded easy
access to enzyme sites, and electron exchange between enzyme and electrode is
mediated by the redox polymer. Increased analytical sensitivity derives from the
use of both high-turnover enzymes and highly efficient mediation of electron
exchange between enzyme and electrode. Specific goals to be pursued by Professor
Heller and his students during the tenure of this three-year grant include
bringing electrochemical DNA sensing to a level of sensitivity that will obviate
the need for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of the probed
sequence, and surpassing the speed of present PCR methodology through enhanced
mass transport in the hydrogel of the amperometric biosensor. The development of
more rapid, sensitive, and selective techniques for detecting and quantifying
biomolecules is broadly important to fundamental disciplinary and technological
advances. Through synergistic combination of fundamentals of biochemistry,
biophysics, materials chemistry, inorganic chemistry, and electrochemistry, new
biosensors will be developed which have selectivity and sensitivity
characteristics that exceed current methodology.