* 9505644
* Biochemical Analysis of PHO5 Gene Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Paul Laybourn, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 309,750.00

This research will investigate the function of the core histones in the
regulation of RNA polymerase II transcription. Many, if not most, transcription
regulatory mechanisms may be fully manifest only in a chromatin context. Core
histones in the form of nucleosomes repress transcription. Recent genetics
studies indicate that core histones are directly involved in RNA polymerase II
transcription regulation. The mechanism of transcription regulation on a
chromatin template will be investigated using Pho4p transcription factor
activation of the yeast PHOS promoter as a model. Results from these studies
will provide a more precise understanding of the role of the core histones in
the mechanisms that determine whether a gene is active or repressed. Depletion
of core histones in vivo causes the derepression of transcription of the yeast
PHO5, GAL 1, and CYC 1 genes. Previous studies of PHO5 gene regulation have
provided important clues to the mechanism of transcription regulation on
chromatin. However, these studies have all been carried out in vivo. A more
complete understanding o f the mechanism requires biochemical analysis. This
laboratory is the first to have purified yeast core histones in large enough
quantities for biochemical investigation of their role transcription regulation.
These histones have been used to reconstitute nucleosomal templates, restoring
repression of basal transcription to the PHO5 promoter. Thus, this laboratory is
in a unique position to undertake these analyses. This research will: (1)
Reconstitute transcription activation from the PHO5 promoter. In vitro
transcription will be reconstituted from recombinant and purified yeast basal
transcription factors and purified Pho4p and Pho2p, and these systems will be
used to reconstitute basal and activated PHO5 transcription. (2) Determine the
degree of PHO5 basal transcription repression by reconstituted nucleosomes.
Nucleosomes will be reconstituted on the PHOS promoter using purified
components. The levels of basal transcription between naked DNA and chromatin
templates will be compared, and the relation between TATA-box and RNA start site
accessibility and transcription activity on chromatin templates will be
determined. (3) Investigate the ability of Pho4p to counteract nucleosome
repression of the PHO5 promoter. Nucleosomes will be reconstituted onto the PHO5
promoter, and the factor requirement will be determined for Pho4p to counteract
nucleosome repression. The level of PHO5 activation will be compared on naked
and chromatin templates. * * * 9506255 Richter This research addresses the
relationship between the structure, function and regulation of the ATP synthase
enzyme. This allosteric enzyme reversibly utilizes the energy of a transmembrane
proton gradient to synthesize ATP. The long term goal of the research is to
contribute toward an understanding of the mechanism of the energy transduction
process and to understand how this enzyme is regulated under physiological
conditions in plants and animals. Prior NSF funding has led to: 1) Cloning and
over-expression of all five subunits of the catalytic F1 portion of the
chloroplast ATP synthase (CF1); 2) Recovery of the subunits from bacterial
inclusion bodies and refolding them into their native, active forms; and 3)
Reconstituting them into a functional F1 complex. Further studies will utilize
this system to genetically engineer CF1 subunits for analyzing regions of
functional importance, and to examine functional dynamics of subunits during the
catalytic process using biochemical and biophysical techniques. This proposal
describes a collaborative multidiciplinary approach focusing on the structure
and function of the three smaller CF1 subunits, )and (. Genetic engineering
experiments will involve: 1) Site-directed mutagenesis studies to probe the
functional and structural importance of different regions of the polypeptide
chains via replacement or deletion of specific amino acids or sequences of amino
acids; 2) Studies of subunit dynamics through attachment of intrinsic
(tryptophans) and extrinsic (via cysteine residues) fluorescent probes to
specific sites on the ( ( and ( subunits. Labeled subunits will be reconstituted
with CF1 deficient in these subunits for fluorescence studies aimed at (a)
structural mapping of subunits within the CF1 complex using fluorescence
resonance energy transfer measurements and (b) monitoring subunit dynamics
during catalytic turnover by the enzyme by monitoring the time- dependent
anisotropy of intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescent probes; 3) Chemical
crosslinking studies involving attachment of bifunctional chemical crosslinking
agents at various engineered sites within the ( and ( subunits. Mutant subunits
will be reconstituted with the other CF1 subunits and with the membrane-bound
proton channel portion (CF0) of the enzyme for chemical crosslinking studies
aimed at identifying the sites of interaction between CF1 and CF0 subunits. %%%
This research addresses the relationship between the chemical structure and
biological function of the ATP synthase enzyme of plant chloroplast membranes.
This enzyme is responsible for the conversion of the energy from sunlight into
the chemical storage form. ATP (adenosine triphosphate). ATP in turn supplies
the energy for the conversion of carbon dioxide into sugar in plants. Analogous
enzymes supply more than 90% of the ATP required for energy-dependent metabolic
processes in animals and bacteria. The long term goal of the research described
in this proposal is to identify, at the molecular level, how the ATP synthase
enzymes capture energy and convert it into ATP. We intend to approach this goal
by genetically engineering the ATP synthase so as to probe the importance of
specific sites within the enzyme for the energy conversion (catalytic) process.
Some of the genetically engineered sites will provide sites for attachment of
chemical probes which will be used to identify specific events involving changes
in the structure of the enzyme which occur during the catalytic process.
Attachment of other chemical probes to genetically engineered sites will allow
us to cross-link (tether) pieces of the enzyme together so that we can identify
specific sites of protein-protein interaction which occur within the enzyme and
which are important for catalysis. A thorough understanding of this very
efficient natural energy conserving process will potentially lead to the design
and implementation of vastly improved energy storage and utilization processes
or human use.