* 9505668
* A Massively Parallel Population-Based Approach to           Operations Scheduling
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Mohammad Shahidehpour, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 72,687.00

9505668 Ramesh The operations scheduling problem concerns the scheduling of
generating units in the most economic manner subject to several constraints. The
problem is to identify which units should be ON (committed) in each our over a
period of time ranging from a day to a week, and to determine the generation
level of each committed unit in each hour. The main difficulty in solving the
problem is that it is a large mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP)
problem, and is compute-intensive. Because of this, the algorithmic techniques
currently employed do not model many relevant constraints, and use several
approximations which lead to suboptimal solutions. The main objectives of this
research are: a) to investigate and develop a new population-based optimization
technique for MINLP problems, and b) to use a comprehensive model encompassing
most, if not all, relevant constraints for the operations scheduling problem.
The new combinatorial optimization technique that we will explore in this
research is a decomposition methodology that evaluates a population of
solutions, in parallel, for each subproblem of the over-all problem. The
approach will be applied to solve a comprehensive model of the operations
scheduling problem. We will investigate the complexity and optimality of the
proposed technique. ***