* 9505469
* Formalizing Software Specifications and Requirements in     Higher-Order Logic
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Carl Gunter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 135,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop theory, tools, and methods needed to
carry out formal specifications of large software systems. The approach is to
formalize the Jackson/Zave (J/Z) specification techniques using an extension of
the Higher-Order Logic (HOL) interactive theorem-proving system. This project
focuses on the theoretical and design issues that this entails for HOL, and the
methodological implications for the J/Z approach. The research explores ideas
from research on polymorphism and module systems for programming languages,
applying them to HOL theories. The J/Z method has been used to provide a
specification of the AT&amp;T 5ESS switch using a first-order model-based
approach. HOL has been used for substantial hardware and software specification
and verification projects such as the Viper Chip and the dynamic semantics of
the Standard Meta- Language (SML). This research explores the possibility that
realizing the J/Z method within HOL can provide a basis for user level
validation and, more generally, for formal verification of software. The project
is conducted as a joint academic/industrial enterprise drawing on research in
logic, type theory, and semantics at the University of Pennsylvania, and
research in interactive theorem proving, application software, and specification
techniques at AT&amp;T Bell Labs.