* 9505810
* RUI: Ubiquitin Mediated Degradation of Picornavirus         Processing Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Thomas Lawson, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F t 9 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t f! O b j e
c t P o o l ıW 9 ıW 9 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ;
Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen jack cohen @ x7 9 @ O
e = e f! C I K K K i T &gt;! ( I I / Thomas G. Lawson MCB 9505810 PRIVATE The
genomes of picornaviruses encode a single large polyprotein, which is
synthesized upon infection of the host cell. This polyprotein is processed into
individual functional proteins by a series of specific cleavages, most of which
are catalyzed by a protein designated as the 3C protease, which resides in the
polyprotein. The 3C protease of the encephalomyocarditis (EMC) virus has been
found to be rapidly turned over, and it has been shown that this degradation is
carried out, at least in vitro, by the ubiquitin mediated proteolytic system.
This system, which appears to be responsible for the rapid turnover of a number
of key regula tory cellular proteins in eukaryotes, has yet to be completely
characterized, and very few natural substrates have thus far been discovered.
The identification of the EMC virus 3C protease as a substrate for rapid,
ubiquitin- mediated proteolysis means that this protein can be used both as a
model for the study of rapid viral protein degradation and for studies of
important questions about how proteins are recognized by the ubiquitin mediated
system. The project proposed here will examine in detail the biochemical
mechanisms by which ubiquitin mediated degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease
occurs, with the primary overall goal being to obtain information which might
contribute to the understanding of how proteins are recognized by enzymes of the
ubiquitin- mediated system. This will be accomplished by preparing site specific
and deletion mutants of the 3C protease coding sequence. A rabbit reticulocyte
system will be employed to test whether the altered, in vitro synthesized
proteins can serve as substrates for ubiquitin mediated degradation. This will
lead to the identification of a specific, previously unrecognized, protein
"degradation" signal. A protein affinity technique will be employed to purify,
from reticulocyte preparations, what is probably a novel ubiquitin system enzyme
which recognizes the EMC virus 3C protease, presumably by binding to the
degradation signal. Other proteins of the ubiquitin system which have been
purified by other researchers will also be tested for their potential
involvement in the degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease. These experiments
will contribute to the understanding of how the ubiquitin mediated proteolytic
system functions. Other proposed experiments will be directed toward determining
whether the in vivo degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease is ubiquitin
mediated, and whether this degradation is necessary for efficient replication of
the virus to take place. The stability of this mutated 3C protease in cultured
mouse cells will be tested, and this will show whether degradation in vivo
requires the ubiquitin system. The possibility that the poliovirus 3C protease
is also degraded by the ubiquitin mediated system will be tested. It will be
determined if cultured human cell cytoplasmic extracts can support the
degradation of the poliovirus 3C protease in a ubiquitin dependent manner. A
positive result here would support the notion that all picornavirus 3C proteases
are substrates for the ubiquitin- mediated proteolytic system. %%% Most short
lived proteins in eukaryotes appear to be degraded by a system which selectively
targets them for destruction through the attachment of the small protein
ubiquitin. Very little is known about how this system actively selects only
certain proteins. One major goal of this project is to explore how the ubiquitin
system interacts with and targets a rapidly degraded protein, the 3C protease,
which is produced by the encephalomyocarditis (EMC) virus during infections of
host cells. Attempts are underway to both locate particular structural features
which cause this protein to serve as a substrate for ubiquitin mediated
degradation, and to identify the specific components of the ubiquitin system
which are involved. It is likely this knowledge will help explain how other
unstable proteins are rapidly degraded. A second question this project seeks to
answer is whether the rapid degradation of the EMC virus 3C protease is
necessary for the replication of the virus. This may represent a novel means by
which virus life cycles are regulated. Finally, the 3C protease of poliovirus is
being evaluated as a potential substrate for ubiquitin mediated degradation,
which will help to determine if instability is a common feature of all 3C
protease type proteins. *** @