* 9505806
* Characterization of Nitrogen Dioxide Derived Polypeptide    Adducts
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Darryl Hood, Meharry Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1996
* USD 38,750.00

9505806 Hood This research is based on the hypothesis that the chronic effect of
NO2 on protein structure and function is due, in part, to the reaction of this
oxidant pollutant with specific basic amino acid side chains and that such
reactions are potentiated by formation of oxidant radicals resulting from the
peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Preliminary data suggest
that NO2 reacts with the E-amino group of lysine residues and with the amide
nitrogen of surface exposed lysine and arginine residues in the polypeptide
backbone which can result in polypeptide bond cleavage. In vitro NO2 exposures
of a series of decapeptides followed by exposures of recombinant 1-PI (a 53kDa
protein which protects the critical structural protein, elastin, from
proteolysis by elastase) will be performed to determine the susceptibility of
these polypeptides to pollutant oxidants. NO2 exposures of selected decapeptides
and of proteins, followed by exposures of inhibitors and unsaturated
hydrocarbons as well as membrane entrapped inhibitors analyzed by Electrospray
Ionization Mass Spectrometry, 15N-NMR, 13C15N-NMR, and 1H-NMR and Gas
Chromatography will identify specific NO2 derived adducts. These studies will
also determine whether the autoxidation of unsaturated fatty acids contributes
to polypeptide inactivation. The in vitro exposure studies will be conducted
using well defined systems, providing accurate quantitation and biochemical
characterization. The target molecules chosen are relevant to the mechanistic
study of conformational transitions in proteins as a result of oxidant exposure.
%%% Nitrogen dioxide (NO2), and its associated NO (x) (nitroxide) species are
examples of atmospheric pollutants derived from fossil fuel combustion and
cigarette smoke. Combustion processes initially produce nitric oxide, which is
then oxidized in the atmosphere to the much more reactive NO2 species. This
photochemical process is responsible for the daily variations i n nitroxide
concentrations in large metropolitian areas. Very little effort has been
directed at the possibility that oxidants, such as NO2, may directly alter the
structure of proteins. Based on the oxidation-reduction potential of NO2 in
neutral aqueous solutions, it has been postulated that NO2 exhibits a high
degree of selectivity among the molecular constituents of living cells. This
research will examine the effects of NO2 exposure on selected peptides and
proteins. Structural changes will be determined and the susceptibility of these
protein structural changes to different conditions of oxidant exposure will be
evaluated. ***