* 9505411
* SBIR PHASE II:  Adaptation and Extension of Diffuse         Reflectance Spectroscopy for Commercialization
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,02/29/2000
* James Worthington, THERMIONICS NORTHWEST INC
* Standard Grant
* Muralidharan Nair
* 02/29/2000
* USD 276,882.00

*** 9505411 Worthington This Small Business Innovation Research Phase 11 project
will conduct the necessary research required to produce the Diffuse Reflectance
Spectroscopy (DRS) technology for use as semi-conductor wafer temperature
measurement. Phase I successfully demonstrated the DRS technique. Phase 11 will
adapt and extend the DRS technology and: 1) build a DRS temperature measurement
materials data base, 2) develop the DRS technology for a process control
interface, and 3) add other process monitoring capabilities to the DRS
spectrometer. Research will be conducted in three research venues. First,
national laboratory collaborators will collect data on GaAs wafer materials.
Second, the University of Washington will collect data on surface morphology,
and epilayer growth. Third, Thermionics Northwest will: analyze the data
received from the research partners, construct a low cost improved performance
DRS wafer temperature sensor, collect and analyze data on Si wafers, and
increase the temperature measure range of the DRS technique for Si. The control
of wafer temperature is critical to film thickness, uniformity and quality. Most
wafer processes require temperature measurement and control to increase yield
and device density. In-situ temperature sensing with real-time data acquisition
is needed for process control. The research conducted in Phase 11 will support
product development of one or more process control products using the DRS
technology for semi-conductor research and production facilities. ***