* 9505753
* Penrose Conference on 'Tectonic Development of the Canada   Basin, Arctic Ocean'
* O/D,OPP
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Lawrence Lawver, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 02/29/1996
* USD 16,500.00

This award provides participant support funds for a Penrose Conference on the
tectonic development of the Arctic Ocean Basin. Penrose conferences are
sponsored by the Geological Society of America and they are intended to bring
together researchers at critical junctures in the development of scientific
thinking in fields of geology and geophysics. The title of this conference is
"The Tectonic Development of the Canada Basin and Surrounding Regions", and it
will be held September 28-October 3, 1995. The tectonic history of the Arctic
region is still extremely controversial and of great importance not only to our
understanding of global tectonics, but also to understanding the framework of
the known and conjectured oil and mineral resources of the Arctic. The movement
of the tectonic plates involved in evolution of the Arctic region have not all
been identified, even 25 years after the plate tectonic revolution. In
particular, how and when the Canada Basin section of the Arctic developed during
the Mesozoic and Cenozoic is still debated in the scientific literature. The
Eocene to recent evolution of the Arctic Ocean was thought to be reasonably
straightforward, consisting of identified seafloor spreading along the Nansen-
Gakkel Ridge in the Eurasian Basin. But now, recent field work indicates that
some of the Cenozoic seafloor spreading motion in the Eurasian Basin was
transformed into the Canada Basin. Similarly, recent analyses of ERS-1 satellite
derived gravity data over the Arctic Ocean to 84 N have added new information,
some of it relating directly to the controversy concerning the origin of the
Canada Basin. At the present time, the various groups that work on the many
different aspects of the Arctic tend to work independently of one another, and
attend different national and international meetings. Therefore, substantial
progress could be made in the understanding of Arctic tectonics by bringing
together the key scientists from these groups to integrat e studies based on
terrestrial geology and geophysics around the margin of the Arctic, marine
geological and geophysical studies, and aeromagnetic, aerogravity and satellite
data. In addition, the Russian data that were not available to western
scientists until recently, need to be incorporated into the tectonic models for
the Arctic, along with new data obtained through joint research undertaken
between Russian scientists, and scientists from Germany, U.S. and Canada. This
meeting is an opportunity to advance understanding of the present geological and
geophysical knowledge of the Arctic, and to plan coordinated and cooperative
future work in the Arctic.