* 9505164
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Marketplace             for Achievement for Young Women
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Wayne Villemez, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 01/31/1997
* USD 7,489.00

This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation Research
Program. This is a study of the work aspirations of young women as they are
affected by their local area of residence. The research ties together theories
about gender and work aspirations with broader issues dealing with the effects
from opportunity structures and from cultural and political milieus. National
data about aspirations are available from the National Longitudinal Survey of
Youth and information about place will come from a variety of existing sources.
More focused data will follow from intensive interviews with 26 adolescents,
gathered over three years, from two high schools in Connecticut. Information on
place to supplement those interviews will be provided by a survey of the high
schools along with additional data about the communities. %%% This research will
contribute to the sociological understanding of gender roles, work aspirations,
and local labor markets. By taking into account how the local labor market is
simultaneously an opportunity structure and a cultural and political setting in
which aspirations are shaped and constrained, it will be of use to policy makers
concerned with broadening opportunities for women in the work world. In addition
to the scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will
materially assist a highly promising student in completing research for the
Ph.D. dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the
nation and the thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.