* 9505881
* Development &amp; Analysis of Multi-user Receivers for          Multi-rate Wireless Communication
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Urbashi Mitra, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Fuja
* 05/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9505881 Urbashi Mitra In order for future wireless communications networks to
accommodate a variety of potentially disparate sources (voice, data and video
signals), multi-rate communication schemes must be developed. Possible sources
such as voice, video, and data communications have inherently different quality
of service (QoS) requirements. A constant bit-rate paradigm as exists in the
current wireless network will not serve such multi-rated services of the future.
The principal aim of this research is to begin the analysis and development of
communication receivers for multi-user spread-spectrum communications with
different information rates. Several multi-rate multi-user access schemes will
be considered for Direct-Sequence Spread Spectrum Code-Division Multiple-Access
communications. Three activities are planned for the preliminary study. First,
existing single bit rate receivers will be investigated to determine whether
they are easily extensible to multi-rate communications. Second, multi-user
receivers will be created to explicitly exploit the redundancy in the mixture of
narrowband and wideband user signals. Third, a cost function will be developed
to compare the various receivers created. Due to the nature of the signals being
considered, the probability of bit detection error does not fully capture the
performance of a given receiver. The ultimate goal of the proposed preliminary
research is to position the applicant to perform research on the design and
analysis of true variable bit rate communications (e.g. video transmissions);
communications where the bit rate is changing for each individual user. In
multi-rate communications each user transmits at a constant rate which may
differ from user to user. It is believed that such receivers must be adaptive in
nature to properly support the variable rated traffic.