* 9505995
* Metric Uncertainty and Robust Control of Nonlinear Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Tryphon Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/1999
* USD 99,772.00

9505995 Georgiou The research proposed represents a continuation of our current
program in developing theoretical and computational tools for modeling and
control of dynamical systems. Our approach relies on the concept of the graph.
Model uncertainty is quantified using the gap metric which measures potential
graph perturbations, and suitable margins are developed to ascertain performance
and robustness of stability for the uncertain system. In our past research, we
have developed computational and theoretical tools for robust control of linear
systems with an energy-type (L2-norm) performance specification. The use of
these tools has been demonstrated via application studies, and related software
has become available within a standard commercial package (u-tools). Over the
next three years, we propose an intensive program to develop theoretical and
computational tools for robust control of nonlinear systems. The robustness will
be quantified using suitable gap-like metrics. In particular, we introduce a
variety of possible distance measures which may be appropriate in different
situations. We propose to compute suitable robustness margins which guarantee
robustness of stability and performance. These margins can be tailored to a
variety of Lo, L2, global, and semi- local stability and performance
requirements. Further, we will develop related tools for robust feedback design
under such metric uncertainty. Emphasis will be placed on computational issues
and application studies. ***