* 9505370
* Vision Algorithms for Analysis of Tissue and Fluid          Deformations from Medical Images
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* James Duncan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 06/30/1996
* USD 84,191.00

The aim of this research is to develop vision algorithms for analysis of non-
rigid motion from medical imagery. We will continue our algorithm development in
snake tracking and image velocity field computation for assessment of tissue
deformations and analysis of fluid flow from MRI and X-ray imagery, and extend
the techniques to 3D. MRI is unique in its ability to non-invasively and
selectively alter tissue magnetization, and create tagged patterns within
deforming tissue such as the heart muscle. The resulting pattern defines a time-
varying curvilinear coordinate system on the underlying tissue, allowing for
precise and quantitative measurement of tissue motion and deformation from a
sequence of images. The motion of these visible tag lines is tracked with
Dynamic Programming (DP) B-spline snakes, and interacting B-spline deformable
grids. Warp algorithms have been developed which continuously map two tissue
regions in the plane such that two embedded grids of curves are brought into
registration. For fluid flow field analysis, a scalar function formulation for
optical flow has been developed. The novel aspect of the new optical flow
framework is that it automatically enforces incompressibility on the resulting
velocity field. Applications of the techniques to various experimental
conditions are planned.