* 9505836
* Ecologic Novelty in Taxonomic Diversification: Evolution of Photosymbiosis in Planktic Foraminifera
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Richard Norris, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/1998
* USD 100,003.00

Norris 9505836 The relationship between ecologica and morphological
diversification is currently much in debate. There is an increasing body of work
that suggests that much speciation occurs in the absence of any change in
ecology. This paradigm suggests that most speciation takes place by the passive
erection of barriers to dispersal. In contrast, concepts such as "adaptive zone"
imply that much speciation occurs when taxa evolve "key innovations" that permit
them to scale unoccupied adative peaks. From this perspective, diversification
is an active process mediated by changes in ecological strategies. Research will
focus on phylogenetic and ecologic study of the globigerinid clade--the largest
exant group of photosymbiotic foraminifera. The proposed study will use stable
isotope methods to deduce the occurrence of photosymbiosis in extinct
foraminifera and then map this ecological information onto a phylogenetic tree.
It should be easy to disprove the key-innovation hypothesis if the results
demonstrate that symbiosis was acquired long before or after the globigerinid
radiation began or if photosymbiotic and non-symbiotic sister groups have
similar evolutionary histories. Moreover, any linkage between symbiosis and
taxonomic diversification can be tested by comparing patterns of radiation in
symbiotic and non-symbiotic sister groups in Neogene globigerinids with a mostly
complete data set for the photosymbiotic Paleocene morozovellids. The results
may provide insights on the evolutionary role of photosymbiosis in other groups
as well as chemosymbiosis in mollusc and other invertebrates.