* 9505844
* Signal Transduction of Anemone Hair Bundles
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Glen Watson, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 06/30/1999
* USD 300,963.00

; R o o t E n t r y F wr, % C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l JA+ % JA+ % ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Abstract 9505844 Watson This research project will
investigate signal transduction in hair bundles of sea anemones. The hair
bundles of these organisms are mechanoreceptors that participate in regulating
discharge of nematocysts into moving targets including prey. While little is
known of the signal transduction in this process, models have been developed to
explain signal transduction in vertebrate hair bundles. This investigator has
found that anemone hair bundles are structurally and functionally similar to
hair bundles in vertebrates, so he now proposes to test a model for signal
transduction in anemones that incorporates features of the tip-link model for
vertebrate hair bundles. Tip-links are filaments which open and close ion
channel gates at the tips of stereocilia. The hypothesis to be tested is that
the tip links mechanically couple the gate of the ion channel to an adjacent
stereocilium of the bundle. This will be tested using a fluorescent dyes and
computer imaging to see if a deflection of the bundle will cause membrane
depolarization and alter fluorescence. Electrophys iological recording (by patch
clamping) during mechanical stimulation of hair bundles and morphological
studies using field emission scanning microscopy will also be done. %%% These
studies on the basis of mechanosensitive signal transduction in anemones are
important for studies of biodiversity and well as evolution. Moreover they will
enhance understanding of how hair bundles respond in other systems, including
vertebrates. *** ; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ' $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Una Solomon Una Solomon @ % @ @ % @
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e l l l l l l l b 1 $ D T 2 b l b l l l l l l l l Z
Abstract 9505844 Watson This research project will investigate signal
transduction in hair bundles of sea anemones. The hair bundles of these
organisms are mechanoreceptors that participate in regulating discharge of
nematocysts into moving targets including prey. While little is known of the
signal transduction in this process, models have been developed to explain
signal transduction in vertebrate hair bundles. This investigator has found that
anemone hair bundles are structurally and functionally similar to hair bundles
in vertebrates, so he now proposes to test a model for signal transduction in
anemones that incorporates features of the tip-link model for vertebrate hair
bundles. Tip-links are filaments which open and close ion channel gates at the
tips of stereocilia. The hypothesis to be tested is that the tip links
mechanically couple the gate of the ion channel to an adjacent stereocilium of
the bundle. This will be tested using a fluorescent dyes and computer imaging to
see if a deflection of the bundle will cause membrane depolarization and a