* 9505007
* Statistical Methods for the Analysis of Functional          Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* William Eddy, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 130,000.00

Proposal: DMS 9505007 PI(s): William Eddy, Chris Genovese Institution: Carnegie
Mellon University Title: Statisitcal Methods for the Analysis of Functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging Data Abstract: This research involves the development
of new statistical methods for the analysis and interpretation of functional
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) data. Such data can be viewed as the
realization of a spatio-temporal process with a very complicated distributional
structure. Models in current use are grossly simplified for both mathematical
and computational expediency. The statistical challenges in constructing more
realistic models are difficult and manifold. Many revolve around understanding
the nature of the noise in the measurements and its effect on successfully
detecting regions of neural activation. Noise in the data shows significant
spatial and temporal correlations that depend strongly on how the data are
collected. Outliers are common, and there are strong sources of systematic
variation such as the subject's respiratory and cardiac cycles. Variances in the
images depend nonlinearly on the means, and the observed absolute levels of
activation tend to shift between sessions because of subject movement. Moreover,
all of these difficulties occur for data collected from a single subject; the
situation becomes much more complicated if comparisons across subjects are
attempted. This research focusses on three general problems in the statistical
analysis of fMRI data: 1. The characterization of the response to an activating
stimulus in the fMRI signal and the use of this information to build more
realistic models and make more precise inferences; 2. The development of robust
procedures for identifying active regions that account for the complexity of the
underlying spatio-temporal process; and 3. The construction of functional maps
within a specified system of the brain (e.g., the visual system) and the use
these maps for making predictiv e inference across subjects. Functional Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (fMRI) is an exciting new technique that uses advanced
technology to obtain images of the active human brain. The technique is of
particular interest to cognitive neuropsychologists because of the unique
perspective it offers into high-level cognitive processing in humans: areas of
the brain that are activated by a stimulus or cognitive task ``light up'' in an
fMRI image. This technology will thus play a critical role in understanding how
the brain works; however, before this potential can be realized, significant
statistical challenges in the interpretation and analysis of fMRI data must be
overcome. For example, there is substantial uncertainty in the identification of
neural activity from these images and in the attribution of that activity to
particular cognitive processes. Moreover, there is a need for new methods of
making statistical inferences of scientific interest from these large and
complex sets of data. This research focusses on three broad aspects of the
general problem: 1. Constructing models for the systematic components of the
process that generates the data, 2. Studying and modeling the properties of the
noise in the measurements so that analysis and inference can be made more
precise, and 3. Developing new methods of inference for addressing interesting
scientific questions with massive sets of data that arise from measurements over
space and time.