* 9505458
* Protein Assemblies Controlling Muscle Contraction
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Peter Vibert, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1996
* USD 25,012.00

9505458 Vibert The goals of this project are to determine the structures of
muscle thick and thin filaments and to interpret them in terms of the recently
determined atomic structures of the cmmponent proteins. The head region of the
myosin molecule, which contains its enzymatic site and which interacts with
actin to produce force, can now be produced in native or modified form by
molecular biological techniques, and the atomic structure of a myosin head has
been determined by x-ray crystallography. The structure of native and mutant
myosin heads attached to actin filaments will be determined by electron
microscopy of frozen-hydrated samples combined with three-dimensional image
reconstruction. Structure determination at 10-15A resolution permits elements of
protein secondary structure such as -helices can be recognized, but even at
lower resolution, fitting known atomic structures into the envelope of the
reconstructions allows them to be interpreted in detail. Of particular interest
is the conformation of the regulatory domain of the myosin head and how this
changes when regulatory switching occurs. These structural methods will also be
employed to study regulation of contraction by the tropomyosin-troponin complex
bound to actin in the thin filaments; reconstructions will be interpreted in
terms of atomic models of actin and tropomyosin. Of particular interest is
establishing the location and possible movements of troponin in thin filaments
at different stages of regulatory switching. Electron cryo-microscopy and image
reconstruction will also be used to determine how myosin subfilaments are
incorporated into native thick filaments. Among the proteins known to associate
with myosin are those of the titin family; vertebrate titin plays an elastic
role in the muscle cell, and may also define how thick filaments align during
muscle development. Co-assembly of myosin and smaller titin isoforms believed to
have structural and regulatory roles will be exami ned by electron microscopy to
establish which features of native filament structure depend on the interactions
between these proteins. %%% Muscle contraction requires the organization of
contractile and regulatory proteins into large complex assemblies. To understand
contraction in molecular terms, it is therefore necessary to know not only the
structures of the individual proteins, but also how the proteins assemble into
the larger structural units found in the cell. Two aspects of muscle cell
organization and of the control of contraction are emphasized: the mechanisms by
which protein subunits regulate myosin-actin interaction and thus contraction,
and the process by which contractile and accessory proteins assemble to form the
filaments of the muscle cell. The size and complexity of the protein filaments
in muscle means that the method of choice for analyzing their structures is
electron microscopy. In cases where the filament components are symmetrically
arranged, image analysis offers a further powerful mathematical and
computational approach to determining their three-dimensional structure and
arrangement. When atomic-level information about the separated components is
available, it can be incorporated to produce a highly detailed picture of the
functional units in the muscle cell, and thus open a path to a new understanding
of muscle contraction at the molecular level. ***