* 9505444
* Ion-Molecule Reactions in Gas-Phase Clusters and Buffer     Gas Flows
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* David Hales, Hendrix College
* Continuing Grant
* Francis J. Wodarczyk
* 06/30/1998
* USD 88,988.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry program of the Chemistry Division,
Prof. David Hales of Hendrix College will study the dependence of of gas-phase
ion-molecule reactions on ion internal energy. To accomplish this task two
different experimental techniques will be used. In the first, evidence will be
sought for reactions which take place within ionized clusters of molecules
produced in a supersonic expansion and ionized by electron impact. Collisional
relaxation of an ion in a cluster involves potentially reactive interactions.
The second technique involves discharge ionization within a high pressure flow
tube prior to expansion of the gas mixture into a vacuum. In the pre-expansion
environment the ions undergo many thermalizing collisions with the buffer gas
for each collison with a potenntially reactive molecule. The ions which exit the
flow tube are probed with a time of flight mass spectrometer. Differences in the
results between the two techniques will be analyzed in terms of the different
environments in which the reactions take place. This research involves the
participation of undergraduate students. Ion-molecule chemistry is one of the
intensely pursued areas of contemporary reaction chemistry. This research will
contribute to a better understanding of the reaction processes that occur in
different gas phase environments, and the results will be of use in applications
such as atmospheric chemistry and others. This research will be conducted in an
undergraduate college and will involve undergraduate students.