* 9505855
* Microtubule-Dependent Transport of Cell Surface Domains
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Jeffrey Travis, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9505855 Travis The granuloreticuloseans (e.g., the Foraminifera) provide a
window into understanding the motility of domains of the plasma membrane. In the
past, this surface motility on the pseudopods (reticulopods) of these large
protists has been assessed using relatively large surface-attached particles as
visible markers. The particles move on a "raft" comprised of a membrane domain.
The present proposal examines the transport of specifically labeled intrinsic
components of these domains. Much of the knowledge on cell motility comes from
studies on intracellular organelle transport. Cell surface domain transport and
intracellular organelle transport share many characteristics including
bidirectional and saltatory excursions that occur exclusively along
microtubules. Correlative light and electron microscopy can demonstrate that
both plasma membrane domains and organelles are directly linked to microtubules
by structurally distinct crossbridges. In addition, the velocity profiles of
these two transport phenomena are virtually indistinguishable. Consequently,
cell surface domain transport and intracellular organelle transport may share a
common mechanochemical mechanism and may be, in fact, manifestations of the same
basic cellular process. This proposal outlines a series of experiments designed
to test this hypothesis by comparing directly the enzymatic properties of
organelle and cell surface transport in Reticulomyxa, a freshwater
granuloreticulosean. Experiments designed to characterize the mechanochemical
signature of the motor ATPase include assaying these specific enzymatic
parameters of the transport motor: ATPase kinetics, nucleotide specificity, and
inhibitor specificity. The stated hypothesis predicts that these fundamental
properties of the cell surface transport motor must be identical to those of
organelle transport and will be refuted or confirmed by direct comparison in the
same cell models. After completion of the first set of studies , the putative
bidirectionality of transport along individual microtubules is studied by
reevaluating transport in microsurgically prepared pseudopod fragments. This
approach addresses serious frame-of-reference questions that have arisen in
previous Reticulomyxa reactivation studies. These two sets of experiments
provide necessary information about the mechanochemistry of the cell surface
transport system and serve as a prelude to the third set to identify, isolate,
and characterize that system's components. Reticulopodial motility and cell
surface transport are cell physiological processes whose significance can be
appreciated on a planetary scale. Since the Cambrian, forams and other
granuloreticuloseans have used their pseudopods in the deposition of limestone
shells and the structuring of marine sediments -- geological processes that have
caused dramatic changes in the oceans and atmosphere. The proposed experiments
have been designed to elucidate the mechanism of cell surface transport,
arguably the most fundamental physiological process of this important taxon,
since it mediates feeding, reproduction and shell construction. %%%
Granuloreticuloseans (e.g., the Foraminifera) are protists which have pseudopods
which appear granular and net-like (reticular). The study choses a
representative granuloreticulosean, Reticulomyxa, to serve as a window into
understanding the motility of domains of the outer membrane of the cell. In the
past, this surface motility on the pseudopods (reticulopods) has been observed
by labeling the surface with visible particles. The particles move on a "raft"
comprised of a membrane domain. The significance of this transport can be
appreciated on a planetary scale. Since the Cambrian, forams and other
granuloreticuloseans have used their pseudopods in the deposition of limestone
shells and the structuring of marine sediments -- geological processes that have
caused dramatic changes in the oceans and atmosphere. The proposed e xperiments
have been designed to elucidate the mechanism of cell surface transport,
arguably the most fundamental physiological process of this important taxon,
since it mediates feeding, reproduction and shell construction. Much of the
knowledge on cell motility comes from studies on intracellular organelle
transport, which is mediated by "motor" proteins which run along filamentous
protein "tracks". The tracks make up the internal support network of the cell,
the cytoskeleton, and have a polarity which can determine the direction of
movement along them because most motor proteins move in a polar, unidirectional
fashion. Cell surface domain transport and intracellular organelle transport may
occur exclusively along one kind of cytoskeletal protein structure, the
microtubule. Correlative light and electron microscopy can demonstrate that both
plasma membrane domains and organelles are directly linked to microtubules by
structurally distinct crossbridges. In addition, the velocity profiles of these
two transport phenomena are virtually indistinguishable. Consequently, cell
surface domain transport and intracellular organelle transport may share a
common mechanochemical mechanism and may be, in fact, manifestations of the same
basic cellular process. This proposal outlines a series of experiments designed
to test this hypothesis by comparing directly the enzymatic properties of motor
proteins responsible for organelle and cell surface transport. The stated
hypothesis predicts that the motor proteins for cell surface transport are
identical to those of organelle transport and will be refuted or confirmed by
direct comparison in the same cell models. After completion of the first set of
studies, the observed bidirectionality of plasma membrane domain transport along
individual microtubules is studied by reevaluating transport in microsurgically
prepared pseudopod fragments. Is there one motor protein responsible for
bidirectional transport or two motor prote ins responsible for oppositely-
directed transport? This approach addresses serious frame-of- reference
questions that have arisen in previous Reticulomyxa reactivation studies. These
two sets of experiments provide necessary information about the mechanochemistry
of the cell surface transport system and serve as a prelude to the third set to
identify, isolate, and characterize that system's components. ***