* 9505443
* Blind Simulation and Regenerative Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Peter Ney, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 132,158.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9505443, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Blind Simulation and
Regenerative Processes, PI-James A. Bucklew and Peter E. Ney: Importance
sampling is used to speed up Monte Carlo simulation of rare events. The methods
used to date have required exact knowledge of the underlying probability
structure of the system being simulated. Direct Monte Carlo simulation requires
only an assumption of ergodicity to guarantee that relative frequency estimates
of system parameters will converge to true values. The direct Monte Carlo
technique is an example of a blind simulation technique: a generic class of
methodologies which bootstrap their way without exact knowledge of the
underlying probability law. Some partial results achieved to date indicate that
in many interesting situations, blind techniques can perform just about as well
as those utilizing much more prior information. Applied to systems with memory
(Markovian for example) these techniques lead naturally to the study of
regenerative processes. These are processes that at random times stop and
essentially start themselves over again. Aspects of the theory of these
processes are yet to be developed and are needed for the analysis of blind
simulation methods. This study of blind simulation and regenerative processes
promises to very important in the bag of tricks available to system simulators.
*****************************************************************************
Aubrey M. Bush Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison Director Division of
Networking and Communica tions Research and Infrastructure National Science
Foundation