* 9505472
* Algorithm Design and Implementation for Parallel            Scientific Computation
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Gary Miller, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1999
* USD 313,769.00

This project applies parallel algorithm design theory problems arising from
scientific problems governed by partial differential equations. Most of the
effort is restricted to solving algorithmic problems including mesh generation
and partitioning. This project develops algorithms and code for the solution of
scientific problems that are highly unstructured and whose solution may be
rapidly changing with time. Thus, the emphasis is on parallel mesh generation
algorithms that will run on parallel machines in conjunction with the system
solvers. The project also continues to improve the parallel efficiency of linear
system solvers and will extend the work on combinatorial approaches to the
construction of good preconditioners for linear system solvers. These are used
to speedup the convergence rate of iterative methods. A central approach taken
by this project for the design of new algorithms for problems such as mesh
generation and preconditioner construction is to use the fact that the graphs
for these problems have small separators that can be quickly found. Under prior
projects partially supported by NSF, algorithms were discovered and developed to
partition, for instance, finite element meshes into roughly two equal size
pieces by removing a small number of elements. This work is referred to as the
geometric approach to separators. The geometric approach quickly produces
provably good partitions for finite element meshes. This project intends to show
how the role of mesh generation methods and separator technology can be
reversed. In particular, good mesh generation methods are being developed which
use the separator technology. This technology will also be used in the
construction of good iterative methods for solving these underlying systems.
Further improvements are being made in the geometric separator algorithms via
experimental and analytic methods. Relationships between the geometric method
and other known algorithms and methods, such as spectral, are being
investigated.