* 9505960
* System Level Issues for Multiparadigm Computing and SIMD    and MIMD/SIMD Architectures
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Jose Meseguer, SRI International
* Continuing grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 08/31/1999
* USD 236,065.00

TITLE: and MIMD/SIMD Architectures Parallel computing applications differ widely
in the type of computational paradigm that is best suited to efficiently exploit
their parallelism. Current software systems for parallel hardware support only
single-paradigm computing. The objective of this research project is to
investigate system-level support for efficient multiparadigm parallel
computation. Previous work on coordination languages and multiparadigm
sequential programming languages form a solid foundation for this research,
although significant new ideas are required. Although current high-performance
computer architectures are moving toward a combined MIMD/SIMD organization, very
little software and system support exists for such hybrid computer
architectures. This research will thus also focus on aspects of multiparadigm
computing for massively parallel SIMD and MIMD/SIMD machines, including the
Rewrite-Rule Machine as a testbed architecture. The research results will enable
future systems designers to better appreciate the engineering trade-offs to
efficiently support multiparadigm computing in a parallel environment. The
results of this research are expected to enhance the future programming ease of
high-performance massively parallel computing systems.