* 9505977
* Structure and Function of Viral Nucleic Acids Polymerases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Lori Kohlstaedt, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 06/30/2001
* USD 477,875.00

; R o o t E n t r y F #2 \> @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c
t P o o l #2 \> #2 \> 4 @ C D E F G H I J K L F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9505977 Kohlstaedt To learn how dimer formation
differs in the closely related polymerases, the Kohlstaedt lab will crystallize
Maloney murine leukemia virus and avian sarcoma virus reverse transcriptases .
Stucture solutions will be supplemented by biochemical experiments aimed at
delineating domain boundaries and domain functions in all three of these
polymerases. Collaborative projects extend the training potential of Dr.
Kohlstaedt's research plan. Plans are being executed that will lead to the
solving of other crystal structures with participation of students from other
research groups. These students will learn to think critically about structural
problems, and some will participate in the solving of crystal structures.
Besides the training aspect of her research plan, which involves graduate and
undergraduate students and will later involve postdoctoral trainees, Dr.
Kohlstaedt will be actively involved in improving formal instruction in
structural biology and biophysics. She will be involved in initiating new course
offerings and updating existing ones. New courses proposed include "Macrom
olecular Crystallography" to be offered to both graduates and undergraduates and
"physical chemistry for biochemistry" to be part of the required curriculum for
undergraduate biochemistry majors. Two extant courses will be modernized:
"Protein Chemistry" and "Biophysical Chemistry," both graduate courses. In
addition, Dr. Kohlstaedt will offer literature review and tutorial classes in
structural biology. %%% The ultimate goal of our research is to understand
structure-function relationships in enzymes. Viral polymerases offer ~n ideal
model system for the pursuit of this goal since they seem to represent multiple,
convergent solutions to the same problems of binding and catalysis. We currently
are working to grow crystals of adenovirus polymerase and of ASV and MuLV
reverse transcriptases. Our overall approach is to study the structures of viral
polymerases by both crystallography and biochemistry. By these complimentary
techniques we hope to build a detailed knowledge of the structure and function
of these enzymes. Our goals for the proposed period of support are: 1.
Biochemical definition of domain boundaries in adenovirus polymerase and
identification of the domain(s) that function in the initiation of genome
replication. 2. Physical definition of the polymerization state of MuLV reverse
transcriptase in the presence of DNA. 3. Growth of crystals suitable for xray
structure analysis of adenovirus polymerase, a fragment of the polymerase,
adenovirus terminal protein, the host factor NF-1 and/or binary complexes
between these proteins. 4. Growth of crystals suitable for x-ray structure
analysis of ASV and/or MuLV reverse transcriptase. These experiments approach
two goals: The first is a better understanding of the entire replication
particle in adenovirus. The second is a better understanding of protein folding
and dimerization in lentiviral reverse transcriptases. *** @ ....()()))()() ; Oh
+' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen Rhonda Young @ { 9 @ M S
u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( B > @ Zy\> @ 2~ Microsoft Word 6.0 3 e = e C
x z z z