* 9505518
* Survey of Brazilian Amazonian Lizards, Snakes,              Amphisbaenians, Anurans, and Their Arthropod Prey
* BIO,DEB
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Laurie Vitt, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1999
* USD 312,208.00

Frogs, lizards, snakes, and a wide diversity of arthropods including, but not
restricted to insects, spiders, mites, centipedes, millipedes, isopods,
amblypygids, scorpions, and pseudoscorpions, will be surveyed at three remote
sites in the Amazon region of western Brazil. Exact localities for individual
specimens will be determined using a global positioning system. Field protocol
will involve sampling the herpetofauna and using the stomach contents of lizards
and frogs as samples of the invertebrate fauna. Lizards and formsg engulf their
prey whole, and the large majority of these arthropods (85-90%) are in perfect
or near-perfect condition. Tissues will be taken form all species of the
herpetofauna. Herpetological specimens will be deposited in collections of the
Oklahoma Museum of Natural History (OMNH) in the United States and the Museu
Paraense Emilo Goeldi (MPEG) in Belem, Para, Brazil, and all invertebrates will
be initially deposited in the collections at the MPEG. For herpetological
specimens, field research, identifications, descriptions of new taxa, and
production of an Internet accessible database will be a collaborative effort
between the PIs and Brazilian scientists. Tissue samples will be deposited in
the tissue collection of the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) and will
be available to all qualified investigators. A database, accessible via
Internet, will be designed to provide accurate and continually updated species
lists, localities, and references to ecological data including lists of
arthropod taxa removed from stomachs.