* 9505522
* Purchase of High Speed Multi-processor Computer with        Parallel Capabilities
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Keiji Morokuma, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 02/29/1996
* USD 300,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
will assist the Department of Chemistry at Emory University in the purchase of a
parallel computational facility. This equipment will enhance research in a
number of areas including the following: A. Potential Energy Surfaces, Reaction
Rates and Mechanisms, and Dynamics of Combustion Related Reactions and Other
Reactions. B. Combined `ab initio Molecular Orbital + Molecular Mechanics`
Studies of Reactions of Complicated `Real` Molecular Systems. C. Ab initio
theoretical studies of elementary reactions involving excited states of
molecules. D. Ab initio theoretical studies of structures and reactions of
transition metal atoms, ions, complexes and cluster complexes. E. Simulation and
Computational Approach to Condensed Matter Chemistry. F. Theory and Computation
of the Dynamics and Vibrations of Molecules. G. The collision dynamics of
radicals. Multi-processor computers with parallel capability are being used
more, with the advent of parallel computing codes and are being integrated into
existing workstation clusters. The most important feature of a network is that
it can simultaneously satisfy departmental computing needs, serve as a
development environment for new theoretical codes and algorithms, provide state
of the art graphics and visualization facilities, and support research in state-
of-the-art applications of parallel processing for the entire department.