* 9505155
* Mathematical Sciences:  Computational and Mathematical      Investigations in Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1998
* USD 492,000.00

Todd The investigator and his colleagues undertake broad studies of optimization
algorithms and the mathematical theory underlying them. The project covers
continuous and discrete optimization algorithms, both exact and approximate,
their computational complexity, practical large-scale implementation,
performance guarantees (in the case of approximate algorithms), and applications
in the physical sciences such as elementary particle tracking, as well as more
conventional applications in manufacturing and logistics. Particular projects
include: - a continuation of large-scale computational testing of
implementations of minimum-cost network flow algorithms; - development and
testing of algorithms for large-scale nonlinear minimization problems with bound
constraints; - performance guarantees for efficient approximation algorithms for
machine-scheduling problems with budget constraints and for other combinatorial
optimization problems; - development of more efficient interior-point methods
for convex programming and for linear programming problems where no initial
interior feasible solution is known; - studies of the polyhedral structure of
combinatorial problems in graph theory and partially ordered sets, as well as in
applications such as crew scheduling -- computational implementation and testing
have been an integral aspect of these studies; and - further development of
complexity theory for continuous nonconvex problems. These projects range from
modeling through algorithm development and analysis to implementation and
testing. Optimization addresses questions like: - How do you schedule the
production of hundreds of items with varying demands over several months to
minimize setup and holding costs, subject to resource limitations and
capacities? - How do you determine the geometric conformation of a protein (how
it ``folds") given an approximate en ergy functional for any position? Indeed,
complex systems arising in the engineering, physical, and biological sciences,
and in the manufacturing and service industries, involving hundreds to millions
of interacting variables, frequently lead to optimization problems when one
wishes to control or predict their behavior. The investigators study a number of
specific projects related to modeling and algorithm development for a variety of
applications, ranging from traditional settings like resource allocation,
planning, logistics, and distribution problems to new application areas such as
airline crew-scheduling, elementary particle tracking, and shop scheduling. A
common thread is the search for efficient methods to solve exactly large-scale
instances of such problems, or, if that is not likely to be possible, for
efficient algorithms that are guaranteed to obtain a solution that is close to
optimal in a precise sense. The investigators also test these algorithms
computationally on representative instances of such problems using serial and
parallel computers.