* 9505706
* Cyclic Beta Glucans of the Rhizobiaceae
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Karen Miller, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/1999
* USD 298,000.00

9505706 Miller Gram-negative bacteria accumulate high levels of oligosaccharides
within their periplasmic compartments. The biosynthesis of these
oligosaccharides is strictly osmoregulated, and periplasmic concentrations may
reach levels greater than 100 mM when cells are grown in hypoosmotic media. The
accumulation of these molecules has been shown to represent an adaptive strategy
for growth in hypoosmotic environments, and it is believed that this
accumulation provides a mechanism for the cell to regulate periplasmic volume.
In the proposed research program, Rhizobium meliloti will be used as a model
bacterium to directly investigate the roles of the periplasmic oligosaccharides
during hypoosmotic adaptation. Three major objectives are proposed: 1)
identification of new classes of R. meliloti mutants defective for periplasmic
oligosaccharide biosynthesis; 2) characterization of R. meliloti periplasmic
oligosaccharide mutants (hypoosmotic growth, periplasmic volume, and cell
surface properties); 3) further characterization of periplasmic oligosaccharide
biosynthesis by R. meliloti (osmotic regulation and transport). The proposed
studies will provide important insight concerning the nature of the microbial
periplasm in the interactive dynamics of biological diversity of the rhizosphere
and ecosystem stability involving essential microbe/plant host/parasite
relationships. %%% Because biological membranes are freely permeable to water,
all living cells must cope with changes in the availability of water in their
environment. This is particularly a problem for bacterial cells which directly
encounter wide ranges of osmotic strength environments (e.g., from very dilute
to hypersaline conditions). Certain bacteria are further challenged by osmotic
stress because they contain an outer cellular compartment called the periplasm.
The compartment is integrally linked to many fundamental cellular processes
(including nutrient acquisition, protein export, and motility) and may represent
up to 4 0% of the total cellular volume. Nonetheless, understanding of the
periplasm is surprisingly limited. Recently, it was shown that a great diversity
of bacteria accumulate high concentrations of structurally unique
oligosaccharides (a class of carbohydrate) within their periplasmic compartments
during growth in dilute environments. Furthermore, it has been shown that a
variety of biosynthetic pathways have evolved among bacterial to insure the
synthesis and accumulation of periplasmic oligosaccharides. Although the precise
functions of the periplasmic oligosaccharides remain undefined, it is generally
believed that their accumulation provides a mechanism for the cell to regulate
periplasmic volume when cells are stressed osmotically. In the proposed research
program, R. meliloti, an agriculturally important soil bacterium, will be used
as a model microbe to directly investigate the roles of the periplsmic
oligosaccharides during growth in osmotically stressed environments. The results
of this study will provide important information concerning the structure and
function of the periplasm, a dynamic compartment linked to several important
cellular processes. ***