* 9505118
* Mathematical Sciences: Topics in Logic and Set Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Andreas Blass, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1999
* USD 114,900.00

9505118 Blass The research project of Andreas Blass is in four areas: (1)
Cardinal characteristics of the continuum, including both the general theory of
such characteristics (involving Galois-Tukey connections) and the detailed study
of particular characteristics, especially the recently introduced evasion and
prediction numbers. (2) Applications of set theory, especially in the theory of
abelian groups. (3) Semantics of linear logic, especially game semantics and its
variants. (4) Logic of topoi, particularly the logical properties of geometric
morphisms. The research project of Glen Whitney concerns interpreting general
recursive definitions, especially in non-determinisitic and concurrent contexts.
Specific questions include: (1) Finding a universal class of structures with a
recursion operation, so that every structure will be contained in one from this
class. (2) Comparing proposals for the semantics of concurrent programming
languages. (3) Seeking connections with fixpoint logics used in finite model
theory. (4) Extending the current theory to allow more detailed modelings of
parameter and message passing between subprograms. Both the formal language of
recursion FLR, which Whitney will study, and Girard's linear logic LL, one of
Blass' research topics, can serve as mathematical models of certain aspects of
computing. FLR models recursion, i.e., programs using subroutines identical to
the programs themselves. Whitney's project is directed toward improved
understanding of recursion in the context of parallel computing, i.e.
computations done collaboratively by many machines operating simultaneously. LL
models data types; its game semantics models the situation where accessing data
involves more of an interaction (access protocol) between the provider and the
user of the data than mere transmission of data. Both theories are currently at
the stage of mathematical exploration, but it is hoped that the information
obtained w ill be of use in the design of future programming languages and in
the formal verification of correctness of programs. Cardinal characteristics of
the continuum are a way to exhibit and clarify the combinatorial content of
difficult problems from various areas of mathematics -- originally topology and
analysis, more recently algebra as well. They provide connections between these
different areas and thus allow progress on a problem in one area to be applied
in another. In addition, they make these problems amenable to treatment by the
methods of modern set theory. The final topic in Blass' proposed research, topos
theory, also serves to connect apparently disparate areas, mostly within
mathematical logic. The particular topic of geometric morphisms of topoi
combines ideas from set theory, from information systems (introduced as a model
of computation), from sheaf theory (a part of topology), and from constructive
logic. ***