* 9505547
* North American Research Fellows:  Mechanochemical           Determinants of Biomembrane Strength
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Dennis Discher, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 07/31/1996
* USD 31,684.00

9505547 Discher This award is under the North American Research Fellows Program,
which enables U.S. scientists and engineers from the United States, Canada and
Mexico, to visit research establishments in one or both of the other two
countries for periods of three to twelve months. The program's awards provide
opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique or complementary
facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This award will
support a twelve month postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Dennis E. Discher to
work with Dr. Evan Evans at the University of British Columbia and Simon Fraser
University in Vancouver, British Columbia. Under the direction of Dr. Evan
Evans, Dr. Discher will receive extensive training in experimental biochemistry
and biophysics and will hone his ability to mathematically formulate and analyze
system models of different scales. His principle area of study will be the
determinants of membrane structural viability with general implications toward
biomembrane organization and function. He will focus on the red cell membrane.
Its encapsulating membrane is a prototype for the general material character of
eukaryotic cell membranes. He will work on determinants of membrane strengths
and mechanisms of failure. What will emerge from their work will be the first
detailed, molecular understanding of forced failure of a cell biological system.
Beyond the fundamental science, red cell membrane mechanics falls within
national and international interests in both novel material systems and any
number of biological problems such as malarial parasite invasion of red cells.
***