* 9505157
* Mathemtical Sciences: RUI: Problems in Forcing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Maurice Stanley, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 08/31/1998
* USD 76,839.00

9505157 Stanley The project involves continued work on class forcing and non-
generic reals, some combinatorial questions regarding stationary sets that have
application to unique generic objects, and other problems in forcing. Set theory
provides the popular way to lay the foundations for all of mathematics, the best
known systematic attempt to do this being Russell and Whitehead's Principia
Mathematica. Important foundational questions concern the independence and the
consistency of the axioms used to establish set theory. Zermelo and Fraenkel's
axioms (ZF for short) are one of the most convenient set of basic axioms.
However, it has been known since the work of Kurt Goedel in the 1930's that no
axioms for set theory can be consistent as well as complete. This means that no
set of axioms can be powerful enough to prove every possible proposition or else
its negation, but not both. Upon this startling theorem has been erected a rich
theory, treating possible propositions P such that either P or Not P can be
added to ZF without resulting in a contradiction. Any such proposition is said
to be independent of ZF and can be taken as an additional axiom of set theory.
The principal technique for finding such independent axioms is Paul J. Cohen's
so-called method of forcing and its offspring. This is the circle of ideas
involved in and motivating the investigator's research. ***