* 9505501
* Surface Chemistry of Electronic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Jeffrey Schwartz, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 07/31/1999
* USD 568,000.00

In this project supported by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research,
Schwartz and Bernasek will study the preparation and structural elucidation of
interfaces between oxided metal or metal oxide surfaces and organometallic
complex-derived overlayers. This research combines aspects of organometallic
chemistry and surface science. Methods will be developed for activation of
surfaces of conductors or insulators by introduction of -OH groups. The reaction
of metal atoms or organometallic complexes with these surface groups will be
studied and contrasted with solution analogs. It will be possible to create
various types of mixed overlayers in specific and reproducible ways. These
interfacial layers will covalently bond between components of the composite.
Investigations will be performed in parallel on bulk oxide or nitrogen analog
substrates under ambient and ultra-high vacuum using single crystal supports.
The use of characterizable single crystal materials will enable an investigation
of the precise nature and extent of covalent interaction between the overlayer
and the surface of the support. %%% Development of methodology for synthesis of
surface-bound species, and application of surface analytical techniques to
analogous bulk and film supports, will augment our understanding of materials
synthesis and interface structure at the microscopic level. Such information
forms a basis for understanding mesoscopic physical and chemical interfacial
properties of increasing importance as electronics and optoelectronics
components become smaller and more complex.