* 9505980
* Regulation of the Yeast Plasma Membrane (H+) ATPase
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Amy Chang, Yeshiva University, Albert Einstein College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 08/31/1999
* USD 278,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F p`D @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l k?_D k?_D 4 @ & ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Abstract 9505980 Chang
Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation reactions are important for mediating cell
response to environmental signals and regulating various cellular functions.
This grant is examining the role of phosphorylation in yeast, specifically the
plasma membrane (H+( encoded by the PMA1 gene, which has a critical
physiological role and is essential for cell viability. The activity of Pma1
(the protein encoded by this gene), is altered by environmental factors
including glucose metabolism. This investigator has shown that Pma1 activation
which occurs in response to glucose in the medium, is mediated by site-specific
dephosphorylation which occurs at the plasma membrane. During its transit
through the secretory path, Pma1 is constitutively phosphorylated on serine and
threonine residues. This investigator will identify the specific kinases that
interact with specific domains of Pma1, using the yeast 2 hybrid system and
peptide microsequencing of proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with Pma1. Mutants
defective for glucose mediated a activation will be used to identify the gluc
ose regulated phosphorylation sites. %%% These experiments will elucidate the
signal transduction mechanisms which are used by yeast to respond to
environmental changes and to fulfill physiological needs. They will also provide
information on phosphorylation in signal transduction and regulation. *** ; Oh
+' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( %
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Una Solomon Una Solomon @ ,LD @ @ ,LD @
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; ; e = e l l l l l l l 1 ~ . T a 2 l l l l l ~ l l l l ~
Abstract 9505980 Chang Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation reactions are important
for mediating cell response to environmental signals and regulating various
cellular functions. This grant is examining the role of phosphorylation in
yeast, specifically the plasma membrane (H+( encoded by the PMA1 gene, which has
a critical physiological role and is essential for cell viability. The activity
of Pma1 (the protein encoded by this gene), is altered by environmental factors
including glucose metabolism. This investigator has shown that Pma1 activation
which occurs in response to glucose in the medium, is mediated by site-specific
dephosphorylation which occurs at the plasma membrane. During its transit
through the secretory path, Pma1 is constitutively phosphorylated on serine and
threonine residues. This investigator will identify the specific kinases that
interact with specific domains of Pma1, using the yeast 2 hybrid system and
peptide microsequencing of proteins that co-immunoprecipitate with Pma1. Mutants
defective for glucose mediated a activation wi