* 9505043
* Mathematical Sciences:  Model-based Statistical Inference   and Data Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Stephen Stigler, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

Proposal DMS 95-05043 Principal Investigators: Stephen M. Stigler, Xiao-Li Meng
Institution: University of Chicago Title: Model-based Statistical Inference and
Data Analysis Abstract The investigators study topics that concern the
construction and investigation of statistical models involving latent structure
for the analysis of complex data sets. Stigler's research involves models for
communications networks where the available data is in the form of frequency
counts of directed transactions. The models studied depart from standard linear
models for paired comparisons in that they are not transitive - they exhibit
cycles - and they incorporate departures from standard multinomial models for
the dispersion of counts. Meng's research involves frequentist properties of
Bayesian procedures, and is related to his research on multiple imputation
methodology, a general and efficient inferential tool for handling the complex
problem of nonresponse in sample surveys, especially those that produce public-
use data files which will be analyzed by many users. Meng will seek to establish
robust frequentist properties of Bayesian procedures in multiple imputation
inference, with specific reference to confidence validity under uncongenial
multiple imputation inferences, frequency evaluations of posterior predictive
p-values, and unbiased imputations and single observation unbiased priors. The
research is of two parts. One part studies the nature of scientific
communication, seeking to build statistical models to understand better the
relationship between theoretical research and applied research (in particular
the degrees to which they influence each other), and the relationships between
different fields of science (for example, do different but related disciplines
necessarily form a hierarchy, or do they exhibit more complicated patterns of
"trade" in ideas.) The other part involves the construction of statistical
models for analyzing survey results when nonresponse is a problem. All surveys
may be susceptible to bias when potential respondents decline to participate for
reasons related to the answer they would have given, and the methods studied
will ameliorate this problem for complex surveys such as the U. S. Census, where
it is desirable to prepare public-use data files that address this problem and
are not overly sensitive to the statistical assumptions made.