* 9505116
* Mathematical Sciences: Numerics for Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Konstantin Mischaikow, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/1999
* USD 67,903.00

Mischaikow Most numerical methods for studying ordinary differential equations
are based on one of the following two ideas: (1) tracking individual
trajectories via an approximation of the differential equation, or (2) searching
for orbits with predetermined properties, e.g. a periodic orbit or an invariant
torus, by solving an associated boundary value problem. While these techniques
are obviously successful, they have shortcomings; one can only approximate
orbits over finite time intervals and these methods have difficulty detecting
orbits which are unstable in the sense of dynamics. These unstable orbits can be
extremely important since they define the boundaries of basins of attraction,
and hence, determine the global dynamics of the system. In addition, there are
many problems where the objects of interest are precisely the unstable bounded
orbits, e.g. traveling waves. In the second case, one needs to know a priori
what types of solutions should be looked for and in what regions of phase space
one should look for the solutions. The investigator develops complimentary
methods for studying the global dynamics of ordinary differential equations. The
theoretical basis for the project is Conley's theory of dynamical systems. The
work is separated into four tasks. (1) Given as an input an ordinary
differential equation and a region in phase space, develop efficient numerical
schemes to determine isolating neighborhoods and compute their Conley indices.
(2) Given a potential isolating neighborhood, develop more efficient mechanisms
for obtaining computer assisted proofs to verify that the neighborhood is an
isolating neighborhood and to rigorously compute the Conley index of the
associated isolated invariant set. (3) Extend the abstract Conley index theory,
which allows one to draw conclusions concerning the structure of the dynamics
from knowledge of the index and the isolating neighborhood. (4) Apply these
techniques to ordinary differential equations for which the global dynamics is
poorly understood. It should be emphasized that the end goal of these four steps
is to obtain a rough understanding of the global dynamics of the ordinary
differential equation. In particular, these procedures provide information about
both the type and structure of dynamics that occur, and the region of phase
space in which these dynamics take place. A finer understanding of these
dynamics can then be more efficiently investigated using the more classical
methods mentioned at the beginning. It is clear that most phenomena, whether
physical, chemical or biological in nature, need to be described by nonlinear
models. Thus, to describe the dynamics of these phenomena one is required to
solve problems in global analysis. In practice, this usually requires numerical
computations, since our theoretical analytic techniques are not yet adequate.
With the advent of high performance computing considerable progress has been
made in understanding the behavior of a wide variety of nonlinear dynamical
systems. However, there are many drawbacks to most current numerical and
computational techniques at our disposal. This project is aimed at two of them.
The first arises from the fact that the classical numerical techniques often
provide bad approximations over long time intervals (i.e. they are unreliable
for long range predictions) and also they have difficulty detecting unstable
dynamic structures (these unstable structures determine the path by which the
object being modelled reaches its asymptotic state). The second problem involves
difficulty in understanding the tremendous amounts of numerical data which the
computers are capable of generating. Typically this problem is overcome by
graphically displaying the data. Unfortunately, most models involve more than
three variables, and hence visualizing the numerical results becomes a difficult
task. This project develops theoretical techniques and efficient numerical
methods for describing the global dynamics arising from nonlinear ordinary
differential equations, and then applies these techniques to a wide range of
biological and physical problems. The theoretical aspect involves translating
algebraic information into dynamics and the numerical side involves computing
these algebraic invariants by approximating the differential equations. The
algebraic information works equally well for stable or unstable dynamics and, of
course, being algebraic, does not need to be visualized in order to be
understood.