* 9505619
* Generalized Hamming Weights of Algebraic-Geometric Codes    and Asmptotically Good Algebraic-Geometric Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* T.R.N. Rao, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 265,783.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9505619, University of Southwestern Louisiana, Generalized Hamming
Weights of Algebraic-Geometric Codes and Asymptotically Good Algebraic-Geometric
Codes, PI-Gui-Liang Feng, and T.R.N. Rao: This research will explore the
following problems: (1) to develop a simple and efficient method to determine a
lower bound of the generalized Hamming weights of algebraic-geometric (AG)
codes, such that the method can also be used to determine the weight hierarchy
of a special class of AG codes, for example, Hermitian codes and generalized
Hermitian codes, and (2) to investigate the construction of asymptotically good
improved AG codes, and improved AG codes that exceed the Gilbert-Varshamov bound
for some special finite fields. A more general approach will be developed to
determine the minimum distance bound, which is as good or better than the bound
given by the Reiman-Roch theorem (referred to here as the Goppa Bound) or by
counting the number of well behaving terms (known as the Feng-Rao bound). The
Feng-Rao bound was shown to be superior to the Goppa bound. Based on this
approach the principal investigators will develop a lower bound of the
generalized Hamming weights. For special classes of AG codes, this method can be
used to determine the weight hierarchy. Classes of AG codes with true minimum
distance greater than the Goppa and the Feng-Rao bounds will be constructed
which provide good code properties for length and minimum distance. An attempt
will be made to prove that these codes are asymptotica lly good codes. The
problem of finding a sequence of AG codes exceeding the Gilbert-Varshamov bound
will be the main feature of the research.
*****************************************************************************
Aubrey M. Bush Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison Director Division of
Networking and Communications Research and Infrastructure National Science
Foundation