* 9505036
* Efficient Extensions of Well-Founded Semantics for          Functions, Aggregation and Collection Types
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Allen Van Gelder, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 08/31/2001
* USD 80,433.00

Recent research has demonstrated that the well-founded semantics and its
equivalent, the alternating fixpoint semantics, can be implemented efficiently
on deductive databases (relational databases with additional function free
logical rules, which may introduce intertwined negation and recursion). Logic
programming is a natural candidate for a database programming language because
it shares the relational paradigm. This project is studying extensions to
traditional logical languages that are likely to be useful for database
programming, including nested relations and aggregation. Deductive rules
involving aggregation as a primitive operation permit a natural and concise
expression of several well-known optimization problems, such as shortest paths
in a graph. However, implementation of such primitive operations is complicated
by the fact they they occur inside recursion; that is, the relation being
aggregated within a deductive rule is also being defined in part by that same
rule. Greater complications are added if the rules may contain negation. This
project is developing algorithms to implement aggregation efficiently within
recursion and negation. Collection types are a valuable adjunct to deductive
database languages, and are closely related to aggregation, nested relations,
and complex objects. A collection type is any data type suitable for
representing a finite set. With collection types, a language can manipulate
relations (and nested relations) directly. This research is designing a language
to integrate collection types with deductive database rules, with sufficient
restrictions on the collection-typed objects to make efficient implementation
possible. For example, the language excludes unification among partially
instantiated sets. Integration of the functional programming paradigm and the
relational paradigm of logic programming is also being studied. Data typing
plays a central role. In logic programming functional terms are normally
uninterpreted, and specific data types are not declared. The main idea is to
establish contexts in which functional terms are interpreted as user-defined
functions. The objective is to provide a high level language that can manipulate
sets and relations in a convenient and understandable way, with sufficient power
to solve practical applications.