* 9505969
* Conference: Organellar Ion Channels and Transporters - The Annual Society of General Physiologists Meeting to be held September 8-11, 1995 in Woods Hole, MA
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Barbara Ehrlich, Society of General Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1996
* USD 6,000.00

9505969 Clapham This is a grant for support of an international symposium on
Organellar Ion Channels and Transporters to be held under the auspices of the
Society of General Physiologists. The symposium will focus on the biochemistry,
molecular biology, structure/function and physiology of ion channels and
transporters in intracellular membranes of the endoplasmic reticulum and other
organelles. The aim of the symposium is to integrate the physiological,
biochemical and genetic approaches to the study of this class of membrane
proteins and provide a focus for discussion of this new frontier of membrane
biology. The meeting consists of five sessions : 1)endoplasmic reticulum ion
channels and transporters, 2)mitochondrial channels and transporters, 3)nuclear
channels and transporters, 4) secretory mechanisms and 5)organellar localization
of calcium. There will also be poster sessions and a session entitled new ideas,
new faces, consisting of shorter talks by young investigators selected from
abstracts submitted for the poster session. These proceedings will be published.
%%% This meeting covers an area which is relatively recent in the studies on
membrane structure and function. Most of these studies have been concerned with
the plasma membrane, however this meeting concerns the membranes of the
intracellular organelles. Since these proceedings will be published, this
information will be available to all interested scientists. ***