* 9505561
* The Information/Communication Networks and the              Decentralization of Organizations
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Umesh Vazirani, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 07/31/1999
* USD 450,000.00

IRI-9505561 Marschak, Thomas University of California-Berkeley $450,000 - 36 mos
The Information Superhighway and the Decentralization of Organizations The
"Information Superhighway" promises to lead to the massive dispersion of
information-handling activities. What does a large organization lose and what
does it gain when it replaces face-to- face exchange of information among a
large group of persons with decentralizion to many remote sites? How does a
decentralized organization, which has a common task, make the best use of the
information infrastructure that ties it together? How should the costs of the
infrastructure, and of the local networks that connect to it, be measured and
how should the costs be divided up among the users. This research project aims
to clarify and study these complex questions. One segment of the program is the
modeling of real organizations; another is the development of new theory; and a
third is the empirical study of a continually accumulating database on Internet
usage at Berkeley, which will convert into a "testbed" for the experimental
study of alternative schemes for allocating network resources among users. One
aim of the empirical work is the (paper) design of an "On- line University". In
all parts of the research project, problems will be studied from the viewpoints
of several disciplines: economics, computer science, electrical engineering, and
operations research.