* 9505603
* International Nathiaghali Summer College on Physics and     Contemporary Needs/Energy and Sustainable Development,      June 22 to July 13, 1995, US-Pakistan Joint Project
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1997
* Toufiq Siddiqi, Center For Cultural&Tech Interchg East&West
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1997
* USD 25,000.00

Description: This project supports the participation of a delegation of US
scientists and engineers in `The Nathiaghali Summer College on Physics and
Contemporary Needs/Energy, Environment and Sustainable Development` planned for
June 22 to July 13, 1995 in Nathiaghali, Pakistan. The Program is for three
weeks: The first week is for discussions on `frontiers of physics` including
fundamental structure of matter, astrophysics and cosmology, and advances in
condensed matter physics; the second week is for `energy, environment and
sustainable development` including energy sources, demand and supply, energy
technology innovations, and energy and the environment; and the third week is
for `energy safety systems` including risk benefit assessment in energy systems,
reactor safety and the environment, and reliability enhancements in power
reactors. The participants include speakers from the United States, Europe, and
Pakistan, and attendees from China, India, Central Asia, the Middle East, as
well as from Pakistan. The participants will include university faculty members
and graduate students. Proceedings will be published, covering the presentations
and the important results of discussions. Scope: This project supports US
scientists' participation in one of the most successful regional meetings that
attract strong participation from most of the developing countries in Asia,
especially South and Central Asia, and also from China, South East Asia and
Africa, and some participation from Latin America. The speakers from the US and
from the European countries contribute to the extensive exchange of information,
and gain from interacting with the scientists from the various developing
countries represented. Partial support for the meeting comes from a number of
sources including the Government of Pakistan, the International Centre for
Theoretical Physics in Trieste, the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and the Islamic
Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization. The meeting is likely to
contribute to advancing science in the developing countries, and to help US
scientists by increasing their interaction with these developing countries and
their abilities to advance US scientific interests.