* 9505098
* Mathematical Sciences: Certain Set-Theoretic Principles and Their Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Piotr Koszmider, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 05/31/1998
* USD 48,000.00

9505098 Koszmider The method of forcing invented by Paul Cohen brought Godel's
result into the realm of mainstream mathematics: some problems on Banach spaces,
Lebesgue measure, or Whitehead groups are undecidable. As the continuum
hypothesis seems far from the basic properties of Lebesgue integral, these
principles seem far away from mathematical practice. However, as in the case of
the continuum hypothesis, they affect the standard objects of modern
mathematics. Set-theorists are developing a network of infinitary combinatorial
principles that provide answers to otherwise unsolvable problems. Some of these
principles involve the existence of two-cardinal combinatorial objects (e.g.,
morasses, or families of sets whose existence is equivalent to the existence of
morasses); these objects may be viewed as generalizations of cardinals. Although
constructions which employ these structures are usually more complicated than
constructions by the usual transfinite induction, they may be necessary in more
complicated situations. The first objective of the project is to extend and
develop new canonical methods of applying Velleman's simplified morasses for
constructing structures in Boolean algebras, topology and other fields. A second
objective is to develop new methods of constructing forcing notions using two-
cardinal combinatorial principles. These forcing notions are used directly for
proving undecidability. If the new combinatorial methods are applied to forcing
theory, this may result in a series of new consistency results in pure set
theory as well as in its applications. The third objective is to introduce
relatively manageable principles equivalent to higher gap morasses and develop
methods of applying them to the theory of Boolean algebras, topology and other
fields. Koszmider has selected well-known open problems from various fields as
test cases, conjecturing that some of these can be solved using the above new
methods. Mathematics is the language of science. Scientific problems are
translated into formal, precise and abstract mathematical problems. Mathematical
machinery provides solutions to these problems and gives blueprints (known as
theorems) that provide conclusions to given assumptions. Proving theorems is
what mathematics is all about; theorems directly or indirectly affect the way we
formulate and solve scientific problems. Is proving theorems a perfect method?
No! In 1930, Godel showed that in any reasonable system of mathematics there
will be conjectures which will never be decided and probems that will never be
solved, unless we add new axioms in the foundations of mathematics. Are these
unsolvable problems only artificial logical constructions? No! In 1964, Paul
Cohen invented the method of forcing, which since then has been used for
demonstating unsolvability of many problems of mainstream mathematics. We need
to know what problems are unsolvable and what extra assumptions in the
foundations of mathematics (new axioms) make them solvable. Based on his work in
the field and on partial research, Koszmider conjectures that certain
combinatorial principles will provide a new method for demonstrating
unsolvability of a large collection of important problems. These principles
could thus serve as extra axioms. These problems arise in various parts of
mathematics, such as infinitary combilatorics, Boolean algebra, and topology.
Koszmider plans to formalize this underlying theme and to prove its relation to
classical principles in order to use them efficiently. ***