* 9505930
* Petrogenesis of Diamondiferous Eclogites from the           Siberian Platform
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Lawrence Taylor, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1998
* USD 180,500.00

9505930 Taylor This is a comprehensive petrographic and geochemical study of
eclogite xenoliths from the Siberian platform using a consortium of scientists,
to establish the compositional and petrographical variation of eclogite
xenoliths from Siberia. Major- and trace-element data will be collected on
minerals by electron and ion microprobe. Bulk-rock compositions determined by
x-ray fluorescence and instrumental neutron-activation analysis, and stable
isotopic data (C and O) will be collected on mineral separates and bulk rocks (C
isotopic compositions only on diamond). Radiogenic isotopic data (Sr-Nd-Os) will
be collected on ultra-pure mineral separates and bulk rocks to evaluate the
sources from which these samples were derived (e.g., crustal or mantle) and the
age of these sources by model ages. Samarium-Nd isochrons from mantle xenoliths
that are older than their host rock. Finally, a unique opportunity has presented
itself in the form of five pairs of garnet-clinopyroxene inclusions which are
hosted by diamonds and which, in turn, are hosted by eclogite modules from the
Mir and Udachnaya pipes. A trace- and major -element study involving these
paired inclusions and comparing them to the host eclogites is paramount to our
understanding of eclogite and diamond formation and possible later metasomatism
of the host. This study will be the first comprehensive detailed study of
eclogite xenoliths from a northern hemisphere Archean-aged crustal segment.