* 9505866
* Counterion Accumulation Around Finite Nucleic Acid          Structures
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Paul Hagerman, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9505866 Hagerman The high local phosphate charge densities found in nucleic
acids, particularly those possessing significant tertiary structure, have a
profound influence on the spatial distribution and extent of association of the
counterion atmosphere. This interplay between the macroion and its counterions
can in turn play a principal role in determining the global conformation of the
macroion, or in directing the binding of proteins and small ligands. However,
except for linear nucleic acids, little is known regarding the nature of
counterion accumulation. In order to address this issue, the current research
combines computational and experimental approaches to the characterization of
two specific structural elements in nucleic acids, namely, the helix terminus
and the four-way junction. The former represents a simple paradigm for the
contribution of peripheral portions od nucleic acid structures to counterion
accumulation, while the latter provides a system for studying the contribution
of elements of higher-order (tertiary) structure. The computational approach
used to describe the degree of counterion association (Aim 1) involves grand
canonical Monte Carlo simulations to predict Donnan distribution (preferential
interaction) coefficients (( ) the principal observable in an equilibrium
dialysis experiment. The experimental determination ( of values for the linear
and branched nucleic acids represents Aim 2. Finally, the technique of steady-
state electrophoresis will be employed to examine the relationship between
thermodynamic ion binding (reflected in () and the effective charge of a nucleic
acid undergoing electrophoresis. %%% One important aspect of a general
understanding of gene expression is an appreciation of the means by which
regulatory proteins interact with DNA. While it is clear that one component of
such interactions involves specific recognition of DNA sequence, another, less
well understood component involves the interplay between charges on the DNA
molecule, the regulatory proteins, and small ions in the vicinity of the DNA.
Based on prior research it has become apparent that the distributions of small
ions in the vicinity of DNA can direct the binding of proteins to particular
locations, particularly when the DNA contains elements of higher-order structure
(e.g., branches, as found during recombination). The current research represents
a direct extension of the previous studies and will continue to rely heavily on
high-performance (supercomputer) computational work in combination with
experimental studies, both aimed at the further characterization of small-ion
distributions in the vicinity of DNA. Such studies will yield direct predictions
regarding the nature of the interactions between gene-regulatory proteins and
DNA. ***