* 9505618
* Atomic and Electronic Structure Investigations of Adlayers  on Semiconductors with Photoemission Holographic Imaging    and Spectroscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,03/31/2000
* Gerald Lapeyre, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2000
* USD 255,000.00

9505618 Lapeyre This project will use synchrotron radiation photoemission
spectroscopy and other electron spectroscopies to study the structure and
electronic properties of overlayers on semiconductor surfaces. Emphasis will be
given to the performance of photoelectron diffraction experiments where scanned
energy spectra can be inverted to obtain three dimensional images of the
photoemitting atom and its near neighbors. The inversion is a Fourier-like
transform based on the holographic principle and does not require any external
input to obtain an image. The technique has been demonstrated on various systems
including Al, Ga, As and Se on Si surfaces. Of particular interest for future
investigations are structural changes that influence the nature of growth--both
homo- and hetero-epitaxy--at semiconductor surfaces and the electronic
properties of surfaces. Photoemission holography will be applied to structure
determination of systems composed of various adsorbates on Si, GaAs, and ZnSe.
Two new applications of the holographic technique will be developed: a) a single
adsorbate on a compound semiconductor substrate, and b)multiple adsorbates on an
elemental semiconductor substrate. %%% A new atomic-level materials
characterization technique, photoemisson holography, is being developed and
applied to basic synthesis and processing research studies of materials with
strong technological relevance to electronics and optoelectronics. An important
feature of the program is the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area of materials research. ***