* 9505340
* Fabric of Granular Materials Studied by DEM and MRI
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Eiichi Fukushima, Lovelace Institutes
* Continuing grant
* Priscilla P. Nelson
* 06/30/1998
* USD 61,807.00

9505338 Ng The objective of this research is: 1) to non-invasively visualize the
interior and the behavior of a suitable mass of granular material by MRI
(Magnetic Resonance Imaging), and 2) to verify the microscopic observations
obtained by DEM (Discrete Element Method) simulations. Available macroscopic DEM
results on random arrays of ellipsoids produced by others are very promising.
They provide qualitatively correct results and some good quantitative
predictions for a wide range of strains, drained and undrained loading, and
static as well as cyclic loading. However, 3-D observations are needed for
verification. This research is feasible with the availability of MRI. The
results will provide a general theoretical framework for modeling the
constitutive relations of granular soils. *** 9505340 Nakagawa The objective of
this research is: 1) to non-invasively visualize the interior and the behavior
of a suitable mass of granular material by MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging), and
2) to verify the microscopic observations obtained by DEM (Discrete Element
Method) simulations. Available macroscopic DEM results on random arrays of
ellipsoids produced by others are very promising. They provide qualitatively
correct results and some good quantitative predictions for a wide range of
strains, drained and undrained loading, and static as well as cyclic loading.
However, 3-D observations are needed for verification. This research is feasible
with the availability of MRI. The results will provide a general theoretical
framework for modeling the constitutive relations of granular soils. *** 9503462
Ghaboussi A new method will be developed to determine constitutive models of
soils directly from the results of soil tests. The primary objective is to
develop and experimentally verify this method of determination, with the results
applied to the determination of the constitutive properties of soils from the
results of in situ tests and n ew types of laboratory tests. After developing
appropriate computational aspects utilizing neural networks to model behavior
and using the FEM, a series of experiments will be conducted to simulate the in
situ tests. Unlike conventional soils tests, in the proposed method it is
essential that the sample be subjected to a non uniform state of strain so that
different points within the sample can be subjected to as many different stress
paths as possible. New soils tests, including a relatively simple punched test,
will be developed and tested in the laboratory. These results will be used to
train the neural network. The development of methodology and the computational
aspects will be conducted at the University of Illinois. The experimental part
of the proposed research will be conducted at the Johns Hopkins University. ***
9503697 Lade A new method will be developed to determine constitutive models of
soils directly from the results of soil tests. The primary objective is to
develop and experimentally verify this method of determination, with the results
applied to the determination of the constitutive properties of soils from the
results of in situ tests and new types of laboratory tests. After developing
appropriate computational aspects utilizing neural networks to model behavior
and using the FEM, a series of experiments will be conducted to simulate the in
situ tests. Unlike conventional soils tests, in the proposed method it is
essential that the sample be subjected to a non uniform state of strain so that
different points within the sample can be subjected to as many different stress
paths as possible. New soils tests, including a relatively simple punched test,
will be developed and tested in the laboratory. These results will be used to
train the neural network. The development of methodology and the computational
aspects will be conducted at the University of Illinois. The experimental part
of the proposed rese arch will be conducted at the Johns Hopkins University. ***