* 9505051
* Mathematical Sciences: Global Bifurcations of Forced        Oscillator Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Bruce Peckham, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/2000
* USD 60,000.00

Peckham A periodically forced oscillator is a prototypical example of a
nonlinear mathematical model that is used to explain past behavior and predict
future behavior of physical, chemical, and ecological systems. The investigator
continues studies of two-parameter families of maps of the plane that are
generated by periodically forced oscillator systems. The broad goal is to
understand the qualitative behavior of these systems and how that behavior
changes, or "bifurcates," as parameters in the models are varied. The project
focuses on discrete dynamical systems rather than differential equations. It
aims to explain parameter space phenomena as projections of "more natural"
objects in the cartesian product of the phase and parameter spaces. The project
includes further development of tools for "local" bifurcation phenomena, such as
the birth of periodic orbits, but concentrates mostly on extending existing
tools and results for local phenomena to analogous tools and results for
"global" phenomena, such as the birth of homoclinic orbits. Study involves
software development, numerical simulation, and analysis of both the numerics
and the mathematics of global bifurcations. The project enables a more complete
understanding of a wide variety of bifurcation problems, including periodically
forced oscillators. It also provides tools for a more automatic bifurcation
study of other families of discrete dynamical systems. The investigator
continues studying a prototypical class of systems that is used to model a
variety of physical, chemical, and ecological systems. The goal of the project
is to study changes, or "bifurcations," in the qualitative behavior of these
systems as parameters are changed. For example, the number of hunting licenses
issued could be a parameter in a mathematical model of an ecosystem. There might
be a critical number of licenses below which deer would survive, and above which
the deer would die out. This critical number would be called a bifurcation value
of the parameter. An incredibly complex scenario of bifurcations is possible,
even for models that are described by very simple mathematical formulas. Hence,
some level of numerical investigation is absolutely necessary. The project
includes software development, numerical simulation, and analysis of both the
numerics and the mathematics of the bifurcations involved. The project enables a
more complete understanding of a wide variety of models. This leads to a better
understanding the past and a better chance of predicting the future of systems
behaving like these models, as well as for many other seemingly unrelated
systems.