* 9505738
* Long Term Study of Social Change in Rural Zambia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Thayer Scudder, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1998
* USD 206,354.00

This project involves the continuation of a long-term ethnographic study in
Africa that is in its 39th year, having begun in 1956. The project will continue
updating demographic, economic and social time-series data dealing with
residents and the Diaspora from 4 rural villages drawn from a rural &amp; urban
population of about 100,000 in the middle Zambezi Valley, Zambia. The project
began tracking the social and economic adjustments of 57,000 people displaced by
a World Bank financed river basin development project based on a dam that backed
up what was at the time the largest artificial reservoir in the world. The study
has gone on to document how the study population reacted to adverse government
policies that bankrupted the national economy and created one of the five
poorest rural populations in the world; how 10 years of endemic warfare leading
to national independence in 1980 affected the population, and how environmental
degradation arising from resettlement and drought, and social disruption arising
from cholera and AIDS have impacted the population. The project has so far
produced results which have directly influenced the World Bank's policies on
resettlement, by producing a theoretical framework for forecasting how
communities respond to such relocation. Hypotheses to be tested during the
1995-97 research period involve how poor people cope with inflation and the
relation between fertility, employment and education. The ongoing research of 3
young scholars who will continue the Gwembe study after the retirement of the
two current PIs is also part of this project. This project is important because
it advances our understanding of how local rural communities respond to global
processes of change such as forced resettlement due to internationally-financed
hydroelectric projects, rural economic hardships caused by internationally-
imposed financial `structural adjustment` policies, and social disruption caused
by AIDS and other infectious diseases Understanding of how traditional rural
communities react over the long-term can help planners design policies which
avoid slow-growing problems and which more effectively stimulate economic growth
and social development.