* 9505670
* The Cell Biology and Genetics of the Maize Meiotic          Kinetochore
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* R. Kelly Dawe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1997
* USD 35,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t - O b j e c t P o
o l / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 95-05670 R. Kelly Dawe This is a cytogenetic study of meiosis,
or gamete production, in maize, focusing on the structure, the kinetochore,
where the meiotic spindle attaches to the chromosome. In the post-doctoral work
which serves as a basis for this proposal, image processing of fluorescent
chromosomes using deconvolution software now comercially available resulted in
more accurate timing of when chromosome pairing occurs during meiosis and a new
cytological map for maize chromosome at the start of meiosis. Using mutant maize
inbred lines, evidence was obtained to support the hypothesis that the
kinetichore is a prerequisite to spindle formation in meiosis and that
kinetochore-like structures appear in an inbred line with an abnormal chromosome
10. Dr Dawe will now pursue higher resolution imaging in order to achieve 3D
reconstruction of the kinetochore itself. Antibodies which have been used to
fluorescently tag the kinetochore will now be used to map its substructure. The
proteins which code for these kinetochore proteins will be cloned and monoclonal
antibodies prepared. These reagent s and select inbred lines will be used to map
the structural differences between the meiotic and mitotic kinetochores, between
kinetochores involved in reductional vs. equatorial division, and between the
normal kinetochore and the kinetochore-like structure found in a line with
abnomral chromosome 10. %%% The meiotic kinetochore has historically provided
important insights into the broader functions of the kinetochore, one of the
most important structures on the chromosome. It has been shown to bind telomeric
DNA, hold sister chromatids together, bind to spindle microtubules, interact
with molecular motors on the spindle,and produce a signal that is used as a cell
cycle check point. Insight into the way it does this will come with this study
which dissects the components of the kinetochore and shows how they interact and
change spacially with time. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i
o n ( . D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 95-05670 Una Solomon Una Solomon @ O @
@ O @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e 3 e - p p p p p p p u 1 7 W T 3 u p u p p p p
p p p p i 95-05670 R. Kelly Dawe This is a cytogenetic study of meiosis, or
gamete production, in maize, focusing on the structure, the kinetochore, where
the meiotic spindle attaches to the chromosome. In the post-doctoral work which
serves as a basis for this proposal, image processing of fluorescent chromosomes
using deconvolution software now comercially available resulted in more accurate
timing of when chromosome pairing occurs during meiosis and a new cytological
map for maize chromosome at the start of meiosis. Using mutant maize inbred
lines, evidence was obtai