* 9505545
* International Postdoctoral Fellows Program:  Rheology and   Morphology of Immiscible Blends of Flexible and Liquid      Crystal Polymers
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Lynn Walker, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 03/31/1997
* USD 29,300.00

9505545 Walker The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral Fellows
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support an eight-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Lynn M. Walker to work with Professor Paula
Moldenaers at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in Belgium. The blending of
polymeric materials during processing is a rapidly growing industrial practice
with the goals of capitalizing on specific pure component properties and
lowering processing costs. Blending offers an almost infinite range of final
properties, the potential to utilize recycled and high volume materials and the
ability to use existing processing equipment without costly alterations.
Unfortunately, the blending of polymeric materials is not fully understood at a
fundamental level, making the robust a priori prediction of final properties
almost impossible. This limits the widespread use of heterogeneous blends,
especially those containing complex and specialized polymeric materials. However
it is the unique properties of these complex polymeric materials that offer the
most potential gain in blending processes. The purpose of this research is to
gain a fundamental grasp of the flow-induced behavior observed in one special
group of blends. Specifically, the PI will study heterogeneous blends containing
a matrix of flexible polymer and inclusions of liquid crystal polymer (LCP), and
perform several rheological and rheo-optical experiments on a model blend. The
results will provide quantitative estimates of the macroscopic and microscopic
parameters used in present models for heterogeneous blends. ***