* 9505773
* CARRER: Estimation of Fracture Aperture Distributions       From Wellbore Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Carl Renshaw, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1998
* USD 77,612.00

9505773 Renshaw Fractures are recognized as important component of many
subsurface flow systems. Consequently, an understanding of the hydrogeologic
characteristics of fractures directly affects our ability to model such
important societal problems as waste isolation, ore deposit genesis, natural
resource recovery, and aquifer remediation. Over the past decade, numerous
investigators have used theoretical, numerical and experimental methods to
attempt to understand the flow and transport characteristics of individual
fractures. While the experimental and conceptual models of the fracture geometry
used by each of these investigators differs, the basic conclusion reached by
each is the same; that flow and transport through an individual fracture is
primarily controlled by the fracture apertures within the fracture plane and ,
in particular, the mean and variance of the fracture aperture distribution.
Unfortunately, little data are available on the distribution of fracture
apertures in a single fracture. Further, it is unclear to what extent fracture
aperture data obtained from surficial exposures or laboratory samples, which
have been subject to unloading and /or stress concentrations due to blasting,
represent the in situ distribution of fracture apertures. Thus the primary
objective of the proposed work is to develop and experimentally test an
indirect.in situ distribution of fracture apertures. Thus the primary objective
of the proposed work is to develop and experimentally test an indirect, in situ,
technique for estimating the distribution of fracture apertures based on three
different types of wellbore data: direct aperture measurement, hydraulic head
measurements and tracer arrival time times. For flow and transport through a
very simple fracture in an impermeable matrix, the proposed estimation procedure
is demonstrated to predict the distribution of fracture apertures with a
reasonable degree of accuracy. In order to adapt this procedure to real
fractures, the possible diff usion and sorption of the tracer into and onto the
fracture walls and rock matrix needs to be considered. Testing the estimation
procedure on a laboratory scale sample with a measureable aperture distribution
is also proposed. Such a test of the technique is a necessary prerequisite for
the application of the estimation procedure to field data. The proposed research
complements the education objectives as both seek to further integrate the tools
and techniques of engineering hydrolgeology with more traditional geological
analyses. For example, one of the education goals is to redesign the
introductory hydrogeology curriculum to more thoroughly integrate the
engineering and geological aspects of the field. This includes the development
of exercises and interactive computer-based laboratories which require the
students to interpret and analyze geologic data before they begin to model the
hydrogeology of the system. Additionally, the introductory course is being
redesigned to include many of the more recent engineering analyses not found in
traditional courses. These include discussions on such topics as slope and fault
stability, geostatistics, linear estimation and uncertainty, and optimization
and management. The goal is not only to demonstrate the many different aspects
of modern hydrogeology, but also to give the students sufficient background that
they might apply these tools to problems in other geoscience fields beyond
hydrogeology.