* 9505275
* Mathematical Sciences:  Efficient Numerical Methods for     Large Reynolds Number Unsteady Viscous Incompressible Flows
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Jian-Guo Liu, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 06/30/1998
* USD 58,110.00

EFFICIENT NUMERICAL METHODS FOR LARGE REYNOLDS NUMBER UNSTEADY VISCOUS
INCOMPRESSIBLE FLOWS Jian-Guo Liu Project Summary: The investigator proposes to
develop and analyze efficient, accurate, and reliable numerical methods for
unsteady viscous incompressible flows in the presence of boundaries with large
Reynolds number, in hopes of simulating directly wall-generated turbulence.
Efficient numerical computations of 3-D incompressible flow are currently far
behind the practical needs. Indeed, even some very basic issues in formulating a
numerical method are unsettled whenever boundaries are present, such as the
correct numerical boundary conditions for the vorticity and efficient 3-D
formulation. Some connections between different types of vorticity boundary
formulations, such as local via global and the MAC scheme via Thom's formula,
have already been found by this investigator and his collaborator Weinan E. With
explicit treatment of the vorticity term and high-order (essentially) compact
difference approach, they recently introduced a very efficient fourth order
scheme in vorticity-stream function (vector) formulation, together with a
complete convergence theory. The investigator proposes to continue developing
efficient and accurate numerical methods for the three dimensional computation
using both the vorticity-stream function and vorticity-velocity formulations.
The investigator also plans to conduct a systematic study of statistical
behavior and coherent structure of some 2-D and 3-D wall-bounded turbulence
flows such as the driven cavity flow, backward-facing step flow, etc. and carry
out a detailed numerical comparison with the homogeneous isotropic turbulence
simulations. Extensive work has been done on direct simulation of isotropic
turbulence in wall-free flows, much less work has involved wall-bounded
turbulence. However, most turbulence is generated at the walls. Understanding
turbulent flows is a grand challenge comp arable to other prominent scientific
problems such as the large-scale structure of the universe and the nature of
subatomic particles. In contrast to many of the other grand challenges, progress
on the basic theory of turbulence translates nearly immediately into a wide
range of engineering applications and technological advances that affect many
aspects of everyday life. Direct numerical simulation for Navier-Stokes equation
is an effective tool that complements experimental and theoretical investigation
of turbulence. The investigator proposes to study two problems in the field: (1)
Developing efficient, robust and reliable numerical methods for viscous
incompressible flows in domains with solid boundaries, especially in the cases
with large Reynolds number. (2) Using these methods to study statistical
behavior and coherent structure of two and three dimensional wall-bounded
turbulence via direct numerical simulations.