* 9505729
* A Proposal for a Workshop on the Roles of Marine            Laboratories in the Implementation of the Nation's Emerging Priorities for Research and Monitoring in the Coastal Zone
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Thomas Malone, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 10/31/1996
* USD 120,854.00

9505729 Malone Funds are provided for a multi-institutional workshop to discuss
the roles of marine laboratories in implementing priorities for research and
monitoring in the coastal zone. The workshop is being sponsored by NSF, NOAA
Coastal Ocean Program, and EPA Office of Research and Development. The
workshop's goal is to identify mechanisms by which marine laboratories can best
address national needs in coastal monitoring and research. The potential role(s)
of marine laboratories will be discussed in light of several areas of interest:
1) multidisciplinary research that transcends scales of biological organization
from molecules to organisms and ecosystems; 2) multidisciplinary research that
transcends the traditional boundaries of ecosystems constituting the land-sea
interface from drainage basin to coastal ocean; 3) cost-effective monitoring
networks that will not only document environmental variability and detect trends
but will also provide a framework for hypothesis testing to reveal causes and
consequences of such trends; 4) information flow and liaison between the
research community, federal and state agencies, and the public; and 5) regional
distributed data and information management systems for scientific analysis and
the formulation of integrated strategies for coastal zone management. The
workshop is to organized under the auspices of the National Association of
Marine Laboratories (NAML).