* 9506008
* Collaborative Research: Hydrologic Implications of          Carbonate Cementation in an Alluvial Aquifer, Sierra        Ladrones Formation, NM
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Peter Mozley, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/1998
* USD 56,173.00

9506008 Mozley This proposal is for a collaborative research project
investigating the relationships between groundwater flow and diagenesis in
alluvial aquifers. Geologists have long recognized the importance of groundwater
in the physical and chemical alteration of sediments. However, relatively few
studies have been conducted that explicitly and quantitatively account for
groundwater flow. Groundwater controls on the spatial distribution of diagenetic
fabrics have received even less attention. Hydrogeologists, on the other hand,
are beginning to formulate quantitative models describing the spatial
distribution of hydraulic conductivity. From a geological perspective, the
spatial distribution of hydraulic conductivity is a result of the processes of
deposition and diagenesis. Incorporating information about geological processes
into quantitative models of heterogeneity requires an understanding of the
relationship between the processes and the spatial distribution of hydraulic
conductivity. In this study, the relationship between groundwater flow and
diagenesis will be investigated in the Plio-Pleistocene Sierra Ladrones
Formation, an alluvial aquifer in the Albuquerque Basin of central New Mexico.
Previous work has resulted in a comprehensive understanding of the depositional
and paleogeographic setting of the study area. The proposed research has two
principal objectives: (1) to determine the influence of early carbonate
cementation on heterogeneity, and (2) to understand the controls on the origin
and spatial distribution of early carbonate cement, the main diagenetic
alteration influencing permeability in the unit. The first objective is a
natural extension of previous work at the study site by Davis and colleagues,
investigating the relationship of depositional features to heterogeneity. The
second objective builds upon preliminary work at the site that indicates a close
relationship between cementation and past fluid flow conditions. The
hydrological aspects of the study wil l be the responsibility of J. M. Davis
(University of New Hampshire) and the diagenetic/geochemical aspects will be the
responsibility of P.S. Mozley (New Mexico Tech). The study will involved mapping
the distribution and orientation of cemented zones in the field, and
petrographic and geochemical analysis of the cements. The principal questions
addressed by the proposed research are: (1) What are the types and spatial
distributions of the calcite cements? (2) What is the origin of the various
types of cements? (3) What are the permeability characteristics of the different
types of cemented zones? (4) Can the spatial distribution of the cements and the
orientation of elongate concretions be used to infer past groundwater flow
conditions in the saturated zone?