* 9506413
* Synthetic, Structural and Mechanistic Investigations of     New Derivatives of the Early Transition Metals Having       Reactive Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* John Bercaw, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 05/31/1998
* USD 504,000.00

Dr. John E. Bercaw, Chemistry Department, California Institute of Technology, is
supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry Program
of the Chemistry Division for synthetic, structural, and mechanistic
investigations of early transition metal complexes having reactive ligands. A
series of Lewis acidic group 4 and 5 metal complexes which contain adjacent
Lewis base sites contained in coordinated ligands will be prepared. Because of
the amphoteric nature of these compounds new pathways for the activation of H-X
sigma bonds will be opened and the oxidation state of the metal can be adjusted
through the control of pH. The mechanisms of new reaction types will be
determined and comparisons will be made with the more usual bent sandwich
analogues of the metals. Catalysts based on transition metal compounds are used
extensively in the chemical industry and important new developments in organo-
transition metal chemistry often center on the development of new catalysts or
on the optimization of existing ones. The objective of this research is to
prepare and structurally characterize new types of early transition-metal
compounds that contain `non-innocent` groups attached to the metal. These
groups, called ligands, will bear reactive sites that will allow the behavior of
the transition metal to be altered in novel, systematic ways. The new compounds
should activate bonds involving hydrogen and may catalyze olefin polymerization.
The ultimate goal is to develop catalysts to selectively transform readily
available substances such as hydrocarbons, water, and ammonia into more valuable
products.