* 9506195
* Career: The Role of Protease Activities in Arabidopsis      thaliana Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Susannah Gal, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 06/30/2001
* USD 449,770.00

9506195 Gal Proteins are the major structural and enzymatic component of the
cell. The level of these essential compounds is dependent not only on the level
of synthesis, but also on the level of breakdown by proteolytic enzymes. Despite
their identification and study since early in this century, proteases have been
primarily analyzed only in vitro. This includes analysis of their substrate
specificity, pH optimum and inhibitor susceptibility. But, the role of these
enzymes in plant physiology can at present only be speculated from these
studies. Proteases have been implicated in such processes as leaf senescence,
organ abscission, seed germination and resource reutilization, but are likely to
be involved at many other stages of plant growth where protein degradation is
important. For example, expression of a number of specific protein products is
hampered by their instability due to natural mechanisms of protein degradation
in some tissues. Relatively little is known about the mechanisms of proteolytic
degradation in plants, so this proposed work will identify the proteases in
Arabidopsis thaliana. The goal is to determine the role of the these enzymes in
plants and which one(s) affect the accumulation of desirable proteins. Not only
will this work set the stage for understanding how proteolysis controls a number
of cellular processes, but may also lead to new approaches in plant
biotechnology where protein levels are critical for maintenance of a desirable
phenotype. The State University of New York at Binghamton prides itself on its
excellence in teaching and research. Dr. Gal's educational objectives during
this granting period would support that role of the university and the
department. The goal is to integrate teaching and research by bringing more
research into course teaching and by bringing a teaching framework to the
undergraduate and graduate students in the laboratory and the department. This
would equip the students with the cri tical thinking skills needed for a
lifetime of learning in biology.