* 9506694
* Phylogenetic and Biological Studies of Dinosaur Bone        Histology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Peter Dodson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 170,190.00

Dodson 9506694 Bone histology is a complex biological phenomenon. The nature of
bone reflects phylogeny, ontogeny and events that punctuate the life history of
the individual. Genuine progress in the study of dinosaur bone histology has
resulted from disciplined studies of ontogenetic series of homologous bones.
Such studies offer the best possible basis for physiological inferences about
dinosaurs. Living and fossil ectotherms typically show bone structure termed
lamellar-zonal, having wide zones alternating with narrow annuli, reflecting
annual periods of rapid and slow bone deposition respectively. In living
endotherms fibro-lamellar bone records rapid growth, typically without seasonal
interruptions. Dinosaurs bone shows features characteristic of both endotherms
and ectotherms. It is now evident that azonal fibrolamellar bone is not a
character of basal dinosaurs, but is a derived character state that evolved
independently several times in different lineages within the Dinosauria.
Histology promises a privileged and powerful insight into dinosaur biology. In
considering the paleobiology of dinosaurs, we will assess these animals on their
own unique merits, without forcing them into stereotypes based on living
endotherms and ectotherms. Four aspects of the proposed research are especially
noteworthy: the standardized study of ontogenetic series of the same species;
the phylogenetic study of the variation of bone tissue types; the stratigraphic
distribution of bone types; and the investigation of the bone biology of living
endotherms and ectotherms. In the proposed research the phylogenetic scope of
growth series of dinosaurs will be extended to include basal dinosaurs ,
thyreophorans, and marginocephalians, as well as more derived forms such as
hypsilophodontids, maniraptorans and basal birds. As a result, the evolution and
distribution of bone types will be drawn into sharper phylogenetic focus than
was previously possible. The proposed studies span the entire stratigrap hic
distribution of dinosaurs, from the Late Triassic to the Late Cretaceous. A
particularly valuable aspect of this study is the inclusion of growth series of
the Chinese dinosaurs Lufengosaurus, Shunosaurus, and Protoceratops. Equally
important, these studies will encompass a diverse array of extant ectotherms and
endotherms. Studies of living animals of known environmental and biological
history will elucidate factors that influence the structure of bone. The result
of these investigations will be deeper insight into the phylogenetic and
paleobiological significance of the histological structures of fossil bone.