* 9506287
* The Genomes and DNA Processing in Oxytricha Species
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* David Prescott, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1999
* USD 405,000.00

9506287 Prescott The purpose of these groups of experiments is to understand the
evolution and unique structure of macronuclear and micronuclear genomes and
their processing in development. Three strategies to study the micronuclear
genome and its processing and the evolution of the macronuclear and micronuclear
genomes are proposed: 1. Comparison of macronuclear with micronuclear versions
of 5 genes in addition to the 5 already studied is proposed to establish the
frequency of gene scrambling and a fuller definition of various scrambling
patterns. 2. The temporal relationships of DNA processing events, particularly
IES excision, MDS unscrambling, excision of gene-sized molecules from
chromosomes, and telomere addition are to be detected in individual developing
macronuclei with polymerase chain reactions. 3. A comparison of sequence
versions of particular genes among several species of Oxytricha will give a
measure of phylogenetic relationships and show how scrambling of micronuclear
genes changes or is modified in evolution. %%% Cilliated protozoa possess a
transcriptionally inactive germline nucleus (micronucleus) and a
transcriptionally active somatic nucleus (macronucleus) within the same cell.
After two cells mate, a new macronucleus develops from a micronuclear fusion
product in each mating partner, and the old macronucleus disintegrates. In
cilliates of the hypotrich group, DNA sequences are extensively amplified, cut,
spliced, eliminated, and reordered during the 3-day development of a
macronucleus. During these events blocks of DNA sequences in many genes are
reordered to produce transcriptionally functional genes. Comparison of the DNA
sequences of micronucliar with macronuclear versions of 5 genes has shown that
micronuclear versions are interrupted by multiple, short AT-rich sequences
called internal eliminated sequences (IESs) that are spliced out during
macronuclear development. Three of the 5 genes are scrambled; blocks of sequence
called macronuclear destined sequences (MD Ss) which are separated by IESs, are
out of order, and, in some instances, inverted compared to the transcriptionally
functional macronuclear versions of the genes. Parts or all of this DNA
processing may represent evolution of novel molecular operations or may
represent exploitation of molecular operations sporadically used in less
conspicuous forms among other eukaryotes. In either case, these unusual events
are an opportunity to learn about possible ways that an organism may manipulate
its genomic DNA. Experiments to provide more detail of the actual mechanisms
involved will be done. ***