* 9506237
* Genetic Analysis of Maternal Functions in Drosophila
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Norbert Perrimon, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/1999
* USD 184,748.00

9506237 Perrimon A detailed analysis of genes critical for early events in
cellular determination is one of the best approaches to the understanding of the
mechanics of early development. Embryonic development in Drosophila requires
both maternal and zygotic gene products. To identify genes that control specific
embryonic patterning events, maternal functions have been detected via mutations
isolated from screens for female sterility, while zygotic functions which are
masked by the maternally stored gene product and loci with specific maternal
effect lethal phenotypes which are associated with pre- imaginal lethality
cannot be identified using these two approaches. To characterize the function of
such loci Dr. Perrimon has previously successfully used germline mosaic
techniques. These analyses, which were limited to the X-chromosome for technical
reasons, identified a large number of new genes that play critical roles during
embryonic development. The goal of this proposal is to conduct near saturation
screens for all zygotic lethal mutations located on the second and third
chromosomes (80% of the genome) that are associated with specific maternal
effect lethal phenotypes. These experiments will provide a complete description
of the kinds of processes controlled by the maternal activity of essential
genes. In addition, they will provide the foundation for further detailed
analyses of various patterning systems that operate during embryogenesis. Dr.
Perrimon's laboratory will focus on the characterization of new terminal class
genes. In addition, since these screens will generate a large collection of
additional mutations with interesting phenotypes, the collection of mutants will
be made available to the fly community. The wealth of information generated from
these studies will contribute to our general understanding of the mechanisms
underlying embryonic pattern formation in Drosophila and will identify the
genetic functions encoded by the Drosophila genome . ***