* 9506051
* Microtubule-Associated Proteins and the Regulation of       Microtubule Organization During Oogenesis and Early         Development in Xenopus laevis
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,12/31/2000
* David Gard, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2000
* USD 404,855.00

MCB 9506051 David Gard Substantial evidence suggests that microtubules play
important roles in the establishment of two important developmental axes that
are specified or established prior to the cleavage of fertilized amphibian eggs:
the animal-vegetal (A-V) axis of oocytes and eggs, and the dorsal-ventral (D-V)
axis of the developing embryo. The proposed experiments investigate the role
that microtubule-associated proteins (MAPs) play in regulating microtubule
assembly and organization during formation of the A-V and D-V axes in Xenopus
oocyte and embryos. Three biochemically-distinct XMAPs have been isolated from
Xenopus eggs. Confocal and electron microscopy will be used to examine the
distribution of XMAPs during oogenesis and early development. Microinjection of
XMAPs and XMAP antibodies will be used to probe the function of these proteins
in oocytes , eggs, and embryos. The effects of XMAP phosphorylation on
microtubule assembly will be addressed in vitro and in permeabilized oocytes and
eggs. Finally, molecular cloning will be used to examine the structural
relationship between XMAPs and MAPs from other species. Results from this
project will provide new information on the role of the microtubules in the
formation of cellular and embryonic polarity. %%% This project will examine the
regulation of a cytoskeletal network (i.e., microtubules) using oocytes, eggs,
and embryos of the frog as a model system. Results from this project will
provide information on mechanisms establishing cellular polarity and embryonic
polarity during early development. Consequently, this project should provide
insights into the mechanisms that establish the body plan of an organism. ***