* 9506916
* Heterochromatic Loci and Position Effects in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Gerold Schubiger, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1999
* USD 420,000.00

9506916 Wakimoto In the proposed studies, the regulatory difference between
heterochromatic and euchromatic genes will be examined using germline
transformation and chromosome rearrangements. The cis-regulatory requirements of
the light (lt) gene will be identified by testing the effect of specific
repetitive DNAs on transcription of a transgene that contains the It promoter
fused to the coding sequences of the bacterial lac Z gene. Repetitive DNA
fragments will also be tested for their ability to confer the properties of
heterochromatin by assaying insertions for effects on chromosome morphology,
euchromatic gene expression and gene dosage using germline transformation. As a
complementary approach, larger regions of the left arm of chromosome 2 (2LH)
will be tested for various functions by comparing the effects of chromosome
rearrangements that variegate for heterochromatic and euchromatic genes, but
differ only in the amount of 2Lh. These overlapping deletions provide the
material for physical mapping of the heterochromatin so functional properties
can be correlated with size of a heterochromatic block or the type of repetitive
DNA. %%% The chromosomes of higher eukaryotes are comprised of two cytologically
distinct domains, heterochromatin and euchromatin. Heterochromatin appears
darkly stained and tightly condensed throughout the cell cycle, including
interphase, while euchromatm shows cell cycle changes in the level of
condensation. The structure and function of heterochromatin will be examined
through the study of the heterochromatin on the left arm of 2Lh of Drosophila
melanogaster. Previous studies have shown that at least eight genes located
within 2Lh require proximity to heterochromatin for normal levels of expression.
Chromosome rearrangements that remove these genes from centric heterochromatin
and place them in distal euchromatic regions cause variegated expression.
Molecular studies have shown that long, heterogeneous arrays of repetitive DNA
are located within and surroundilg one heterochromatic gene, the lt gene. These
studies address questions about the molecular determinants of higher order
chromosome structure and the functional significance of the heterochromatin.
Therefore, the results should contribute to a better understanding of chromosome
structure in other organisms *** ??