* 9506958
* Recreating European Identity in Situations of Cultural      Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Peter Wells, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 8,762.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Peter Wells and a graduate student
assistant will study archaeological materials in German museum collections. They
will focus on artifacts which date to late pre Roman and early Roman periods,
assess the nature and extent of these collections and use this information as
the basis for the formulation of a larger project. These data will allow Dr.
Wells to select potential sites for future excavation. Between 58 BC and 83 AD
the Roman empire extended northwards into temperate Europe and incorporated
local groups. Dr. Wells is interested in the process of incorporation and the
kinds of changes and accommodations which are made by both cultures in this
interaction. Limited historical documentation exists and these data will
increase the potential contribution of the archaeological research. The work has
the ultimate potential to add, not only to scientific understanding of cultural
interaction between dominant and subservient groups but also to contribute to
archaeological technique and methodology. Archaeologists attempt to reconstruct
cultural process on the basis of excavated material remains and this can be
complicated to do. In the Roman case, documents provide some historic control.
Through study of the material correlates of Roman incorporation, Dr. Wells hopes
to develop markers which may prove of interpretive use in other archaeological
contexts.