* 9506002
* A Dissection of the Yeast ER Translocation Machine
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Jeffrey Brodsky, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1999
* USD 416,419.00

9506002 Brodsky The molecular mechanism of protein translocation into the yeast
ER will be detailed, affording a deeper understanding of how polypeptides may
cross biological membranes. Although several factors required for protein
translocation have been identified through genetic analyses, how these
components act coordinately to thread a precursor protein across the ER membrane
remains obscure. Each member of the translocation complex will be purified using
standard techniques and analyzed with a novel biochemical complementation test.
The mechanism(s) whereby ATP drives protein translocation, perhaps by altering
the conformation and activity of a subcomplex of the translocation apparatus
will be investigated. The purification of active members of the translocation
complex will rely on an assay in which wild type protein fractions are tested
for their ability to restore protein import to reconstituted proteoliposomes
prepared from cells with non-functional mutations in the corresponding genes. An
active subcomplex of the translocation complex was successfully purified using
this test of biochemical complementation. Once other active components in the
complex are isolated, their interactions with one another, their associations
with a precursor protein and ribosomes, and their ability to regulate the
translocation channel will be investigated. A liposome reconstituted with
essential purified factors in the complex should support protein import and
determine which members of the translocation machine are stimulatory or
regulatory. To examine how constituents of the translocation complex interact,
affinity columns containing the required translocation factors are prepared.
Purified proteins or crude solubilized membrane extracts are applied to the
matrices to identify interacting subcomplexes or novel members of the
translocation complex. To determine which factors in the translocation apparatus
contact ribosomes and precursor proteins, purified factors will be r
econstituted into liposomes and mixed with radiolabeled ribosomes or secreted
proteins to assess their interaction. A likely candidate for these contacts is
the translocation channel, Sec61p, which is presently 50% pure and biochemically
complements the sec61 mutant in the reconstituted assay described above. The
interaction of Sec61p with other factors in the translocation complex and
measurements of the uptake of radiolabeled peptides into liposomes containing
either Sec61p alone or combined with other purified proteins offer insights into
how the translocation pore is regulated. These studies will dissect an intricate
protein machine at the ER membrane that performs the first step in the secretory
pathway. The results from this study will permit an understanding of how the
transport of a protein across a membrane, an energetically unfavorable process,
is facilitated by the translocation complex: a membrane protein machine of this
complexity has not been fully examined and reconstituted to date. The work
proposed here will further the comprehension of energy-requiring transport
systems, of gated channels, of heat shock protein function, and of the secretory
pathway. Finally, because these studies utilize a genetically defined system and
biochemical methods, novel techniques for examining membrane transport and other
cell biological phenomena will become evident. %%% The cell uses protein
complexes to spacially organize temporal events. These protein machines are
found throughout the cell and help to organize, for example, metabolic
sequences, global cellular structure and polarity, and traffic of newly
synthesized proteins to their correct locations. The protein machine of interest
here is an example of the latter; it is one which recognizes newly synthesized
proteins destined for delivery outside the cell (secretion) and, like a grocery
clerk, bags them up. Interestingly, it only takes those items which should be
secreted, so it must recognize those items and open up the bag for them only --
not other proteins. The movement (translocation) of proteins into the bag, or
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), is regulated by this energy-consuming protein
machine. This work is to dissect the machine, purify the components, and
reconstitute its activity using a "synthetic" bag, a liposome. This type or
reconstitution has not been done before. The components of the machine have been
identified using the power of yeast genetics; if one of the components is made
nonfunctional by mutation, the machine stops. The sensitivity of the machine to
these mutations can be studied both in the cell (using ER) and in the test tube
(using liposomes). The interaction of these components, their energy dependence,
and their self-assembly in the test tube are analyzed. The results have
application to how other protein machines fit together and how the cell
regulates what gets out of and what stays inside the cell. ***