* 9506828
* RNA Localization and Localization-Dependent Translational   Control in Drosophila Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Elizabeth Gavis, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9506828 Gavis Establishment of anterior-posterior polarity of the Drosophila
embryo requires the asymmetric distribution of determinant molecules.
Restriction of the posterior determinant, encoded by the nanos gene, to the
posterior of the embryo is essential for normal development. High concentrations
of Nanos in the anterior of the embryo suppresses head and thorax development.
Spatial restriction of nanos expression occurs by a novel mechanism;
translational repression of unlocalized nanos RNA and derepression by
localization of nanos RNA to the posterior pole. Independent but overlapping
cis-acting sequence elements have been identified within the nanos 3'
untranslated region (3' UTR) that mediate RNA localization and translational
repression of unlocalized nanos RNA. The proposed research aims to elucidate the
molecular mechanism that effects translational regulation of nanos RNA and its
linkage to RNA localization by identification and characterization of components
of the cellular machinery that act through the defined nanos 3'UTR sequences.
The experiments described will be directed toward: 1) further analysis of the
cis-acting sequences that mediate localization dependent translational control
guided by evolutionary sequence and secondary structure comparisons and
identification of binding sites for trans acting factors and 2) isolation and
characterization of factors that interact with the translational control element
by both biochemical methods and genetic screens. ***