* 9506752
* RPG: Stable Oxygen and Hydrogen Isotope Studies of          Groundwater and Wood from the Last Glacial Maximum to the   Present
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Xiahong Feng, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 02/28/1997
* USD 17,997.00

ABSTRACT EAR-9506752 Feng A commonly used climatic indicator in continental
paleoclimatic studies is inferred oxygen and hydrogen isotopic compositions of
paleometeoric water either by direct measurements, such as polar ice, or by
using proxy indicators, such as lake sediments, soil carbonates, cave deposits,
vein calcite, and tree rings. Because climatic indicators are rarely single-
variable functions of meteoric water, the climatic reconstructions are not
always consistent. In particular, groundwater samples dating back to the Last
Glacial Maximum are typically depleted in deuterium relative to worldwide
Holocene recharge, while waters inferred from wood cellulose is typically
enriched in deuterium. This project attempts to resolve the cause(s) and
mechanisms of this observational discrepancy. The main approach is to locate
meteoric recharge zones known to be responsible for some of the
paleogroundwaters that have been described, and find and analyze wood samples
known to have grown in the same area. If the disagreement between Pleistocene
groundwater and Pleistocene wood is confirmed, then it may imply fundamental
differences in climatic parameters between the Last Glacial Maximum and the
Holocene. Emphasis during the Planning Grant will be placed on finding
appropriate sites for the study. The focus will be on the north-central and
central U.S, where paleogroundwater and ancient wood samples are well
documented, and North China, where Pleistocene water is widely distributed.
Because the discrepancy between groundwater and wood is a large-scale
observation, the causes must be large scale phenomena. Thus, this project should
make fundamental contributions to the understanding of the climate and
environment.