* 9506077
* REG:  High-Speed Computing and Date Analysis Systems for    Physical and Numerical Modeling or Complex Three-Dimensional Homogeneous and Hetergeous Flows
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1996
* Omar Knio, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Roger E.A. Arndt
* 03/31/1996
* USD 69,589.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9506077 Meneveau Johns Hopkins University The Department of
Mechanical Engineering at The Johns Hopkins University will purchase a high
performance computing, communications and visualization system which will be
dedicated to research on complex fluid-thermal processes. The equipment
requested consists of a high-speed computer and one graphics workstation for 3-D
visualization and animation, linked together and connected to laboratories by a
high-speed fiber network. This equipment will (I) allow processing of extensive
mulit-dimensional laboratory data, (ii) provide computing power necessary to
perform large-scale numerical simulations, and (iii) compare and integrate large
computational and experimental data sets. This will have a significant impact on
the following projects: (a) Analysis of small-scale models for large-eddy
simulation of turbulent flow, where massive experimental data sets are analyzed
to study unsolved problems in the modeling of subgrid-scales. (b) Study of
generation mechanisms of small bubbles, where a new method of producing tiny
bubbles at high rates is investigated experimentally and theoretically. (c)
Thermoacoustic refrigeration, where heat flow is driven by acoustic energy. This
study - experimental, computational, and analytical - addresses the factors
limiting the efficiency of present systems.