* 9506111
* Cloning and Characterization of Biomineralization Matrix    Phosphoprotein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Anne George, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* A Berry
* 07/31/1998
* USD 294,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 3 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l 3 3 4 @ : ; &lt; = &gt; ? @ A B C D F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; e a structural network comprised of collagen
fibrils, into which calcium is deposited to form the final, hard product.
However, the mechanism by which calcium in trapped and deposited in the matrix
in an orderly fashion is not understood. Present experiGeorge, Anne MCB-9506111
Biomineralization, the biogenic formation of mineral deposits, is one of the
most widespread processes in nature. All aspects of this mineral deposition are
important, but attention has been focused on the processes in eukaryotes, where
the mineral deposition at extracellular sites is clearly mediated and regulated
by proteins and other components secreted by cells which are part of the matrix
itself. In matrix-mediated mineralization, the cells first form the structural
components of the ECM (extracellular matrix) and then deliver regulatory
macromolecules which modify the properties of the matrix and lead to the
location and stereospecific nucleation of mineral crystal. Bone, dentin and
cementum are the three principal mineralized tissues of vertebrates. The present
research program will use dentin formation as a model system. In this system,
the odontoblasts synthesize a structural matrix, comprised of collagen fibrils,
which serves to define the basic architecture of the tissue product. The cells
also synthesize and deliver a number of acidic macromolecules into t he
extracellular compartment. Molecular biology technology has been applied to
clone the acidic macromolecules. The first macromolecule identified was DMP1
(dentin matrix protein 1). Specific aims of the research program are directed
toward an increased understanding of the structure and the function of DMP1 and
its role in biomineralization. %%% Biomineralization is the process that occurs
in animals and involves the formation of structures such as bone, claws, and
dentin in teeth. All of these structures are examples of biomaterials. In the
present program, studies will be performed to begin to learn how these
biomaterials are formed using dentin as a model system. In the formation of
dentin, cells called odontoblasts produce a structural network comprised of
collagen fibrils, into which calcium is deposited to form the final, hard
product. However, the mechanism by which calcium in trapped and deposited in the
matrix in an orderly fashion is not understood. Present experimental results
suggest that a number of proteins, also produced by the odontoblasts are
involved. By using molecular biology methods, one of these proteins has been
isolated. This acidic protein will be studied to learn how it combines with
calcium and then operates to deposit it in the correct fashion to form dentin.
*** ....()()))()() ; Oh +' 0 D h @ d R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT &amp;
Metabolic Biochemistry Panel Summary Shelley A. Graves Shelley A. Gra ves @ &lt;
3 @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 9 @ + m 3 @ Microsoft Word 6.0 3 e = e
L 3 - T o George, Anne MCB-9506111 Biomineralization, the biogenic form