* 9506003
* Microevolution in Two Lineages of Upper Ordovician          (Cincinnatian) Bryozoans
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Joseph Pachut, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2000
* USD 101,394.00

Pachut 9506003 This project proposes to study microevolution among fossil
organisms from a new perspective: that of the genetics, heritability, and
selection of characters within preserved lineages. Such a study would be unique
in paleontology because it could separate observed temporal variation into
heritable and non-heritable components, estimate temporal changes in levels of
heterozygosity, and separate stabilizing from directional selection. Observed
microevolutionary phenomena such as stasis, gradualism, or lineage splitting
could be assessed in terms of their underlying genetic basis. Fossil bryozoans,
because they form colonies, are among the few groups in the fossil record in
which this type of analysis is possible. The only other abundant groups in which
a comparable analysis could be carried out are corals and graptolites. Secondly,
bryozoans are very abundant on a bed-by-bed basis over lengthy stratigraphic
intervals in the Edenian, Maysvillian, and Richmondian Stages of the
Cincinnatian Series in its type area. The two generic lineages chosen,
Peronopora and Parvohallopora, both have continuous distributions with numerous
branching points over a duration exceeding 10 million years. Branching patterns
within the lineages are resolvable using both cladistic techniques and
chronostratigraphy based on both conodonts and sequence boundaries. Testing
several specific microevolutionary hypotheses in these lineages. The first of
these is that stabilizing selection underlies observed stasis, even stasis
lasting millions of years. The second hypothesis is that speciation, or lineage
branching, is unrelated to directional selection preceding the branching point,
a key test of punctuated equilibrium. The third hypothesis is that
heterozygosity levels may be reduced prior to a branching event, producing a
genetic bottleneck that may break out of stasis. The main disadvantage of this
study is that estimates of genetic parameters must be based on morphological
data; however, r ecent studies of genetic heritabilities and covariance and
morphological variability in living bryozoan species justify the substitution of
estimates, calculated from partitioned within- and among-colony phenotypic
variances, for genetic parameters. The tradeoff, that more than balances this
"disadvantage" is that these parameters can be studied in two well-sampled
branching lineages enduring over a 10 million year interval.