* 9506164
* Role of Histones H1 in Modulating Transcription Factor      Access
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Jerry Workman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 170,000.00

9506164 Workman While functional transcription studies have implicated both core
histones (nucleosome cores) and the linker H1 histones in transcription control,
the distinct roles of these proteins and their functional interactions have not
been determined. The long term goal of this research is to describe the details
of these interactions as well the interactions of transcription factors with
these histone complexes. These studies will employ model nucleosome templates to
determine basic parameters governing the ability of H1 to regulate transcription
factor access to nucleosomal DNA. We will analyze the histone domains and
modifications that govern the functions of H1 in transcription repression and
activation. Moreover, these studies will utilize purified systems, where
activities can be accurately attributed to protein components. These studies
will help clarify several issues concerning H1 function and provide mechanistic
detail of how transcription factors overcome H1 repression to access nucleosomal
DNA at enhancer and promoter elements in cellular chromatin during gene
activation. The specific objectives are: 1) Determination of which core histone
amino termini and precise acetylated lysines effect H1 binding to nucleosomes
and repression of factor binding. Individual core histone amino termini
regulating H1 repression will be identified by the formation of hybrid
nucleosomes where specific histone tails have been removed. The ability of
acetylated forms of these histones to also relieve repression will be determined
by the application of novel immunoblotting techniques using antibodies to all or
specific acetylated lysines on histones. These methods will determine the
specific acetylated histones and in some cases the specific acetylated lysines
which alleviated H1 repression. 2) Analysis of H1 domains involved in
restricting transcription factor access and the effect of H1 phosphorylation on
their activity. The function of histone H1 domains (i.e. the central globular
doma in, the C-terminal and N-terminal domains) in repression of transcription
factor binding will be determined by assaying the function of these individual
domains. The role of H1 phosphorylation will be determined by measuring the
repression of factor binding by hyper-phosphorylated H1. In addition, the
retention or loss of phosphorylated H1 forms upon transcription factor binding
will be determined by western-blots of mobility shift gels using antibodies to
total H1 or antibodies specific for hyperphosphorylated or dephosphorylated
forms. %%% While functional transcription studies have implicated both core
histones (nucleosome cores) and the linker H1 histones in transcription control,
the distinct roles of these proteins and their functional interactions have not
been determined. The long term goal of this research is to describe the details
of these interactions as well the interactions of transcription factors with
these histone complexes. These studies will employ model nucleosome templates to
determine basic parameters governing the ability of H1 to regulate transcription
factor access to nucleosomal DNA. ***