* 9506933
* Structure of Alpha-CT Domain of E. coli RNA Polymerase by   NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Nuria Assa-Munt, Sanford Burnham Prebys Medical Discovery Institute
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9506933 Assa-Munt Transcriptional regulation is modulated by the interaction
between transcription factors and their target DNA sequences, as well as by
protein protein interactions. Escherichia coli RNA polymerase holoenzyme (RNAP)
is one of the most intensely studied enzymes since its discovery. This
multimeric enzyme consists of a core protein made up of 2 ' and complexes with
the major sigma subunit (sigma 70). This research will concentrate on the role
and structure of the subunit of RNA polymerase, and specifically on the
carboxyterminal domain of , ( -CTD). This domain is known to bind DNA and also
to interact with CAP, the catabolite gene activator protein. Its small size
makes it amenable to NMR solution studies and it has been expressed in large
amounts. The solution structure of the -CTD will be determined by
multidimensional NMR studies, both free in solution and when complexed to DNA.
Dynamic studies will probe the role of flexible regions in the protein and also
in the protein-DNA complex. Based on the solved structure, we will identify the
topological surfaces involved in protein-protein and in protein-DNA recognition,
and use the structures to understand the available biochemical and mutation
data. The -CTD is an independently folded domain and may be studied as a
prototype of the dual DNA-binding and protein-protein functions common to both
eukaryotic and prokaryotic DNA-binding proteins. %%% Transcriptional regulation
depends on the interaction between transcription factors and their target DNA
sequences. Modulation of the biological activity of these transcription factors
via protein-DNA or protein-protein interactions regulates processes such as cell
development, differentiation and oncogenesis. One of the best studied
transcription systems is the bacterial RNA polymerase and its interactions with
diverse promoters. This research on fundamental issues of DNA-binding proteins
and their regulatory roles mediated by specific pro tein-protein and protein-
DNA associations will focus on the domain organization of the RNA- polymerase
subunit from E. coli; it binds DNA and interacts with the activating region of
the Catabolite Gene Activator protein (CAP) in the ternary complex of the lac
promoter, RNAP and CAP. It is, therefore, a good model to study intermolecular
interactions. ***