* 9506773
* Support of Student Participation in North American          Paleontological Convention (NAPC-VI); June, 1996;           Washington, D. C
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Ellis Yochelson, Paleontological Society
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 09/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

The North American Paleontological Convention is a quadrennial gathering of
paleontologists from a variety of disciplines. It is supported by the
paleontological group headquartered in North America, but is open to all who are
interested in paleontology. The meeting planned for June 1996 in Washington, DC,
will be the sixth NAPC, and the first to be held on the East Coast. Each
previous gathering has been judged by those who participated as an excellent
scientific event. One aim of NAPC is to allow specialists who would not
otherwise normally be in contact to meet and exchange ideas. For example,
micropaleontologists and vertebrate paleontologists have different professional
societies which meet at different times, yet some members of these two group
work on fossils from the same age rock. Based on past experience, the Organizing
Committee for NAPC-VI expects that about 500 professionals will attend and
interact for three days. It is the view of the Organizing Committee that the
continued interest of students is critical to the health of the field. Not only
will students m aintain the study of past life, they are the ones who will
provide fresh approaches and examine old fossils with new eyes. NAPC provides an
outstanding educational opportunity to obtain a concentrated amount of
paleontological information from talks and poster presentations without the
other distractions presented at a general geological meeting. It also allows
them the ready opportunity to meet with leaders in the field and to discuss
their research in progress, both formally and informally, in a venue not
provided by a national or regional geologic meeting. The grant proposal consists
of two components. The first would allow for a lower registration fee for all
students who plan to attend. Based on past experience, the Organizing Committee
expect that about 100-150 students will attend. The second component of the
grant would consist of a small grant of fixed amount to a limited number of
students to facilitate their attendance. Grantees would be selected on the basis
of merit, but appropriate attention would be paid to the need to support
minority groups and women.