* 9506254
* Acclimation of Photosynthetic Organisms to High Light:      Molecular and Genetic Dissection
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 10/31/2000
* USD 320,000.00

9506254 Grossman Photon flux densities that are in excess of what a plant can
use for photochemistry result in the activation of processes that help protect
the photosynthetic apparatus against photodamage; specifically, plants can
dissipate much of the excess excitation energy as heat. This nonradiative energy
dissipation, which is measured as nonphotochemical quenching (NPQ) of
chlorophyll fluorescence, is probably the result of several processes. One of
these processes, the generation of zeaxanthin (which may directly quench excited
chlorophyll molecules) via the xanthophyll cycle, occurs in the light-
harvesting antenna complexes. Other energy dissipating processes, such as charge
recombination between P680+ and QA- and a cyclic electron flow around
photosystem II (PSII), are associated with the reaction centers. The objective
of this grant is to elucidate the mechanisms underlying these processes and
their relative importance for photoprotection, using Chlamydomonas as a model
organism. Mutants have been generated by insertional mutagensis, which will
allow for the relatively facile isolation of the genes of interest.
Physiological characterizations of the mutant strains grown in high or low light
have revealed several novel classes of mutants, including those that appear to
be defective in 1) the xanthophyll cycle, 2) other mechanisms of energy
dissipation, 3) the regulation of NPQ, and 4) scavenging of oxygen radicals. It
is proposed to continue physiological, biochemical and genetic analyses of the
mutant strains that have already been isolated. These studies will help us
evaluate the importance of known photoprotective processes, discover specific
mechanisms that govern these processes and perhaps even unveil novel mechanisms
that contribute to photoprotection.