* 9506059
* Biochemistry of Fatty Acid Transport in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Paul Black, The University of Tennessee, Memphis - The Health Science Center
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 10/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9506059 Black In all organisms, fatty acids (FA) and their derivatives are
components of membranes, are sources of metabolic energy, and are effector
molecules that regulate metabolism. This research is on the transport of long-
chain fatty acids (C14-C18) into the cell, followed by their enzymatic
conversion to coenzyme A thioesters prior to metabolism. These FAs traverse the
cell envelope of Escherichia coli by a specific, energy-dependent process that
requires the outer membrane-bound FA binding protein FadL and the inner membrane
associated acyl CoA synthetase (ACS). ACS activates FAs concomitant with
transport and results in net FA accumulation in the cell against a concentration
gradient. Processes that govern FadL-mediated long-chain FA transport across the
outer membrane will be determined by i evaluating the topology of FadL using
limited proteolysis and protein modification and ii defining the FA binding
pocket within FadL using the affinity labeled long-chain fatty acid
9-p-azidophenoxy nonanoic acid (3H-APNA). The contribution of acyl CoA
synthetase to long-chain FA transport will be evaluated by i defining the ATP
and FA binding domains within ACS using the affinity labeled ligands azido- (32P
ATP and 3H-APNA, respectively, and ii mutagenesis of the fadD gene at specific
sites involved in CoA and/or FA binding. Studies are also being conducted to
define protein-protein interactions between the membrane-bound (FadL) and
soluble protein components of this transport system using far Western analyses,
and by performing experiments with glutathione S-transferase (GST) and histidine
fusion proteins. Soluble protein components may interact with FadL. The H+/FA
cotransporter in the inner cell membrane, and acyl CoA dehydrogenase and acyl
CoA binding protein in the cell cytosol may bind specifically with ACS. %%% In
living cells from bacteria to man, dietary fats (or fatty acids; FAs) are
important sources of energy to support growth. This research project addresses
the qu estion of how long-chain FAs are transported across the membrane into the
cell to be used to produce energy. In the bacterium, Escherichia coli, long-
chain FAs are taken up by an enzyme system that requires an outer membrane-bound
FA binding and transport protein (FadL) and an inner membrane associated enzyme
(CoA synthetase; ACS). The use of E. coli for these studies is ideal as basic
questions can be answered concerning transport of long-chain FAs using
biochemistry, molecular biology and molecular genetics. Work will define regions
within FadL that are essential in FA transport, and will thus serve as a
paradigm in understanding specific interactions between proteins and FAs. In
addition, regions within acyl CoA synthetase that bind long-chain FAs and ATP
will be defined, thus providing information on the role of this enzyme in FA
transport. Lastly, studies are being conducted to define protein-protein
interactions between the membrane-bound (FadL) and soluble protein components of
the transport system. These studies will be important in further defining the
transport system and by identifying specific cytosolic/membraneous protein
associations that develop with FadL and with ACS for FA transport to occur. ***