* 9506681
* Algorithms and Architectures for Channel Estimation and     Multiuser Detection in CDMA Communication Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Behnaam Aazhang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 303,597.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9506681, William Marsh Rice University, Algorithms and
Architectures for Channel Estimation and Multiuser Detection in CDMA
Communication System, PI-Behnaam Aazhang and Joseph R. Cavallaro: There are
three major problems in using multiuser detection for the next generation
cellular CDMA networks: estimation of the signal and channel parameters, real-
time hardware implementation of multiuser estimation and detection algorithms,
and system adaption to changes in the network. This project addresses the
development and concurrent implementation of algorithms for channel estimation
and data detection in a multiuser environment. The objective is to find
computationally efficient algorithms that are near-far resistant, are capable of
tracking slowly varying channels, and can be extended to systems with antenna
arrays. An integral part of the project is the implementation of these
algorithms. The mapping of the algorithms onto parallel architectures,
particularly using standard DSP processors in combination with custom VLSI co-
processors will be studied. The project combines developments in multiuser
communications with developments in DSP and VLSI to provide practical solutions
for problems in CDMA communications.
*****************************************************************************
Aubrey M. Bush Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison Director Division of
Networking and Communications Research and Infrastructure National Science
Foundation