* 9506849
* CAREER: Virus Structure in Plant Resistance
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1999
* James Culver, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 11/30/1999
* USD 326,670.00

; R o o t E n t r y F @ @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l @ @ F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +' 0 $ H
l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen jack cohen @ d @ @ B< e = e D D D
D D \ f D C p t t t t t t t S D T ( t t t t t t t p t t t t t t . 6 t t / t
Culver 9506849 Plant disease resistance has been widely studied because of its
economic importance to agriculture. Much of this effort has focused on the
hypersensitive response (HR) conferred by single plant genes. This type of
resistance is dependent upon host recognition of the invading pathogen, possibly
via plant receptors that specifically bind molecules of pathogen origin, called
elicitors. The recent cloning and characterization of several plant resistance
genes has been a major breakthrough in the field of plant biology and has added
support to the elicitor receptor hypothesis. Future studies defining the
molecular interaction between pathogen elicitors and plant resistance genes will
be critical in understanding the molecular basis of plant disease resistance and
in developing practical ways to utilize this resistance in the field. Using the
interaction between the tobamovirus coat protein (CP) and the N' gene HR of
Nicotiana sylvestris as a model system, this proposal seeks to molecularly
characterize elicitor specificity. Current evidence indicates that CPs with
"weaker" quaternary structures act as elicitors of the HR while CPs with
"stronger" quaternary structures do not. Identifying the structural motifs
required for HR induction will be an important first step in defining putative
elicitor receptor interactions. Three objectives will be addressed: 1) identify
the form (monomer, dimer, trimer, etc.) of CP that is recognized by the N' gene
host; 2) identify a putative receptor binding site within the CP three
dimensional structure; 3) investigate structural alterations in CP that allow
some tobamoviruses to elude N' gene resistance. An important aspect of this
proposal is to provide undergraduate and graduate students with training in both
molecular biology and protein biophysical studies. The wide range of scientific
matters involved in this investigation provide an ideal interdisciplinary
"training matrix" for students interested in research careers. Students will
learn the skills needed to manipulate protein sequences (gene cloning, site
specific mutagenesis, etc.), determine the biophysical consequences of those
manipulations (analytical ultracentrifugation, circular dichroism, and electron
microscopy), and relate these changes to biological function (virion structure
and plant resistance). In addition to technical skills, students will organize
and present their research at a planned yearly miniconference. %%% Plant disease
resistance has been widely studied because of its economic importance to
agriculture. Much of this effort has focused on the hypersensitive response (HR)
conferred by single plant genes. This type of resistance is dependent upon host
recognition of the invading pathogen, p ossibly via plant receptors that
specifically bind molecules of pathogen origin, called elicitors. The recent
cloning of several plant resistance genes has added support to the elicitor
receptor hypothesis. Using the interaction between the tobamovirus coat protein
(CP) and the N' gene HR of Nicotiana sylvestris as a model system, this proposal
seeks to molecularly characterize elicitor specificity. Specifically, what makes
one pathogen elicit a resistance response while another does not? Three
objectives will be addressed: 1) identify the form (monomer, dimer, trimer,
etc.) of CP that is recognized by the N' gene host; 2,1 identify and analyze the
putative receptor binding site within the CP three dimensional structure; 3)
investigate the structural differences between CPs that allow some tobamoviruses
to elude N' gene resistance. Information from this study will be important to
understanding the molecular basis of plant disease resistance and in developing
practical ways to more fully utilize this resistance in the field. *** @
....()()))()() ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (