* 9506278
* Conservation of Interaction Patterns in Protein Families
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Adam Godzik, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9506278 Godzik Modeling of protein structures by computer, before it is
determined experimentally, is an invaluable tool, aiding drug design, mutation
studies and often structure determination itself. The main goal of this research
is to improve existing tools for the modeling of protein structures by including
extra information obtained from the new type of analysis of regularities in
known protein structures. This whole approach can be best described as the
reverse- engineering of protein structures on the computer. Protein structures
will be "decomposed" into interacting fragments, and, by utilizing a library of
"parts", they will be rebuilt. To gain experience as well as to measure progress
during the method development, known structures will be modeled onto structures
of other proteins from their structural families. Experience gained in the
"rebuilding" of known structures will be used to make structural predictions for
a number of real targets. %%% The main scientific trust in this research is to
explore and utilize a new, interaction based, description of proteins. In such a
description, a protein is seen as a collection of interactions between side
chains, rather than as a set of points in space; thus, the very features
responsible for the folding to a particular structure are directly used in the
structure description itself. The quality of protein models obtained by homology
modeling will be improved by using insights obtained through this new
perspective, by focusing on side-chain interactions which remain constant with
sequence changes even as protein backbone shifts and slides. The goals of this
research will be achieved in two stages. In the first stage, traditional
modeling techniques will be supplemented by additional information obtained from
the analysis of protein families. In the second stage, a new modeling approach
will be developed, where the predicted protein structure will be built inside-
out, around interacting clusters of res idues, using fragments of structures
from other proteins. To assist in achieving these goals, a set of necessary
tools will be developed. A number of specific objectives, including building
models of proteins with various levels of homology to the target, will be used
to judge the progress of the research. ***