* 9506113
* Structure and Permeability of the Outer Mitochondrial       Membrane
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Carmen Mannella, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1999
* USD 270,000.00

9506113 Mannella This project aims at answering fundamental questions about the
structure and function of the gated membrane channel, VDAC or mitochondrial
porin, which is formed by a 31-kD protein in the mitochondrial outer membrane.
Electron microscopy and digital image analysis are being applied to two-
dimensional (2-D) crystals generated from isolated fungal outer mitochondrial
membranes to determine the 3-D shape of the VDAC channel in two different
conformations (and complexed with an endogenous modulator protein) at a
resolution of about 2nm. Information about the structural and functional
topography of the VDAC protein also are provided by sequence-specific antibodies
and by partial proteolysis experiments. Regions of the channel polypeptide that
are most likely to form transmembrane -strands are being identified by applying
a novel algorithm for local multiple-sequence alignment (the Gibbs sampler) to
sequences of VDACs and distantly related bacterial channels (several of which
have known atomic structure). These varied kinds of "low-resolution" structural
information will be used to construct a self-consistent folding model for the
VDAC polypeptide. At the same time, systematic attempts will be made to grow
bigger 2-D and 3-D crystals of the VDAC channel, suitable for higher resolution
structure determination by electron and/or x-ray diffraction. These
crystallization attempts have been made possible by recent success in expressing
the mitochondrial protein in bacteria at levels over 100-fold greater than are
possible with fungal cultures. %%% The cell and its internal compartments are
bounded by membranes composed of lipids and proteins. The lipids form a bilayer
sheath that is impenetrable to polar ions and molecules. Proteins make it
possible for the different compartments to communicate, i.e., exchange material.
For example, some proteins form channels, water-filled passageways across the
membrane bilayer which open and close (or gate) in response to different
stimuli. The basic structure of channels and the molecular mechanism(s) of their
gating are only poorly understood. In this project, we are studying a channel
that occurs on the surface of the intracellular organelle that is the cell's
powerplant, the mitochondrion. The channel is switched by transmembrane
electrical potentials between states with different degrees of openness, and
this gating appears to be controlled by other proteins in the mitochondrion.
Using electron crystallography and other biophysical and biochemical approaches,
this research will determine the three-dimensional structure of the channel in
different states, in order to understand how it is formed and how it opens and
closes. ***