* 9506594
* Faculty Career Development Including Kinetic Physics        of the Magnetotail and Teaching Enhancement
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2001
* Cynthia Cattell, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 250,000.00

This proposal is designed to support the early career development of the
Principal Investigator in her position as a new faculty member in the School of
Physics and Astronomy of the University of Minnesota. This position requires
both excellence in scientific research, excellence in teaching, course
development, and community outreach activities. The research component of the
proposal is focused on the kinetic physics of the Earth's magnetotail, including
data analysis, numerical studies, and both inputs to and comparisons with
various theoretical models of the magnetosphere. Previous studies of electric
field data in the magnetotail have shown that the variable part of the field is
usually one to two orders of magnitude larger than the background field. These
variable fields, including waves and large amplitude spikes, will have a large
effect on particle distributions as has been shown in preliminary numerical
studies. It is proposed to characterize statistically the parameters of the
waves and spikes using data from the ISEE-1 and Geotail spacecraft. The results
will be used to provide empirical dissipation coefficients for use in MHD
simulations and global models and to develop a more realistic electric field
model for inclusion in the numerical study of particle trajectories in the
magnetotail. The particle distributions will then be compared to those observed
on the AMPTE/IRM spacecraft (as well as other plasma data). As part of this
comparison, the nature of the complex distributions observed at the plasma sheet
boundary will be examined including effects such as acceleration of electron
beams in slow mode shocks and the mapped location of the auroral zone/polar cap
convection boundary. The educational component will be focused primarily in two
areas, both of which have very high priority for the School of Physics and
Astronomy. The first is improvement in the lower division physics with calculus
class which is the main introductory physics clas s for engineers, physicists,
and chemists with approximately 1200 students per quarter. Modification of this
course and TA training for the course are an ongoing effort. The second is
inclusion of undergraduates in research which has been a longstanding priority
for the PI. In addition, there are many ongoing projects including local efforts
to improve K-12 science teaching, development of new undergraduate courses, and
outreach activities to share the excitement of physics research with the
community in which the PI will participate, particularly in the later years of
the proposal.