* 9506258
* Genetic Regulation of Phase Change in Maize
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* R. Poethig, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1998
* USD 165,000.00

9506258 Poethig The correct timing of events in development is critical for
normal morphogenesis. At the same time, changes in the relative timing of
different developmental events (heterochrony) can be an important source of
novelty in evolution, particularly when the timing of reproductive maturity
changes relative to somatic maturity. The vegetative development of the shoot in
plants is marked by several more or less discrete phases that can be
distinguished from one another on the basis of a variety of morphological and
physiological traits. A large number of obvious phase specific traits have been
defined in maize, greatly facilitating the genetic and molecular analysis of the
process of phase change in this species. Recently, Dr. Poethig has identified a
new mutation, glossy early flowering, that dramatically accelerates both
vegetative and reproductive development. Mutant plants produce leaves with adult
vegetative fates abnormally early in shoot development and also flower early.
Although extensive work on woody plants has suggested that the vegetative phase
of the shoot is linked in some way to its reproductive capacity, gef is the
first genetic link between these two aspects of shoot development in maize. Dr.
Poethig proposes to a) characterize the phenotype of gef at a molecular,
histological, and morphological level, b) determine its cell autonomy by clonal
analysis, and c) establish its relationship to other genes involved in phase
change by analyzing double mutations. In addition, he proposes to conduct
extensive genetic screens for new mutations affecting phase change. these
screens will involve screening in a wild type genetic background for mutations
that accelerate vegetative phase change, and screening a gl15-2 background for
mutations that either enhance or suppress this partially functional mutation.
These experiments should provide new insight into the relationship between
vegetative and reproductive maturation in plants, and provide th e genetic and
molecular resources necessary for future research on the mechanisms of this
important aspect of plant development. ***