* 9506893
* Studies of Signal Transduction by the B-Lymphocyte Antigen  Receptor
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2001
* Lawrence Stern, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Randolph Addison
* 07/31/2001
* USD 435,950.00

MCB 9506893 Lawrence J. Stern This project investigates the mechanisms of B-cell
activation, and combines membrane biochemistry and protein engineering. B cells
comprise the branch of the immune system that is responsible for producing
antibodies against foreign material. When a foreign antigen binds to a receptor
on the B cell surface, the B cell becomes stimulated to interact with other
immune cells, and to proliferate and produce antibodies. The mechanism that
triggers this process is poorly understood but appears to involve a clustering
of receptors on the cell surface. Similar clustering mechanisms activate other
cells in the immune and nervous systems. How such clustering on the membrane
surface activates signaling events within the cell is unknown. Investigation of
this mechanism has been hampered by the complexity of working with whole-cell
systems, and in particular, membrane-bound components. To better understand the
B-cell activation mechanism, a model system will be developed in which the
components of the activation mechanism can be studied apart from the membrane.
Analogues of the B-cell receptor that mimic single receptors, and clusters of
two, three, and four receptors, will be constructed. Research into the basic
structure of proteins has identified small protein modules that interact in
different combinations. These modules will be grafted onto the components of the
B-cell receptor in place of the parts that anchor the receptor to the membrane.
Different modules will provide soluble analogues of the receptor in different
size clusters. These clusters will be used to determine the requirements for
triggering the signaling mechanism, and to investigate the interactions of the
B-cell receptor with other signaling proteins. Studies of the B-cell receptor
and its interactions will contribute to a description of this important
signaling mechanism, and to our understanding of cellular activation processes.
Concurrent with this research program, the Principal Investigat or will execute
a multi-faceted education program. One goal of this program is the introduction
of innovative computational and molecular graphic methods into the undergraduate
and graduate educational experience. The ability to access and utilize
information in nucleotide and protein databases has become an essential
scientific skill. A module will be introduced into the undergraduate
biochemistry laboratory that teaches students how to access the information in
these databases. Another module will comprise exercises that teach students the
use of computer graphics workstations to visualize and manipulate protein and
nucleic acid structures in three dimensions. The use of a campus-wide computer
network to provide supplemental course material and evaluation and assessment of
course content and presentation will also be explored. Another goal of the
education program is revision of the undergraduate biochemistry curriculum to
keep students apace with recent developments in biochemistry that affect society
at large. The introductory biochemistry course will be expanded to include
recent technological and biomedical advances, and to allow students to
critically evaluate developments in medicine, forensics, pharmaceuticals,
biotechnology, and other areas of current biochemical research. A new course in
protein structure and function also will be introduced. In addition to
traditional teaching activities, the education program has important provisions
for involvement of undergraduate and graduate students in research projects,
community outreach, involvement of students from traditionally under-
represented groups, pre-college educational projects, and student mentoring and
advising. %%% This project provides insight into mechanisms that regulate the
way cells interact. Interactions between cells are the basis for the formation
of a multi-cellular organism and a major question in the field of cell biology.
The education plan of this award includes the introduction of macromolecular
comput er graphics and database search techniques into an undergraduate
laboratory, extension of biochemistry curriculum, and development of innovative
education assessment techniques.