* 9506929
* Identification of Physiological Substrates of pp60v-src:    Engineering Non-natural ATP Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Kevan Shokat, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 10/31/1998
* USD 257,760.00

MCB 9506929 Kevan Shokat Growth factors, transcription factors, hormones and
cell cycle regulatory proteins utilize tyrosine kinases in their signaling
cascades. The common molecular feature of these kinases is their activation of
downstream proteins by phosphorylation of tyrosine residues. The main obstacle
to dissecting the involvement of specific tyrosine kinases in signal
transduction cascades has been their lack of substrate specificity in vitro and
in vivo. The catalytic domains of tyrosine kinases possess little or no inherent
substrate specificity. In fact catalytic domains from one tyrosine kinase can be
substituted into a different tyrosine kinase with little change in the function
of the latter. Other domains in the tyrosine kinases are responsible for
assembling multiprotein complexes which guide the catalytic domain to the
correct targets. The poor in vitro specificity makes it difficult to use
purified enzymes and substrates to assess the involvement of an individual
tyrosine kinase with phosphorylation of a particular substrate. The
manifestation of this poor substrate specificity in vivo is that many genetic
approaches, such as gene knock out experiments, give no phenotype due to
compensation by other cellular tyrosine kinases. This proposal describes a
method for tagging and identifying individual protein tyrosine kinases and their
physiological substrates. The method is based on engineering the catalytic
domain of a prototypical tyrosine kinase, v-src, to accept a non-natural ATP
analog (A*TP). A yeast based selection syqtem will be used to screen v-src
mutants which accept unnatural ATP analogs. Once the engineered v-src protein
which accepts an unnatural ATP analog is identified it will be expressed in NIH
3T3 cells and gamma- 32P A*TP will be provided to the cell. Under these
conditions, normal v-src induced signal transduction will cause all the
physiological substrates of v-src to contain an easily identifiable radiolabel
(32PO4-Y single letter amino acid c ode ). This methodology can also be used to
label specific substrate tyrosine residues with the more stable phosphorothioate
moiety resulting in a phosphotyrosine residue which is less sensitive to
phosphatase catalyzed hydrolysis. This method will provide a novel approach for
the study of specific phosphatase involvement in signaling pathways. The two
types of experiments in concert will provide a powerful new tool for dissecting
signaling cascades involving tyrosine kinases and phosphatases. The education
plan of this project employs a multi-disciplinary approach to promote
communication between biologists and chemists, and employs computer graphics to
give the students a "hands-on" experience. This experience is provided for both
undergraduates and graduate students. %%% Cells process information about their
environment by using protein signaling cascades. Some types of cascades are so
numerous and similar to one another that it has been difficult to study them
using standard biochemical and genetic techniques. This proposal describes a
chemical method for uniquely "tagging" one signaling protein at a time inside a
cell which will allow us to decipher the molecular logic of signaling cascades.
The education plan is designed to improve the quality of both undergraduate and
graduate education, and to promote communication between disciplines in science.
***