* 9506467
* Characterization and Simulation of the Effects of Redox     Zones on the Fate and Transport of Contaminants in the      Saturated Subsurface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Keith Loague, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1999
* USD 216,000.00

9506467 Loague Anthropogenic contamination can create geochemical zones of
different redox potential, which in turn will cause many hazardous contaminants
to exist in different oxidation states in different zone of aquifers. The
mobilities of these contaminants in the different oxidation states may vary by
orders of magnitude. This greatly complicates the task of predicting the
transport, fate and effects of groundwater contaminants. The work proposed here
will provide insight into the fate and transport of hazardous chemicals in the
saturated subsurface. This work will establish a physics and chemistry based
simulation protocol that will enable future workers to quantitatively estimate
the fate and transport of contaminants that can exit in multiple oxidation
states. The well-studied USGS Toxic Substances Hydrology Research Program field
site on Cape Cod, MA will serve as a unique data set for model development and
testing. The results anticipated from this work include i) characterization of
the reactions responsible for the distribution of Fe (II) observed at the Cape
Cod site and ii) the potential fate of the iron and anoxic zone under current
and future management strategies. The measure and model approach used for the
cape Cod site in this study will serve as a surrogate for future investigations
at similar contaminations sites. The approach to be taken for the proposed work
consists of three phases. The first phase will be accomplished by i) developing
a set of chemical reactions, based upon thermodynamics, that control the
concentration of iron, and ii) analyzing the sensitivity of batch simulations to
concentrations and abundances of reactants and products. The second phase will
be accomplished by investigating what processes affect Fe (II) during transport
at the Cape Cod site by i) constructing a one-dimensional model to simulate the
development of the sewage plume and iron zone and ii) considering the importance
and impact of rate-limited reactions. In third p hase the chemical batch
modeling and the one-dimensional transport modeling will be integrated to
develop a model of coupled groundwater flow, chemical speciation, and solute
transport at the Cape Cod field site. The third phase will be accomplished by i)
developing a two-dimensional vertical cross-sectional groundwater flow model,
ii) developing a two-dimensional vertical corss-sectional groundwater solute
transport model, and iii) coupling the fluid flow and solute transport models.
These simulations will be compared with field data to evaluate model performance
in terms of assessing concept development and predictive capabilities of the
coupled modeling approach.