* 9506885
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Drosophila Proteasomes
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* John Belote, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1998
* USD 394,976.00

9506885 Belote A genetic and molecular analysis of proteasomes in Drosophila
will be done. The gene, l(2)73Ai, encodes a component of the proteasome. It was
originally defined by the existence of an unusual dominant temperature-sensitive
lethal mutant, l(3)73Ail. The developmental consequences of loss-of-function
mutant alleles of this gene will be studied. Detailed analysis of the phenotype
of these mutants will be done, including examination of possible maternal
effects on early embryogensis. A second gene, DTS7, which evidence suggests
plays an important role in proteasome function or regulation will be cloned and
characterized. Extragenic suppressors of 1(3)73Ai1 will be identified and
characterized. One such suppressor of 1(3)73Ai1 has already been identified and
experiments will be done to define its genetic and phenotypic properties. %%%
Regulated protein degradation is important for normal cell function, playing a
key role in such diverse processes as growth control, metabolic regulation,
embryonic development and cell cycle progression. Targeted protein breakdown is
also important for protecting cells against a variety of abnormal conditions.
Thus, an understanding of how cells selectively identify unwanted proteins and
target them for destruction has fundamental importance for an understanding of
many areas of biology. Recent studies have shown that an essential component of
intracellular proteolysis is the proteasome, a large, multi-subunit complex that
acts as the proteolytic core of the ubiquitin-dependent protein degrading
machinery, responsible for the removal of abnormal polypeptides and short-lived
regulatory proteins from eukaryotic cells. This work, a genetic characterization
of one of the components of the proteasome of Drosophila, will increase our
understanding of the genetic control of this very important biological process.
***