* 9506033
* Intercellular Signalling in Vibrio harveyi
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Bonnie Bassler, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 451,000.00

9506033 Bassler The broad goal of this research is to explore the molecular
mechanisms that bacteria use for intercellular communication. This work focuses
on a luminous bacterium, Vibrio harveyi, with the objective of examining
genetically and biochemically the pathways of inter- and intracellular
signalling. Definition of the genes, proteins, interactions, chemical
modifications, and signals involved in intercellular communication could lead to
a molecular understanding of how signals are detected and how this information
is integrated, processed, and transduced to control expression of luminescence
genes (lux) and other genes in the same control network or regulon. Regulation
of the expression of luminescence genes in V. harveyi is complex and appears to
consist of interconnected pathways of signal transduction which modulate the
transcription of the operon (luxCDABEGH) encoding the luminescence enzymes. The
expression of the luxCDABEGH operon is strongly influenced by the density of the
culture. V. harveyi secretes and responds to extracellular signal molecules,
called autoinducers, which accumulate in the culture medium and induce the
expression of luminescence. One Lux signal-response system is encoded by the
luxLMN locus. The luxL and luxM genes are required for the production of an
autoinducer (probably (hydroxybutryl homoserine lactone), and the luxN gene is
required for the response to that autoinducer. Analysis of the phenotypes of
LuxL, M and N mutants indicated that an additional signal-response system also
controls density sensing. Two genes, luxP and luxQ, were identified, cloned and
sequenced and encode functions required for this second density-sensing system.
Mutants with defects in luxP and luxQ are defective in response to a second
autoinducer substance. LuxQ and LuxN are similar to members of the family of
two-component, signal transduction proteins and each contains regions of
sequence resembling both the histidine protein kinase and the response regulator
domains. Anal ysis of mutant LuxN and LuxQ signalling phenotypes indicated that
these two signal-response pathways converge to regulate expression of
luminescence in Vibrio harveyi. Another function, luxO, is required for the
integration of the two density-dependent signals. LuxO, which is similar in
amino acid sequence to the response regulator domain of the family of two-
component, signal transduction proteins, acts negatively to control expression
of luminescence. Relief of repression by LuxO in the wild-type could result from
interactions with other components in the Lux signalling system. Since the
regulatory process is complex and involves both intercellular and intracellular
signal transmission interesting new mechanisms could be revealed. However,
complexity should not be a barrier because the sensory input (chemical signal)
and the output (light emission) can be defined and can be conveniently
controlled and measured, and the genetic and biochemical methodology are well-
developed. This research includes an exploration of the Lux system 1 signal
relay. The studies are focused on system 1 because the autoinducer signal has
been identified and is obtainable. Mutagenesis procedures will be employed to
construct lux genes encoding proteins containing defects that should result in
termination of the Lux signal at different points in the transduction sequence.
The mutant genes will be identified by in trans analysis and the specific
defects determined. The mutated lux regulatory loci will be transferred to the
genome of V. harveyi followed by in vivo phenotype analysis. In vitro
biochemical analyses will be used to study combinations of wildtype and mutant
Lux signallers to determine which Lux system 1 components interact and the
sequence of events involved in signal relay. DNA binding by Lux regulatory
proteins will be analyzed. Gel mobility shift assays and DNase I footprint
analyses will be employed to determine the DNA binding sites of the positive and
negative regulatory proteins LuxR and LuxO. Using a combination of in vitro
biochemistry and in vivo genetics should aid in development of a comprehensive
explanation of the signalling mechanism. Educational responsibilities include
both the design and instruction of an Advanced Microbial Genetics course for
graduate students and a Microbial Diversity course for undergraduates at
Princeton. The principal investigator will also teach the Advanced Bacterial
Genetics course at Cold Spring Harbor from 1996-2000. Other educational plans
include mentoring of both undergraduate and graduate students in my laboratory,
counseling minority summer students, and participating in a science outreach
program for high school teachers. Additionally, the principal investigator will
be her department's undergraduate representative, advise at one of the five
Princeton undergraduate colleges, and serve on the committee for reviewing
curriculum. %%% Analyzing the light-producing genes of a marine bacterium will
lead to an understalding of how these bacteria respond to their environment.
This could, in turn, lead to practical applications. Light emission is a
relatively easy measure of gene expression, and so can be used to improve
bacterial gene expression in applications related to biotechnology. ***