* 9506333
* Transcriptional Activation by Rhizobium meliloti DCTD
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Timothy Hoover, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 92,076.00

9506333 Hoover Rhizobium meliloti DCTD activates transcription from dctA (which
encodes a C4-dicarboxylate transport protein) and belongs to a family of
(54-dependent activators that probably operate by a common mechanism. Sigma54
-dependent genes encode products that are involved in important and diverse
metabolic processes, including nitrogen assimilation, nitrogen fixation,
C4-dicarboxylate acid transport, toluene degradation, hydrogen metabolism, and
pilin formation. The long term goal of this lab is to understand the molecular
mechanisms involved in transcriptional activation by (54 -dependent activators.
Examining how (54-dependent activators like DCTD facilitate transcriptional
activation will contribute greatly to the understanding of bacterial gene
regulation and physiology. The transcription mechanism for (54 -RNA polymerase
holoenzyme (E(54) differs significantly from that of the major form of RNA
polymerase holoenzyme (E(70) in several notable ways. For example, ATP
hydrolysis by the activator is coupled to open complex formation with E(54,
while no examples of such a requirement for ATP exist among the numerous genes
transcribed by E(70. Towards this long term goal, the following shorter term
objectives will be addressed in this research. First, DCTD mutants that are
defective in activating transcription will be generated and characterized. For
these experiments, a truncated form of DCTD (referred to as DCTDL143) that
constitutively activates transcription and hydrolyzes ATP will be used. Mutant
DCTDL143 proteins will be purified and analyzed for their abilities to activate
transcription in vitro, hydrolyze ATP, bind DNA, and interact with E(54. DCTD
can be crosslinked to (54 and the ( subunit of RNA polymerase, and interactions
between DCTDL143 mutants and these subunits of E(54 will be examined using this
crosslinking assay. These biochemical and genetic approaches will be valuable
for dissecting protein-protein interactions required for transcriptional
activation. Second, studies on the ATPase activity of DCTDL143 will be extended
to include examination of potential inhibitors, determination of temperature and
pH optima, and determination of dissociation constants for ATP.
Photocrosslinking ATP (or analogs of ATP) to DCTD will be used to identify
regions of the protein involved in ATP binding. Examining ATP binding and
hydrolysis by DCTDL143 and DCTDLl43 mutants is likely to yield insights into how
ATP hydrolysis is coupled to transcriptional activation. Together, these data
will provide useful information on how DCTD activates transcription from the
dctA promoter. %%% Despite the large number of transcriptional activators that
have been identified in prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms, the ways in which
these proteins facilitate transcriptional activation are poorly understood. The
long term goal of this laboratory is to characterize the molecular mechanism of
transcriptional activation by a class of activators ((54 -dependent) in
bacteria. One such activator, DCTD of Rhizobium meliloti will be studied. Mutant
activators that are deficient in their ability to activate transcription will be
generated using both random and localized mutagenesis. These mutant proteins
will be examined for their abilities to activate transcription, bind and
hydrolyze ATP, and interact with E(54. Studies on the ATPase activity of a
truncated form of DCTD will be extended to include examination of potential
inhibitors, determining temperature and pH optima for ATP hydrolysis,
determining dissociation constants for MgATP, and identifying regions involved
in MgATP binding. This work will help increase our understanding of how cells
activate those genes which are appropriate for a given environment. ***