* 9506279
* Role of Actin Filaments in Fast Axonal Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,01/31/2000
* George Langford, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/2000
* USD 430,000.00

9506279 Langford This project will investigate the specific functions of
organelle-associated myosins in nerve cells. The number of new myosin motors
identified by molecular and genetic techniques has grown explosively in the past
few years but the functional roles of these new motors have not been determined.
This project tests the hypothesis that microtubule-dependent motors drive
movement of organelles over long distances while actin-dependent motors drive
movement to local sites along the axon. The broad objectives of the research
project are to determine the actin-dependent motors involved in fast axonal
transport, the interrelationship between the actin-dependent and microtubule-
dependent forms of organelle motility and the mechanism by which the motors
involved in organelle motility are regulated. The squid giant axon and optic
lobes (brain) will be the primary biological materials used in these studies.
Squid axoplasm is one of a small number of in vitro systems where myosin-
dependent organelle motility can be studied directly. Therefore, it represents a
unique system in which to study (a) organelle associated myosins, (b) the
regulation of these motors and (c) the relationship between membrane trafficking
on microtubules and actin filaments. Extruded axoplasm is particularly useful
for motility studies but the amount of material is too small for biochemical
purification of myosin motors. Squid brain, however, represents an alternate
source of material for purification of myosins, therefore, motors identified in
axoplasm will be subsequently isolated from squid optic lobes. The primary goal
of the research project is to use an identified organelle, the tubulovesicular
organelles (TVOs) in the squid giant axon, to study the properties and
regulation of organelle-associated myosins. Purification of TVOs will be
achieved by generating axoplasmic ghosts; the highly extracted remnant of
axoplasm. Motility of purified TVOs will be reconstituted on actin f ilaments
and the parameters of movement determined by quantitative motion analysis. The
function of these compartments as Ca stores will be determined with Ca-indicator
dyes. In addition, antibodies to known smooth ER proteins will be used to
establish the identity and purity of the isolated compartments. Another specific
goal is to identify factors that influence binding of motors to the
tubulovesicular organelles. The location of the actin-dependent motors on the
surfaces of TVOs will be determined using immunofluorescence microscopy. This
technique will make it possible to establish whether the motors are uniformly
distributed or localized to the vesicular domains of TVOs. Properties of the
motor, such as whether the motor is a peripheral protein and whether soluble
factors are involved in its attachment to the membrane will be determined.
Myosins will be purified from squid brain by conventional biochemical methods or
from axoplasm by immunoprecipitation. Purified motors will be biochemically and
functionally characterized using in vitro motility assays. An antibody to squid
brain myosin V has been generated for use in localization and functional
studies. Antibodies to other organelle-associated unconventional myosins will be
generated and used to inhibit motility in extruded axoplasm thereby verifying
the role of these motors in the movement of organelles. %%% The work described
in this proposal will provide new knowledge on molecular motors and will aid our
understanding of fast axonal transport as well as our understanding of many
other fundamental cellular processes including secretion, cell division, cell
motility and the organization and transport of organelles. The new knowledge
from these studies has applications in biotechnology and research on molecular
nanostructures. ***