* 9506415
* Role of Turbulence Structure in Bedload Transport
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Ronald Shreve, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2000
* USD 120,695.00

Shreve 9506415 The long-term goal of the project is to develop quantitative
predictive relations between fluid flow and bedload transport that incorporate
the role of turbulence more precisely than those currently available. Such
relations should apply to the broad spectrum of nonuniform or unsteady flows
that occur in streams and beneath waves: and their development should provide
new insight into the mechanics of formation of a variety of erosional and
depositional features from ripples and dunes to bars and channels. The proposed
research will therefore emphasize the parts of the coupled flow-sediment problem
that most directly bear on how the morphology and stratigraphy of these features
originate and evolve. It will entail a combined experimental and theoretical
approach. The experimental work will use two-component laser-doppler
velocimetry, high -speed motion-picture photography, and a newly developed force
transducer to (1) make time-series measurements of near-bed fluid velocities,
bedload sediment transport, and bed-particle forces noninvasively in both
nonuniform and unsteady flows at turbulence-resolving frequencies, (2) study the
turbulence structure over spatial variation in bed roughness, and (3) make
synoptic measurements of bedload particle motions, fluid-velocity profile, and
turbulence structure by particle tracking. The theoretical work will use the
experimental data to (1) elucidate the equations of motion for near-bed sediment
particle trajectories by evaluating the formulas for the lift and drag forces,
assessing the relative magnitudes of the terms in the equation, and testing the
effects of the turbulence fluctuations (instead of using time average
velocities, (2) use the verified equations and measured fluctuating velocity
fields to compute bedload particle trajectories for statistical comparison with
actual trajectory speeds, heights, and lengths, and (3) apply nonlinear
forecasting techniques to study the relations between the measured time series
of the near-bed velocities and the corresponding bed-particle forces and bedload
transport. The proposed research basically addresses two fundamental problems:
(1) relating the forces exerted on particles on the bed to the temporal and
spatial distribution of the near-bed fluid velocities and (2) relating the
entrainment and motion of those particles to the forces. The experimental work
will elucidate the processes involved in both relations, provide ground truth
for any general model of entrainment and transport of bedload, and supply new
data on the role of turbulence in bedload transport. The theoretical work will
aid in developing a more accurate description of bedload transport in natural
flows, verify the formulas for lift, drag, and other forces on bedload transport
by turbulent flows. Together, the two approaches should significantly enlarge
current understanding of the physics of bedload transport of sediment by both
streams and waves.