* 9506817
* MCD and MLD Studies of Cytochrome Oxidase and other         Hemoproteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* James Peterson, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9506817 Peterson This research will develop magnetic linear dichroism (MLD) as a
valuable tool for the study of cytochrome c oxidase and some other
metalloproteins. MLD is not sensitive to heme a or CuA(which give rise to
features that dominate the magnetic circular dichroism MCD spectra of most
cytochrome c oxidase derivatives one would like to study) but is sensitive to
some states in which the heme a3-CUB binuclear pair can be prepared.
Consequently, it is expected that the site of interest can be observed free of
spectral interference from the other chromophores using the MLD approach. The
major limitation associated with magneto-optical measurements on hemoproteins in
general has been that the MCD signals derived from species having a low spin
ferric (S = 1/2) ground-state are the most intense and can therefore dominate
much of the spectrum. Such hemes tend to be simply electron transfer centers and
not directly involved in substrate binding. Since for most purposes we are
primarily concerned with the latter, this represents something of a problem.
Nearly always, it is possible to prepare one or more interesting derivatives
where the electron transfer centers are low-spin ferrous (S = O) and the
substrate binding heme has some paramagnetic ground-state (S =2 usually). In
these circumstances, only the active site heme has a readily measurable MCD
signal. Unfortunately, there invariably remain a number of derivatives which
could usefully be studied by MCD spectroscopy if it were not for small amounts
of residual low-spin ferric hemes dominating the spectrum. This tends to be the
rule rather than the exception and is definitely the most serious source of
spectral interference associated with the technique. MLD spectroscopy represents
something of a breakthrough in this regard, since it is not sensitive to either
low-sin ferric, or ferrous, systems; but is likely to prove particularly useful
for studying integer spin paramagnets. The MCD instrumentatio n now on-line at
The University of Alabama operates between 1.2 and 300 K, O to 7 tesla, over the
wavelength range 350 to 3000 nm. No other single instrument has these
capabilities. Also, unlike other MCD instruments, it has been constructed
entirely by American companies. The planned addition of the MLD option will
represent a further unique feature in a single instrument. This equipment
arguably represents something of a national resource. %%% This research will
develop the technique known as magnetic linear dichroism (MLD) as a tool for the
study of hemoprotein and other samples which have proved difficult to
investigate by established methods. Presently, there seem to be no useful MLD
data reported for any metalloprotein samples.The information obtained will
assist in the elucidation of the mechanism by which certain metalloenzymes
function and is, therefore, of some fundamental significance to biochemistry.
The planned addition of the MLD option to the magnetic circular dichroism (MCD)
instrumentation now on-line at The University of Alabama will represent a
further unique feature in a single instrument and, arguably, represents
something of a national resource. ***