* 9506391
* Collaborative Research: Use of NEXRAD Data to Estimate      Rainfall Rate and Rainfall Kinetic Energy Flux
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Stephen Burges, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1999
* USD 89,025.00

9506391 Burges The proposed research will focus on describing aspects of
precipitation and its erosivity. The work will show how to make use of radar to
provide rainfall rate and rainfall kinetic energy concurrently, while covering a
large area with high spatial and temporal resolution. Rainfall intensity and
kinetic energy characterize the aspects of precipitation relevant to soil
erosion and have to be monitored accurately to obtain improved soil loss
estimates. Relatively sparse networks of raingauges have been used to estimate
long-term soil loss. One of the largest potential benefits of using radar is
augmenting such sparse gauge networks to provide comprehensive coverage for
areas that are subject to erosion. Improved estimation and greater flexibility
are likely to be gained and research opportunities created by making use of the
newly available radar information provided by the Next Generation Weather Radar
(NEXRAD) network of WSR-88D (Weather Surveillance Radar - 1988 Doppler). We will
explore in depth the usefulness and limitations of radar for soil erosion
studies and investigate and spatial and temporal distributions of rain rate and
rainfall kinetic energy. Detailed comparisons will be made to test the
performance of the radar-based approach to estimate precipitation erosivity
versus present practice which depends exclusively on raingauge records. The
study will be made on the basis of data collected in the Goodwin Creek research
watershed in northern Mississippi. This watershed is under radar coverage from
two NEXRAD WSR-88Ds, Memphis (Tennessee) and Little Rock (Arkansas). We will use
data from the Memphis radar because of its proximity to the catchment. In
addition to the existing raingauges in the already highly instrumented Goodwin
Creek watershed, we will deploy a disdrometer for the automated measurement of
raindrop size Distributions.