* 9506486
* CAA:  Transient Nucleation Behavior in Li2O-2SiO2           Glasses:  The Effects of Q Speciation
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Hanna Nekvasil, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,000.00

9506486 Nekvasil Crystal nucleation in silicate glasses is of great importance
in both geological and materials systems. Yet, many important questions still
remain regarding the effects of pre-existing amorphous phase structure on the
homogeneous nucleation process in silicate melts and glasses and the dynamic
processes leading to new steady-state species distributions. This CAA is
requested to permit the PI to begin a new research direction focused on the
structural aspects of time-dependent processes relating to crystallization from
molten and glassy silicates. This direction strongly complements her previous
experimental and theoretical work on equilibrium thermodynamics in molten
silicates. This project would serve as an introduction to NMR spectroscopy as
well as nucleation studies and would be conducted during her first sabbatical
leave. The proposed study focuses specifically on evaluating the kinetics of
structural readjustments and its effect on induction times. MAS and static NMR
experiments on glassy lithium disilicate will be coupled with nucleation studies
with the specific goal of determining the kinetics of "short" range order
readjustments after structural perturbation. The kinetics of Qn species
rearrangements when coupled with the effects of structure on induction times
will also indicate the kinetics of the readjustment of cluster distributions
(i.e., "medium" range order). In addition to advancing our understanding of the
effect of pre-existing structure on induction times, the data obtained should
provide a means of determining whether or not a specific measured Qn species
distribution at or below Tg reflects an equilibrium state. This is of immediate
relevance to the interpretation of the numerous structural data of glasses in
the literature and should provide a guide to the preparation of glasses for
future structural studies. The award supplement will support a particularly
talented female, African-American underg raduate. She will work closely with the
PI and a female chemistry professor on all aspects of the project.