* 9506352
* Formation and Segmentation of Leech Endoderm
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* S. Martin Shankland, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9506352 Shankland This study will yield novel insights into the formation,
regional specification and segmentation of the endodermal germ layer in the
glossiphoniid leech, Helobdella. The leech endoderm shows an overt pattern of
segmentally periodic differentiation, and the mechanistic basis of this
segmental patterning will be investigated through a combination of experimental
embryology and molecular biology. The developmental origin of the definitive
endodermal tissues will be characterized to ascertain whether particular cells
have a stereotyped or variable lineage, the latter being suggestive that
segmental organization is not intrinsic to the endoderm at the time of its
formation. Another set of experiments will examine the development of the
endoderm following either ablation or abnormal juxtaposition of the overlying
mesoderm. These experiments will test the hypothesis that segmentation and
regionalization are imprinted onto an initially unpatterned endodermal cell
layer by local inductive cues from the adjacent mesoderm. A third set of
experiments will perturb the segmental pattern of a particular homeobox gene
within the endoderm, examining whether that gene is either necessary or
sufficient to bring about the segmentation of the endodermal germ layer. The
final set of experiments will investigate the derivation of the nuclei that take
part in endoderm formation. The leech's endoderm arises from a midgut primordium
which is formed by cell fusion early in embryogenesis, and which gives rise to a
cellularized gut wall several days later. A nuclear lineage tracer will be used
to follow the fate of individual pre- fusion nuclei, with the express purpose of
testing whether some or all of these nuclei arise from ectodermal or mesodermal
cell lineages. Should this prove tho be the case, it would suggest that the
nuclei of ectodermal and mesodermal cells are respecified to an endodermal fate
by cytoplasmic determinants encountered following their fusion i nto the midgut
primordium. ***