* 9506785
* Regulation of Competence for Genetic Transformation in      Streptococcus pneumoniae
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Donald Morrison, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 205,000.00

9506785 Morrison Pneumococcal transformation is a naturally occurring, inducible
gene replacement mechanism that is relatively simple and very efficient.
Competence for genetic transformation in pneumococcus (Streptococcus pneumoniae)
occurs during a brief period of highly specialized protein synthesis,
coordinated among all cells of an actively growing culture by a secreted
17-residue peptide pheromone. During a period of approximately 10-20 minutes,
the competent cells can transport DNA into the cytoplasm and replace homologous
genes I the chromosome very efficiently. In identifying and cloning genes
involved in this DNA-processing mechanisms, and in determining their roles, this
study relies on standard genetic techniques and the efficient gene replacement
provided by the natural transformation process itself, in combination with
molecular methods in vitro, a rapid physical mapping method, and recombinant DNA
cloning using new vectors in pneumococcus and in E. coli. Induced genes are
identified by insertion of a lacZ reporter gene. These studies identify, map,
clone, and sequence genes of this natural transformation system in two broad
areas: (a) genes of the pathway that transports DNA into the cell and processes
it for genetic recombination, and (b) genes regulating the induction of this
pathway via a quorumsensing peptide signal. %%% This research provides an
understanding of how bacteria naturally exchange genes. It is therefore, useful
in understanding how genes for new properties can appear in a bacterial
population. ***