* 9506217
* The Identification and Characterization of Synthetic Peptide Substrate for Protein Tyrosine Kinases
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Kit Lam, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F #?6 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l "?6 "?6 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +'
0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ R
=6 @ e = e i \ " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | # c T T 4 " | | |
| | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 &gt; " " " " | | 2 | 9506217 Lam The objective
of this project is to apply the combinatorial synthetic peptide library method
to identify peptide substrate motifs for various classes of protein tyrosine
kinases (PTK). Approximately 10 million random peptides will be screened for
each PTK. The two PTKs to be studied include (i) Fes, a non receptor linked
cytosolic PTKs, and (ii) Src, a non receptor linked, membrane anchored PTKs. In
an attempt to identify natural substrates, the GeneBank will then be searched
for proteins that have sequence homology with the identified peptides. Detailed
structure activity relationship (SAR) studies will be performed on synthetic
analogues of these peptides. Kinetic parameters as well as specificity of these
pe ptide substrates will be determined. Based on these peptide substrate motifs,
pseudosubstrate based peptide inhibitors for various PTKs will be developed. The
combinatorial synthetic peptide library method based on a "one bead, one peptide
concept" developed by the PI is used in this proposal. Random heptapeptide
libraries are screened for their ability to be phosphorylated by specific PTKs
in the presence of ~32P ATP. After incubation, the library is washed and the
beads immobilized on a glass plate with agarose. The 32P labeled beads are then
identified by autoradiography and individual labeled beads isolated for
microsequencing. This method has already been proven for both the cAMP dependent
protein kinase and p60C src PTK. Efficient peptide substrates have been
identified for these two protein kinases. A high throughput solid phase
phosphorylation assay system, developed in the P.I. s laboratory, is used for
the SAR studies. Peptide analogues are synthesized on resin beads and used as
substrates for the phosphorylation reaction. No purification of peptides is
required and separation of the free gamma 32P ATP from the solid phase 32P
labeled peptides is easy and rapid as peptides are covalently attached to beads.
Quantitative autoradiography is then used to quantitate the phosphorylation.
Using this approach it is possible to synthesize and analyze hundreds of
analogues within a relatively short time. %%% The objective of this research
proposal is to apply a novel combinatorial peptide library method to identify
peptides that can be phosphorylated (the transfer of a phosphate group to a
peptide or protein) by a number of human enzymes named protein tyrosine kinases.
These enzymes are especially important in regulating various cellular functions
such as activation of the immune cellular function, differentiation of various
cell types, cell growth and death, and even the cancerous process. The
combinatorial peptide library method described in this proposal was first
developed in Dr. Lam 's laboratory and involves the synthesis of millions of
peptide beads. The peptide beads phosphorylated by these enzymes will be
isolated and their chemical structures determined. After several peptide
substrates for these enzymes are identified, the P.I. plans to synthesize many
of their analogs and test their activity. Results from such studies will provide
important information for the understanding of the mechanism of action of these
enzymes, and also help us to understand the biochemical basis of many important
cellular functions. In addition, based on these results, he may be able to
design specific and potent inhibitors for these enzymes. *** @ ....()()))()() ;
S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( @ U ?6 @ v A Microsoft Word 6.0 2