* 9506144
* RUI: Biochemical and Genetic Characterization of Membrane-  Associated VirB-Protein COmplexes in Agrobacterium          tumefaciens
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1999
* Lois Banta, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 12/31/1999
* USD 310,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F g 5 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l :z 5 :z 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh
+' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @
_ 5 @ e = e { n " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | # Ä± e V T 4 " |
| | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 &gt; " " " " | | 4 | 9506144 Banta The plant
pathogen Agrobacterium tumefaciens causes a disease in which crown gall tumors
form on susceptible plants. The disease results from a complex interaction that
is initiated when the bacterium binds to the plant cell surface at a wound site.
The bacterium has the unusual ability to transfer a fragment of DNA (the T DNA)
into a host plant cell and deliver the DNA to the nucleus, where it becomes part
of the host plant's genome. Extensive molecular characterization over the past
several years has helped elucidate the process of T DNA production within the
bacterium, as well as the mechanism by which a molecule of bacterial origin is
directed to a specific compartment in a eukaryotic cell. One of the fun damental
aspects of this plant pathogen interaction that remains shrouded in mystery is
the actual transport process mediating export of the T DNA from the bacterium
and delivery into the plant cell. A multiprotein channel or pore complex has
been hypothesized to allow passage of the T DNA (and its associated proteins)
through the two membranes that surround the bacterium. Several candidate
proteins have been identified that could make up such a transport apparatus;
these proteins are encoded by the virB operon on the large tumor inducing (T)
plasmid that carries many of the virulence associated genes (as well as the T
DNA itself). Recent results from a number of labs including our own have shed
some light on the localization and other characteristics of many of the VirB
proteins; these observations support a model in which several VirB proteins
interact to form a T DNA transport pore, while others many function as
chaperones and/or sources of energy for the translocation event. The proposed
studies are designed to determine which VirB proteins interact to form
oligomeric complexes. Genetic analyses will take advantage of point mutations in
the virB10 gene that result in a loss of tumor formation; potentially
interacting species will be identified by screening for compensatory changes in
a second virB gene that can suppress the avirulent phenotype of the original
mutant. A second genetic approach will utilize the "dihybrid" strategy, in which
proteins or protein fragments are tested for their ability to bring together two
domains of a yeast transcriptional activator such as the GAL4 protein. These
genetic studies will be complemented by biochemical experiments designed to
explore the composition of VirB protein containing aggregates. Together, these
studies should provide some insight into the mechanism by which a large polar
molecule such as the T DNA and associated proteins is transported across the two
apolar membranes that enclose the Agrobacterium cell. Molecular dissection of
the structure and function of the putative transfer apparatus will, in turn,
help elucidate the processes and interactions mediating assembly of what is
thought to be an elaborate membrane associated complex. %%% The soil bacterium
Agrobacterium tumefaciens infects susceptible plants, resulting in unregulated
cell division and crown gall tumor formation. This disease can be thought of as
"plant cancer" in that, as with human tumors, cells are multiplying at an
inappropriate time and/or place. Infection by Agrobacterium involves the
movement of a piece of DNA (the T DNA) from the bacterium into the host plant
cell. This unusual interaction is the only known naturally occurring example of
DNA transfer from one kingdom (bacterial) to another (plant). We are especially
interested in the mechanism by which a large water loving molecule of DNA is
able to cross the oily membrane that surrounds the bacterial cell. T DNA
processing and transfer are mediated by a number of bacterial virulence (Vir)
proteins. One group of Vir proteins, the VirB proteins, are believed to play a
direct role in allowing the T DNA to exit the bacterial cell, most likely by
interacting to form an opening in the bacterial membrane through which the T DNA
is transferred. We plan to test this hypothesis, using both genetic and
biochemical approaches, by studying defective VirB proteins that do not permit T
DNA movement, and by isolating complexes of VirB proteins. *** ; @
....()()))()() ;