* 9506462
* Linkage of Laramide Depositional and Deformational Histories of the Sweetwater Arch and Adjacent Parts of the Hanna     Basin, Wyoming
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Arthur Snoke, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 187,694.00

Lillegraven 9506462 This interdisciplinary study is focused in south-central
Wyoming, along the boundary of the Hanna Basin and adjacent uplifts to the
north. The area is in the heart of the Rocky Mountain foreland, a region
characterized by broad, asymmetric basement arches that over-rode adjacent
subsiding basins along thrust and/or reverse faults (so-called "Laramide-style"
deformation). The Hanna Basin, although areally small, exposes an enormously
thick, fossil-rich sequence of Upper Cretaceous to lower Eocene strata. Parts of
the sedimentary sequence were affected by the same structural events seen more
obviously in adjacent mountain blocks. Data from both areas suggest a polyphase
deformational history, although its timing and regional extent are uncertain.
Goals of the research transgress boundaries among traditional disciplines of
paleobiology, biostratigraphy, physical stratigraphy, and structural geology.
Paleogeography is a unifying theme, including: 1) interpretation of physical
evolution of the Rocky Mountain landscape during the Laramide orogeny; and 2)
documentation of massive changes in diversity among its ancient vertebrate
inhabitants through time. The research depends upon integration of new
paleontological and geological data, linked between the basin and its marginal
uplifts. The unusually thick and richly fossiliferous Ferris Formation, for
example, provides unique opportunity for adding new, highly relevant taxonomic
distributional data to debates on: 1) catastrophic versus gradualistic
dinosaurian extinction; and 2) the nature of North American mammalian faunal
"recovery" following terrestrial extinctions near the end of the Cretaceous
time. These same fossils, in conjunction with abundant mammalian remains from
the younger Hanna Formation (Paleocene-early Eocene), not only provide evidence
for detailed zonation of stratigraphic horizons within the Hanna Basin, but also
allow temporal calibration of recognizable, important geologic events.
Stratigraphic linka ge of unique paleontological occurrences with lithologically
distinctive assemblages of syntectonic conglomerates, for example, shows
significant differences in the timing of uplift, and erosional histories,
between western and eastern extremes of the Hanna Basin's border of northern
mountains. The study area affords unusual opportunity to document effects of
Laramide structural style throughout the geologic column, ranging from
Precambrian igneous and metamorphic cores of the Shirley and Seminoe Mountains
upwardly through the Paleozoic and Mesozoic montane cover into syntectonic
basinal strata deposited during the latest Cretaceous and early Paleogene. The
structural research is to develop a detailed chronology based upon: 1)
continuation of geologic/structural mapping in key areas; 2) analysis of
deformational overprinting, from mesoscopic to macroscopic scales; 3) study of
major and minor faults, applying kinematic analysis; 4) preparation of
additional interpretive cross-sections from surface and subsurface (from well
and seismic reflection sources) data; and 5) retrodeformational analysis of
adjacent montane and basinal structures. These kinds of detailed investigations,
which are simultaneously based upon, and dependent upon, new
paleontological/geological data derived from field observations, provide superb
opportunities to: 1) expand basic knowledge of paleogeographic development of an
area of converging tectonic patterns; 2) analyze important tectonic
relationships among crustal shortening, orientation and sequential evolution of
structural features, and synorogenic sedimentation; and 3) test diverse
geometric and kinematic tectonic models applied to the basement-involved,
contractional regime characterizing the eastern Rocky Mountains.