* 9506796
* Theoretical Studies of Aqueous Solvation of Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Toshiko Ichiye, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1999
* USD 260,000.00

9506796 Ichiye The development of theories of aqueous solvation of biological
macromolecules is crucial to understanding their structure and function. This
research will develop theories for macromolecular solvation and implement them
into simulation algorithms and to study specific interactions of water and
counterions with proteins. Simple continuum solvent models are insufficient to
describe phenomena such as hydrogen bonding, local dielectric perturbations and
phenomena involving separations of only a few water layers. To understand and
model the molecular nature of solvation, the approach used here is the
development of statistical mechanical integral equation theories. First, the
previously proposed integral equation theory for solvation of globular molecules
will be extended to proteins. To facilitate this, a new model of water for
simulations will be developed, which is equivalent to TIP4P in structural
properties but is three times faster than 3-site water models in Monte Carlo
simulations. Without further development, this theory can then be used to
predict the solvation of a given structure; e.g., a crystal or NMR structure of
a protein. Second, this theory of aqueous solvation of macromolecules will be
incorporated into dynamics simulation algorithms. Currently, addition of
explicit solvent into a molecular dynamics simulation is the only simulation
method to include the molecular nature of water, but it is very costly in
computer resources. Several different methods of incorporating this theory are
discussed. The final goal is incorporation of ionic strength effects into
simulation methods. %%% The development of theories of aqueous solvation of
biological macromolecules is crucial to understanding their structure and
function. This research will develop theories for macromolecular solvation and
calculations that can then be used to study specific interactions of water and
counterions with proteins. This theory can be used to predict t he solvation of
a given structure; e.g., a crystal or NMR structure of a protein. Second, this
theory of aqueous solvation of macromolecules will be incorporated into dynamics
simulation algorithms. The final goal is incorporation of ionic strength effects
into simulation methods. ***