* 9506128
* Sodium Transport in Renal Tubules
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Larry Stoner, SUNY, Upstate Medical University
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 216,000.00

9506128 Stoner Most vertebrates regulate not only the contents of their blood
plasma but also its volume. Plasma is filtered into the kidney tubules of many
animals. The regulation of plasma volume is effected by controlling the net
reabsorption of filtered water and the most prevalent cation in the filtrate,
sodium. When animals are placed on a sodium restricted diet hormonal mechanisms
act to enhance the reabsorption of filtered sodium, reducing its rate of loss.
Several known control mechanisms for sodium reabsorption effect the distal
nephron. One important step in sodium reabsorption is sodium movement from the
lumen of the renal tubule into the cell, via ion channels. Many investigators
believe that regulated changes in the rate of sodium transport are achieved by
controlling the sodium channel activity. Dr. Stoner has developed a technique
whereby it is possible to turn inside-out fragments of the amphibian kidney
tubule. This approach exposes the urinary surface for study. The utility of
everted segments of renal tubule fragments lies in the ability to control,
independently, the contents of the saline solutions bathing the urinary and
blood surfaces of the epithelial cells while studying the aativity of the
channels involved in sodium reabsorption. Control of the ionic and hormonal
contents of these compartments will allow him for the first time to study the
expression and regulation ion channels in native tissue. One unique feature of
the species used, Ambystoma tigrinum, is that it can be purchased in both a
land- and aquatic-phase. One type of sodium channel is observed in the apical
membrane of everted collecting tubules dissected from land-phase Ambystoma,
while two other types of sodium channels appear in the aquatic-phase collecting
tubule. This is the first time the latter types of sodium channels have been
identified in any native collecting tubule. The physiological significance of
the presence of different channel types during different stages of metamorphosis
is unknown. Dr. Stoner hopes to identify the different physiological mechanisms
used to activate and inactivate each type of sodium channel. The results are
certain to clarify the differences in control of the sodium reabsorption in
terreqtrial and aquatic animals, and likely to spark new interest in the
developmental aspects of channel expression in the kidney. ***