* 9506606
* Collaborative Research:  Quantitative Hierarchical Models   for Fossil and Recent Marine Assemblages
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Robert Gardner, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 02/28/1998
* USD 32,415.00

; R o o t E n t r y F h C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l h h 4 @ 7 8 9 : ; &lt; = &gt; ? @ A F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9506606 Gardner Some recent studies of marine fossil
assemblages suggest that they exhibit a hierarchical pattern of stasis or
persistence on time scales ranging from millions to hundreds of millions of
years. Other studies seemingly contradict this, suggesting that the taxonomic
composition of marine assemblages are open; i.e., that persistent marine
communities do not exist. Both views of the stability of these systems invoke
abiotic perturbations as major controlling factors. Any ecological model invoked
to explain these patterns must include a consideration of the heterogeneous
distribution of habitats and ecosystems over a wide range of spatial scales,
changes in habitat distribution over time, and the effect that spatial
heterogeneity will have on population and community dynamics. In addition, any
model must include a consideration of the severity and frequency of abiotic
perturbations, which can also occur at multiple temporal and spatial scales.
Fortunately, the last decade has seen a tremendous growth in qualitative and
quantitative studies in landscape ecology and metapopuulation dynamics
specifically designed to examine such problems. This proposal is designed to
fund collaborative research between a paleontologist and a landscape ecologist,
in order to develop and utilize a quantitative model for the dynamics of
ecological units on multiple spatial and temporal scales. This model, CAPS, will
integrate metapopulation concepts into the spatial models developed for
landscape ecology and examine the relationship between the scales of biotic
dynamics with those of disturbance regimes. CAPS will be used to address several
problems of paleontological and ecological interest: How do fine-grained, high
frequency interactions at the landscape scale affect broader scale properties of
species abundance and distribution at metapopulation and biogeographic scales?
To what extent does long distance transport stabilize local biotas against
extinction due to local disturbances? Is the impact of a given disturbance
contingent on its location or timing? What are the relative roles played by
disturbance and biotic interactions in producing observed patterns of community
structure? Paleontology provides the only long term record of the biotic impact
of global change. As a result, the interpretation of spatial and temporal
changes in community composition observed in the fossil record is of major
importance. The model developed in this proposal will greatly aid in the
interpretation of these data. Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n
( 6 D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9506639 Felicia A. Fauntleroy Felicia A.
Fauntleroy @ r @ @ r @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e p p p p p p p C % ' ' ' ) P
T e E p p p p p % p p p p % w 9506606 Gardner Some recent studies of marine
fossil assem