* 9506997
* Industry and Government Co-Sponsored Workshop on            Pre-Competitive Research in Basic Science of Commercial     Light Sources to be held in Washington, DC on 2/27/95-3/2/95
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Alfred Gough, Lighting Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 11/30/1995
* USD 19,050.00

9506997 Gough This proposal is for holding a workshop to address the development
of a sustained advanced light source research program aimed at building the
scientific basis for major long range breakthroughs in light source performance
and efficiency. Qualified researchers in the basic sciences related to light
sources technologies will be brought together with world-wide experts now
working in light source research to discuss, plan and prioritize the sustained
research programs needed to achieve the major breakthroughs. The goals are to:
(1) educate participants from the basic research community in the current state
of the art in light source technology and research; (2) provides a vehicle for
the participants to explore both single focused as well as interdisciplinary
research programs that would provide the basis for the breakthroughs; (3)
jointly establish specific programs and priorities for collaborative effort and
funding. There will be approximately 60 participants. The workshop will take
place over a two and one-half day period. The findings and recommendations
regarding new research directions will be documented in a workshop proceedings.
The outcome of the workshop is expected to lead to multiple sourcing of funds
for the targeted research from both private industry as well as from interested
government agencies. ***