* 9506985
* Function of the Nuclear Ran/RCCI Regulatory System          in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Wilhelm Gruissem, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1998
* USD 278,000.00

9506985 Gruissem Cells regulate their growth by controlling their progression
into the cell cycle, but the molecular mechanisms for these controls are not
well understood. It has been shown that the nuclear Ras-like GTP-binding protein
Ran and its nucleotide exchange factor RCC1 form a complex that is critical for
a number of nuclear functions, including entry into and progression of DNA
replication, and entry into cell division. Mutations in either Ran or RCC1 have
complex phenotypes in animal and yeast cells and affect many processes,
including DNA synthesis and gene expression, often resulting in cell death. This
project is an investigation of the functions of Ran and RCC1 in plant cell
division and sexual reproduction. The proposed studies of the Ran/RCC1
regulatory complex in a multicellular system that is amenable to in vivo
manipulations should reveal novel and as yet poorly understood functions for
these conserved proteins. Preliminary data indicate that plant Ran is a highly
conserved nuclear protein which can suppress a fission yeast cell cycle
mutation. Ran is encoded by a family of genes in tomato whose members are
differentially expressed. The function of Ran and RCC1 in tomato plants will be
investigated using transgenic tomato plants expressing mutant Ran proteins in an
inducible fashion. This is a novel and powerful tool to investigate the role of
these proteins in development. In addition, the subcellular distribution and
function of the proteins during cell division and sexual reproduction are not
understood. Plant cells present a useful genetic system for such functional and
localization studies. Together, these experiments establish an important basis
for studies to understand the function of the Ran/RCC1 regulatory complex in a
signal transduction network that regulates the integration of cell growth and
cell division %%% During entry into any phase of the cell cycle, there are
complex and diverse functions which must be coor dinated. The phase which leads
to initiation of mitosis, the M phase of the cell cyle, requires, and to some
degree may be driven by, multiple activities, some of which involve the Ran gene
product and its associated RCC1 gene product. However, the work to date on these
genes has been done primarily in yeast and mammalian systems. This work pulls
together the suggestive previous work done in yeast and mammalian cell tissue
culture and provides a means to determine definitive functions of this gene
complex through the use of transgenic technologies in tomato and Arabidopsis
plants. Work has already shown that the genes for Ran/RCC1 in plants are very
similar to those found in yeast and mammals. The work also shows that the plant
genes can functionally replace non-functional genes in yeast. Ending these
studies to plants takes advantage of the multiple known plant mutations in
meiosis, the "reduction" division which gives rise to sexual gametes. The
commonality between the early phases of mitosis and meiosis would indicate that
the definitive role for these proteins might be uncovered by exploiting advanced
knowledge in this area of plant biology. Extending the work to plants also takes
advantage of the "naturally" occuring cell cycle arrest points and activity in a
mature, differentiated higher plant. Discovery of the role of the Ran/RCC1
regulatory complex in the signal transduction network involved in the normal
development of plants should provide a deeper of understanding of how these very
basic, common signaling mechanisms are coordinated during plant, animal and
fungal growth. ***