* 9506048
* Packet Network Architecture and Prorocols for Video Services
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Simon Lam, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 449,910.00

9506048 Lam During the course of this project, the principal investigator will
investigate the design and performance of a new class of packet switching
networks, called Burst Scheduling networks, for supporting multimedia
applications. Burst Scheduling networks are designed for carrying video, audio,
and data traffic, and characterized by: (i) use of virtual clock values in
channel scheduling, (ii) packet flows (in particular, video flows) processed
efficiently in bursts, and (iii) delay and delay jitter guarantees provided to
packet flows that satisfy a Flow Specification (a new model of packet video
motivated by our recent study of MPEG video). The primary objective of the
proposed project is to investigate network design issues, such as, statistical
versus deterministic performance guarantees, demand assignment strategies,
efficient scheduling algorithms, fault-tolerant architecture and protocols,
modeling of audio and delay-sensitive data traffic, flow control and buffer
management strategies. The secondary objective of the proposed project is to
investigate the design and prototyping of a transport protocol that makes use of
performance guarantees provided by Burst Scheduling networks to support
multimedia applications. Some of the proposed research problems will be
investigated using mathematical methods. All of the research problems will be
investigated experimentally in the Networking Research Laboratory of the
Department of Computer Sciences. Specifically, we plan to add capabilities to a
simulator of Burst Scheduling networks to enable the proposed research
activities. The simulator will be run on a high-performance workstation and will
be connected to other workstations where the prototype transport protocol and a
real multimedia application will be run, supplying video, audio, and data flows
to the simulator. *** ******* Darleen Fisher Program Manager Networking and
Communications Research Program 4201 Wilson Blvd. Roo m 1175 Arlington Va 22230
(703) 306-1949 (703) 306-0621 (FAX)