* 9506989
* Genetic Analysis of Complex Membrane Protein Insertion
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Colin Manoil, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 273,900.00

9506989 Manoil, Colin C. The project investigates how Escherichia coli lac
permease is assembled in the membrane and how mutational changes disrupt the
process. 1. We aim to determine whether the translocation of an internal polar
domain (P6) of lac permease across the membrane is redundantly determined by
each of the transmembrane sequences adjacent to the domain. To do this, we will
examine whether mutations inactivating the individual export function of the
more N-terminal transmembrane sequence (TM11 ) are suppressed when the
C-terminal transmembrane sequence (TM12) is present. 2. We will identify a large
set of missense mutations inactivating lac permease. Many of the changes should
alter folding of the membrane-inserted protein, and the mutant set should
provide a foundation for a systematic molecular genetic analysis of this
process. Mutant proteins will be assayed for cellular stability, membrane
topology and ability to fold normally. 3. We are identifying lac permease TM12
mutations that cause the protein to be highly toxic to cells. We will
investigate the mechanism of toxicity by analyzing mutants that show increased
or decreased sensitivity to the toxic proteins. 4. We will identify inactivating
and neutral mutations altering the most C-terminal transmembrane sequence (TM5)
of the L subunit of the photosynthetic reaction from Rhodobacter sphaeroides. We
will characterize the relative sensitivity to different substitution types of
the side of the spanning segment facing other parts of the protein versus the
side facing lipid. This analysis will serve as a guide for interpreting
analogous studies of membrane proteins of unknown structure. In addition, we
will determine whether second site revertant analysis can identify residues in
transmembrane sequences adjacent to TM5. If so, the study of revertants may
provide a general method for identifying elements of the folded structure of
other membrane proteins of unknown structure, such as lac permease. 5. We are
constructing a trans poson derivative that will function to fuse all of lac
permease except its last transmembrane sequence (TM12) to target gene products.
Analysis of LacY+ transposon insertions should make it possible to determine
what sequences can functionally substitute for TM12 and may provide a way to
identify genes for proteins related to lac permease. %%% Membrane proteins play
fundamental roles in a variety of cellular functions, such as photosynthesis.
This research will lead to an understanding of how proteins are inserted into
membranes and how they function there. New membrane proteins with desired
structures and functions may be able to be created using this information. ***
??