* 9506230
* Flagellar Glycoprotein Dynamics and Whole Cell Locomotion
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Robert Bloodgood, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1999
* USD 345,000.00

9506230 Bloodgood Whole cell locomotion alone a solid substrate involves a
carefully choreographed sequence of events that requires the cell surface to
exhibit both sensory and motor functions, which must be carefully integrated.
Chlamydomonas exhibits gliding motility along a solid substrate, and this form
of whole cell locomotion is dependent upon the activities of the flagellar
surface. Previous work from this laboratory suggests the existence of a
signaling pathway (involving c calcium and protein phosphorylation) that couples
the sensory and motor functions of the flagellar surface. Crosslinking of a
population of 350 kD flagellar membrane glycoproteins results in calcium influx
followed by the dephosphorylation of a 60 kD flagellar phosphoprotein that binds
to the cytoplasmic surface of the flagellar membrane through its association
with the 350 kD glycoprotein. In a manner not yet understood, these initial
signaling events result in activation of a flagellar motor protein complex that
derives the movement of the 350 kD glycoproteins within the plane of the
flagellar membrane thereby bringing about locomotion. The experiments outlined
in this proposal will extend our understanding of the flagellar signaling
pathway by which sensory and motor events at the flagellar surface are coupled.
In particular, efforts will be focused on characterizing the functions performed
by the 350 kD flagellar membrane glycoprotein and the 60 kD flagellar
phosphoprotein. These proteins will be cloned sequenced. A library of non-
gliding mutant cell lines obtained by Kozminski and Rosenbaum using insertional
mutagenesis/tagging will be screened for defects in the 350 kD glycoproteins,
the 60 kD phosphoprotein, and steps in the signaling pathway that induces the
dephosphorylation of the 60 kD phosphoprotein. These mutants hold the promise of
providing an alternative approach to cloning genes encoding the 350 kD
glycoprotein, the 60 kD phosphoprotein, and other, curren tly unknown,
components in the signal components of the signaling pathway. Functional
analysis of the 350 kD flagellar membrane glycoprotein and the 60 kD
phosphoprotein will be performed by directed mutagenesis of cloned DNAs coupled
with transformation of Chlamydomonas and characterization of the transformants.
In parallel with the molecular approaches to understanding this signaling
pathway and, in particular, the function of the two key players identified to
date, biochemical approaches will be utilized to ask a number of functional
questions: 1) Is the 60 kD phosphoprotein a protein kinase? 2) Does the
phosphorylation of the 60 kD phosphoprotein regulate its function and/or its
association with he 350 kD membrane glycoprotein? 3) What is the binding site on
the 350 kD glycoprotein to which 60 kD phosphoprotein binds? and 4) Does the
Chlamydomonas flagellar homologue of the calcium dependent protein kinase (CDPK)
from higher plants play a role in the signaling pathway? Monoclonal antibodies
to the 60 KD phosphoprotein will be obtained and utilized for quantitating the
60 kD phosphoprotein using ELISA and Western blots, purifying the 60 kD
phosphoprotein by immunoaffinity chromatography, for characterizing the non-
gliding cell mutants and for screening a lambda gt11 expression library. These
experiments, utilizing a combining of biochemical and molecular approaches, hold
the promise of greatly extending our understanding of the regulation of whole
cell locomotion. %%% The unicellular green alga, Chlamydomonas, is a model
system for studying gliding (not swimming) motion of cells with a whiplike
"tail" or flagellum. This study explores the coordination of events which bring
about the gliding motion in Chlamydomonas. A complex of proteins found within
the flagellum mediates the gliding motion. The complex is comprised of a larger
protein containing covalently-attached sugars (350 kD glycoprotein) and a
smaller protein containing covalently attached pho sphates (60 kD
phosphoprotein). The genes for these proteins are cloned and sequenced. Mutant
forms of the genes are identified in existing mutant libraries of non-gliding
Chlamydomonas. These mutant libraries are also the source of genes important in
the signaling mechanisms involved in flagellar gliding. Mutant forms of the
genes will also be synthesized and re-expressed in Chlamydomonas. Biochemical
analysis of proteins which mediate the gliding motion are pursued to identify
the biochemical function of the proteins. the 60 kD phosphoprotein will be
purified and the following questions answered: Does it phosphorylate components
of the flagella? Is the phosphorylation which it shows necessary for its
activity? How does it interact with the 350 kD glycoprotein? Other proteins
known to be signaling mediators and also found in Chlamydomonas will be
identified as candidates for coordinating a part of the gliding motion. This
work is part of a larger question about the mechanism of cell motility and how
cellular motors are coordinated to produce motion. Application for this work
could be found in the area of how molecular machines are coordinated and
synthesized. ***