* 9506156
* Somitogenesis in Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Achim Gossler, Jackson Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1999
* USD 400,000.00

9506156 Gossler Somitogenesis is a fundamental pattern forming process in
vertebrates that subdivides the paraxial mesoderm along the anterior-posterior
body axis into a series of homologous subunits called somites. The somites
acquire distinct identities according to their axial position and during
subsequent differentiation, they give rise to specific anatomical structures
along the anterior posterior body axis. The molecular mechanisms that control
the formation of somites from the presomitic (unsegmented) mesoderm remain to be
elucidated. Mouse mutations that specifically perturb normal somite formation
and consequently lead to severe malformations of the axial skeleton indicate
that different genetic elements control distinct aspects of somitogenesis, such
as the formation of individual somites, or their size and shape. To understand
the molecular mechanisms underlying somitogenesis and thus controlling the
generation of the segmented mesodermal body parts, the isolation and functional
characterization of genes involved in the regulation of these processes are
essential. In this proposal Dr. Gossler will focus on the functional analysis in
vivo of a recently isolated mouse gene Dll1 (delta like gene 1). Dll1 is closely
related to the Drosophila Delta gene which is required for various cell fate
decisions during fly development. Dll1 is transiently expressed during
embryogenesis and expression is closely correlated with somitogenesis. The
expression pattern and homology to Drosophila Delta strongly suggest a role for
Dll1 in cell to cell interactions underling somitogenesis. To test this
hypothesis Dr. Gossler will generate a null allele of Dll1 by homologous
recombination in ES cells and study the consequences of this mutation during
embryogenesis. To address the consequences of a mutation in Dll1 on the cellular
level he will assess the developmental potential of cells carrying this mutation
in chimeric embryos. Finally, he will determine the expressio n of the Dll1 gene
and the distribution of its product in embryos that carry mutations affecting
somitogenesis in comparison with wild type embryos. ***