* 9506959
* Glycolytic Enzyme Dynamics in Living Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Leonard Pagliaro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1996
* USD 119,338.00

9506959 Pagliaro Much of the understanding of cellular organization and function
has evolved in the conceptual framework of studying the structure of fixed cells
and biochemical processes in dilute solution. These approaches have been
extremely valuable in elucidating the microanatomy and biochemical function of
cells and their organelles, but the spatial and temporal dynamics of many
cellular processes remain poorly understood. In large part, this is due to the
spatial averaging inherent in many biochemical approaches and the loss of
temporal resolution in ultrastructural studies requiring chemical fixation.
Fluorescent probe and optical microscope techniques developed over the past
decade have made it possible to study an increasing number of molecular and
biochemical processes in living cells. These techniques are now adopted to
characterize the organization of a ubiquitous metabolic pathway, glycolysis, in
living cell. The glycolytic enzymes aldolase, phophofructokinase (PFK),
glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and triose phosphate isomerase
(TPI) interact with each other and/or structural proteins in vitro, and a
variety of specific reagents are now used to study their behavior, organization
and dynamics in vivo in living mammalian fibroblasts. The intracellular
distribution and motility of each of these enzymes is compared, and the
interactions among these enzymes in vitro and in vivo is characterized
extensively. The glycolytic enzyme enolase lacks specific interactions in vitro
and in vivo, and we will use enolase as a reference molecule in our experiments.
Aldolase is concentrated in a microdomain around F-actin stress fibers in
fibroblasts, and a fraction of the enzyme is bound in vivo. This finding is
inconsistent with the textbook description of glycolysis occurring as a series
of fully solvated, diffusion limited reactions in the cytoplasm, and consistent
with a growing number of models for organized glycolytic metabolism. Recent work
from several laboratories has led to the identification of a putative domain for
actin-interaction on the aldolase molecule, based on biochemical and molecular
genetic studies of aldolase interactions in vitro. Site- directed mutants of
rabbit muscle aldolase are used to study the effect of specific mutations on
aldolase dynamics in vivo; mutants of aldolase catalytic activity and actin-
binding activity have been obtained and characterized. There is also evidence
that PFK and GAPDH bind to F-actin and may interact with aldolase in vitro. The
distribution and mobility of these enzymes in vivo is mapped using ratio
imaging. The study is part of and reflects the interdisciplinary approach taken
by the lab, with substantial biochemical characterization of reagents prior to
their use in vivo; electron microscopy, falling ball viscometry, fluorescence
photobleaching, and fluorescence energy transfer measurements to quantify
enzyme/actin interaction in vitro; and microinjection, fluorescence imaging,
fluorescence photobleaching, and fluorescence energy transfer experiments in
vivo. Better understanding of the organization of this important and ubiquitous
metabolic pathway allows better understanding of the cytoplasm, and how
biochemical reactions in cytoplasm are organized and regulated. %%% After the
discovery of the particle responsible in a large way for cellular energy
metabolism of the cell, the mitochondrion, a search was undertaken for a
particle responsible for the other component of energy metabolism, the breakdown
of sugars, a process called glycolysis. No membrane-bound compartment was
identified for this process, so the general conclusion was that the enzymes
reponsible for glycolysis function in a solvated state. With that assumption,
much of the chemistry of glycolysis has been done completely in vitro, after the
cells have been homogenized, extracted and the individual enzymes purified. This
project approaches the nature of glycolysi s differently, because it now appears
likely that this conclusion is in part, wrong. Work in progress indicates that
some of the glycolytic enzymes act, to some extent, within a particulate
microdomain where they can be associated with each other and with the
cytoskeleton. This work identifies the extent of association by studying the
movement and mutual proximity of labeled "tags" for the enzymes or their
associative partners by means of advanced fluorescence microscopy and imaging
approaches. The advantage of the imaging approaches is that the process can be
understood in vivo; the cell and its components will not be disturbed. The
behavior of the enzymes, aldolase, enolase, phosphofructokinase, glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate dehydrogenase, and triosephosphate isomerase, and their relationship
to the cytoskeletal protein, F-actin, will be studied in vivo. Labeled
fluorescent forms are microinjected and their behavior studied through ratio
imaging, a process whereby the optical problems created by the in vivo situation
can be largely corrected. The results will have a large impact on the
understanding of how the cell organizes not only glycolysis, but other multi-
enzymatic pathways which are coordinately active in the cell. ***