* 9506911
* A Global Regulon in E.coli Controlled by the                Leucine-Responsive Regulatory Protein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Rowena Matthews, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 435,000.00

9506911 Matthews The leucine-responsive regulatory protein (Lrp) is a recently
discovered transcriptional regulator in Escherichia coli that mediates changes
in the expression of more than 30 known genes and operons, and at least as many
more unidentified genes and operons. In attempting to understand the response of
E. coli and other unicellular organisms to changes in nutrient availability, it
is important to understand how shifts in the regulation of whole blocks of genes
are mediated, and how a small number of regulatory proteins can work together to
integrate physiological responses. Lrp induces a particularly diverse set of
regulatory responses among operons in the regulon, inhibiting the expression of
some operons and activating the expression of others. In addition, target
operons differ greatly with respect to their sensitivity to the co-regulator,
leucine; leucine antagonizes the effect of Lrp on some operons, is required for
the effect of Lrp on others; and has little or no effect on regulation of still
other operons by Lrp. Lrp thus has unusual properties as a DNA-binding
regulatory protein. A long term goal of the research is to understand at a
molecular level how Lrp mediates these diverse effects. These studies should
also clarify the role of Lrp in regulating metabolic processes in E. coli and
other Gram-negative bacteria. A major focus of the research will be the
comparison of in vivo and in vitro studies on regulation of genes and operons by
Lrp. These comparisons initially will focus on the regulation by Lrp of the
gltBDF operon, which codes for the subunits of glutamate synthase. This enzyme
plays an essential role in the assimilation of low levels of ammonia during
growth of E. coli in glucose minimal medium. Under these conditions, the net
rate of transcription of gltBDF is 44-fold higher in an lrpt strain than in an
isogenic Irp::Tn10 strain. In vivo studies of gltBDF regulation will employ a
strain, AAEC546, in which the Irp gene has been placed under the control of the
lacUVS promoter so that the synthesis of Lrp is controlled by addition of an
inducer (IPTG) to the medium, and which contains a transcriptional fusion of the
gltBDF promoter to the lacZ+ gene coding for (-galactosidase. In this strain,
the effect of varying concentrations of Lrp on the expression of gltBDF can be
studied, and compared with effects of Lrp on transcriptional activation of
gltBDF in vitro. Preliminary studies have established that Lrp binds to the
promoter region of gltBDF both in the presence and in the absence of leucine,
but that the ability of bound Lrp to activate transcription is markedly reduced
(~4-fold) in the presence of leucine. Further studies will seek to define the
differences between the interaction of Lrp with gltBDF in the presence and in
the absence of leucine. Using derivatives of strain AAEC546 containing
transcriptional lacZ+ fusions to other genes in the Lrp regulon, the effect of
leucine on the transcriptional regulation of these genes will be compared with
results obtained with gltBDF. Strain AAEC546 has also been used to identify
genes and operons in the Lrp regulon by mutational analysis following random
insertions of (placmu into the chromosome. In contrast to the methods used to
identify such genes in other laboratories, the strategy employed does not depend
on effects of leucine on the Lrp-dependent regulation of gene expression. Ten
fusions, displaying highly varied patterns of regulation by Lrp and by leucine,
have been isolated. These fusions will now be cloned, permitting the
identification of the operons into which the fusion has been inserted. Future
research will involve characterization of the effect of Lrp and leucine on the
expression of these operons in vitro and in vivo. In the classical models for
prokaryotic transcriptional regulation, for instance in regulation by LacI or
Crp, the coregulator primarily modulates the affinity of the regulatory protein
for its specific binding sites on the target DNA. The initial studies of trans
criptional regulation by Lrp fit a very different paradigm, in which the
coregulator, leucine, affects both the affinity of Lrp for specific sites
upstream of target genes and the efficacy of bound Lrp as a transcriptional
regulator. In this way, Lrp resembles AraC and MerR more than it does Crp and
LacI. The studies seek to provide an understanding of this phenomenon at the
molecular level. By these means, our understanding of the way in which a single
regulatory protein modulates the activity of so many other genes and operons in
E. coli, with such large variations in the type and degree of modulation of
expression, should be improved. %%% The growth of bacteria is affected by the
environment in which they are growing. These studies will lead to an
understanding of how large groups of genes are regulated by environmental
signals. This knowledge is potentially useful in modulating the growth of
bacteria for applications to biotechnology, as well as understanding how
bacteria function in a variety of environments. ***