* 9506139
* Assembly of the Bacteriophage T4 DNA Replication Sliding    Clamp:  A Functional Analysis of Protein-Protein            Subassemblies
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* Michael Reddy, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/2001
* USD 370,000.00

9506139 Reddy This research will determine the key steps by which a
multicomponent complex involved in the replication bacteriophage T4 DNA is
assembled. In particular, this research will yield a precise understanding of
how complex termed the "clamp loader" (gp44/62, a hetero-oligomeric protein
possessing an intrinsic ATPase activity) specifically interacts with a second
protein, termed the "sliding clamp" (gp45, a homo-oligomeric protein) to
subsequently "load" the sliding clamp onto DNA. A variety of inter- and
intracrosslinking methodologies, including both chemical as well as molecular
biological approaches will be employed. Using a recently refined version of the
nitrocellulose filter binding assay, a thorough kinetic analysis of the binding
and release of ADP to the ATP-dependent clamp loader protein complex will be
done. Development of novel protein chromatographic schemes such as affinity
chromatography in the presence of a macromolecular crowding agent (polyethylene
glycol) or specific retention of protein-protein complexes by the inclusion of
Mg-ATP in all chromatographic buffers will be explored in order to facilitate
the purification of intact protein-protein complexes directly from biological
sources. The nature of the macromolecular interactions observed in the T4 system
appear to closely parallel those currently under investigation in the field of
molecular chaperones. Therefore, insights garnered from these studies will add
to the growing understanding of the molecular basis underlying the specificity
and regulation of protein-protein interactions. Current avenues of
investigations in molecular and cellular biochemistry will be presented to both
undergraduate and graduate students by a research-level analysis (lectures and
assignments) in which understanding is considerably valued over rote
memorization. Two "Special Topics in Biochemistry" courses entitled "The
Enzymology of DNA Replication" and Cells as Macromolecular Assemblies" will
provide students with a breath of knowledge that enables them to independently
think about molecular mechanisms of biological relevance. These courses combine
formal lectures with class-sessions during which there is a critical assessment
of directly relevant papers assigned from the primary scientific literature.
Modernization of a general biochemistry course will be accomplished by
complementing molecular biology lectures with student assignments such as
searching for DNA sequence homologies, designing oligonucleohdes for use in PCR,
and performing secondary structure predictions. These tasks will require of the
students that they learn how to navigate, using computers, the Internet (in
particular, the World Wide Web). An undergraduate Experimental Biochemistry
Laboratory course has been designed as a mini-research project around the enzyme
bacterial luciferase. A laboratory manual also has been written for this course.
The structure of the course provides the students with an excellent and exciting
model system by which to learn various common and important techniques in
biochemistry and molecular biology. %%% This research will determine the key
steps by which a multiprotein complex involved in the replication of
bacteriophage T4 DNA is assembled. Crucial features of the mechanism of DNA
replication are conserved throughout Nature. Therefore, insights garnered from
these studies will add to the growing understanding of the molecular basis
underlying the specificity and regulation of protein-protein interactions in
general and of DNA replication in particular. Current avenues of investigations
in molecular and cellular biochemistry will be presented to both undergraduate
and graduate students by a research-level analysis (lectures and assignments) in
which understanding is considerably valued over rote memorization. Two "Special
Topics in Biochemistry" courses entitled "The Enzymology of DNA Replication" and
Cells as Macromolecular Assemblies" will provide students with a breath of
knowledge that enables them to ind ependently think about molecular mechanisms
of biological relevance. These courses combine formal lectures with class-
sessions during which there is a critical assessment of directly relevant papers
assigned from the primary scientific literature. Modernization of a general
biochemistry course will be accomplished by complementing molecular biology
lectures with student assignments such as searching for DNA sequence homologies,
designing oligonucleohdes for use in PCR, and performing secondary structure
predictions. These tasks will require of the students that they learn how to
navigate, using computers, the Internet (in particular, the World Wide Web). An
undergraduate Experimental Biochemistry Laboratory course has been designed as a
mini-research project around the enzyme bacterial luciferase. A laboratory
manual also has been written for this course. The structure of the course
provides the students with an excellent and exciting model system by which to
learn various common and important techniques in biochemistry and molecular
biology. ***