* 9506844
* Genetic and Developmental Mechanisms of a Morphogenetic     Program
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2001
* David Fitch, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2001
* USD 540,000.00

Fitch, David IBN-9506844 To understand how morphological diversity in
multicellular animals has arisen by the accumulation of evolutionary changes in
genes, an understanding is first required of how morphology is specified by
genes and developmental mechanisms. The 4-celled tail tip of the nematode,
Caenorhabditis elegans, is being studied as a model for elucidating the genes
and developmental processes involved in producing its morphology. Because this
structure adopts different morphologies in related species, the tail tip
provides a model for the evolution of morphogenesis as well. In C. elegans, the
shape of the tail tip is pointy in adult hermaphrodites and blunt in adult
males. The pointy shape in hermaphrodites results from retention of the larval
state, whereas the blunt shape in males results from cell fusions and changes in
cell size, shape and possible adhesion that occur rapidly, just before the last
larval molt. Additionally, a cell-cell signalling event may induce the
coordinated expression of these events. To identify genes involved in male tail
tip morphogenesis, morphological mutants are being isolated and characterized.
One such gene, lep-1, acts specifically to control adult fate in male tail tip
cells and is being cloned to determine its molecular function and expression
pattern. Epistatic interactions among identified genes will eventually be
studied. The hypothesized cell-cell interactions in the induction of tail tip
morphogenesis are being tested by selective ablation of multiple or single
candidate cells with a laser microbeam. Other cellular processes potentially
involved in tail tip morphogenesis are being investigated with markers and
inhibitors of cellular components. To provide a precise microanatomical
framework for these genetic and developmental analyses, the cellular
architecture of the tail tip is being detailed by electron microscopy. The major
educational activities take the form of undergraduate and graduate courses
(mainly on evolution and evolutionary developmental biology), but participation
in pre- service teacher education, undergraduate advising, and supervision of
high school, undergraduate and graduate student research projects in the
laboratory are also important. In the courses and laboratories, emphasis is
placed on inquiry-centered, hands-on learning. Students are guided by question-
based approaches to construct their own knowledge and skills. In particular
activities, cooperature learning is encouraged to develop communication skills
and the ability to work collaboratively as well as independently. A continuing
emphasis in both coursework and assessment will be the development of language
and problem- solving skills. The objectives of all of these activities are to
develop in all of the participating students a solid foundation of knowledge in
biology, a hearthy skepticism and creative ability to formulate constructive
questions and hypothesis (and thus an appreciation of science as an
approachable, dynamic, creative, human activity), a practical knowledge of the
scientific method as a general problem-solving tool, and an ability to
effectively communicate findings and concepts in both oral and written language.