* 9506296
* RUI: The Biosynthetic Incorporation and Characterization of Seleno-and Telluromethionine in Both Control and Novel      Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Jeffrey Boles, Tennessee Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 160,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F K `P: @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c
t P o o l K `P: K `P: ? @ A B C D E F G H F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9506296 Boles The overall goal of this project is
the incorporation of unusual heavy atom containing amino acids into protein for
use as diffraction labels and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) probes. The
method of unusual amino acid incorporation is a biosynthetic one, where
selenomethionine (SeMet) and telluromethionine (TeMet) are introduced in vivo
during protein biosynthesis in place of wild type methionine. This introduces a
selenium or tellurium atom in place of the lighter sulfur atom of methionine.
The overall long term objectives of the research are, 1) to develop chemically
defined bacterial growth protocols that allow maximal uptake of SeMet and TeMet
into cellular protein, 2 ) purify, characterize and crystallize resultant
control and novel proteins, and 3) prepare these proteins for analysis by x ray
diffraction and/or NMR spectroscopy. Telluromethionine is a proposed in situ
isomorphous replacement which may be capable of simplifying the phase problem of
macromolecular crystallography simplifying three dimensional structure
determinations. Undergraduate students will be independentl y integrated into
this program at the appropriate level. Each student researcher will realize how
their individual research project works collectively toward the latter
objective. %%% Elucidation of the three dimensional structure of proteins is
central to both our understanding of biological mechanisms as well as to the
targeted design of new drugs. Currently, structural determinations must overcome
two well known hurdles, firstly, the crystallization of a protein and secondly,
solving the well known phase problem of protein crystallography. Crystallization
is largely perceived as more art than science, thus, this P.I. is focusing on
the latter problem: the phase problem. The atoms found in proteins are too light
(lacking sufficient mass) to allow a satisfactory structural determination. It
is the goal of this research to incorporate selenomethionine or
telluromethionine into proteins via a biological mechanism, thus introducing two
heavier atoms into the biological system: Selenium or Tellurium. These atoms are
much heavier than the typical atoms found in proteins (carbon, nitrogen, oxygen,
sulfur and hydrogen). These atoms can be exploited by two different available
technologies, x ray diffraction and multi nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy, both of which are used in the determination of three dimensional
structure and the study of enzyme function. It is hoped to introduce novel
avenues in the simplification of structural determinations which may eventually
lead to a better atomic level understanding of biological events. *** ; ; @
....()()))()() Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( &gt; D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ " N: @ @ TP: @
v A Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e u D D D D D \ f D C p t t t t t t t #