* 9506901
* Biosynthesis of Heme and Chlorophyll Precursors
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Samuel Beale, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 316,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ÕwA C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l wA wA 4 @ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9506901 Beale Tetrapyrrole pigments comprise a family of
biomolecules including hemes, chlorophyll, bilins, and vitamin B12. These
pigments function as essential components in the processes of respiration and
photosynthesis, and also exist as cofactors in other important enzyme reactions.
All tetrapyrroles arise from a branched biosynthetic pathway that has
(-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) as its first committed member. The long term goals
of this project are to understand the structure, mechanisms of action, and
regulation of the enzymes that catalyze ALA formation in plants and algae, and
how ALA formation controls the photosynthetic pigment content of these
organisms. Efforts have recently been directed to exploiting the unique genetic
and biochemical potentials of the unicellular alga Chlamydomonas reinhardtii to
achieve these goals. Two light regulated genes have been cloned that encode
enzymes which catalyze the formation and utilization of ALA, and these genes are
being used to study enzyme mechanisms and regulation. It is proposed to isolate
and purify the enzymes mf the ALA-forming pathway , to characterize their
physical and kinetic properties, their cofactor requirements, their reaction
mechanisms and possible enzyme interactions, to study the regulation of enzyme
activity by allosteric modulators, and to determine changes in the enzyme
abundance in response to light and cellular developmental status. Using cloned
genes as molecular probes, cellular development processes, and mechanisms of
regulation and expression of components of the chlorophyll biosynthetic pathway
will be studied during adaptation of the cells to light. %%% Chlorophyll is the
essential biological pigment which plants use to harvest sunlight for conversion
into the biological energy that sustains all life on earth. The goals of this
research project are to determine the biochemical reactions that plants employ
to carry out the initial steps of chlorophyll formation, and to understand how
plants control these reactions to achieve their ability to efficiently use the
energy in sunlight. *** Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( / $ H l D
h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT METABOLIC BIOCHEMISTRY Shelley A. Graves Shelley
A. Graves @ M wA @ @ M wA @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e < < j j j j j j j H
# A 7 T L j j j j j ~ j j j j 9506901 Beale Tetrapyrrole pigments comprise a
family of biomolecules including hemes, chlorophyll, bilins, and vitamin B12.
These pigments function as essential components in the processes of respiration
and photosynthesis, and also exist as cofactors in other important enzyme
reactions. All tetrapyrroles arise from a branched biosynthetic pathway that has
(-aminolevulinic acid (ALA) as its first committed member. The long term goals
of this project are to understand the structure, mechanisms of action, and
regulation of the enzymes that catalyze ALA formation in