* 9506236
* RUI:  Characterization of a Molecular Chaperone in the      Eukaryotic Flagellum
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Karl Johnson, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1999
* USD 240,000.00

MCB 9506236 Karl Johnson Molecular chaperones of the 70,000 M.W. Heat Shock
Protein (HSP70) family are special proteins that interact with many other types
of proteins in cells to assist both their proper folding and assembly.
Biological processes known to require HSP70 function include such diverse
examples as response to stress, protein targeting and secretion, assembly of
steroid hormone receptors, viral replication and the initiation of gene
transcription. Recent evidence implicates members of the HSP70 chaperone family
in the construction of larger intracellular structures such as the microtubule
cytoskeleton. During an investigation into the assembly of a microtubule-
containing organelle, the eukaryotic flagellum of the green alga Chlamydomonas,
an HSP70 family member was identified. Immunofluorescent localization
experiments demonstrated that this HSP70 protein was concentrated in the tips of
flagella. This localization is significant, as previous work has shown that the
tips are the sites of flagellar assembly. A combination of molecular,
cytological and cell biological techniques will be employed to further
characterize the in vivo role of this molecular chaperone. This investigation
offers significant opportunities for novel insight into the processes which
govern cytoskeletal assembly in living cells. Because flagella are present on
many different cell types, including cells of the human body, investigations in
the green alga Chlamydomonas should reveal details about conserved processes of
macromolecular assembly applicable to understanding the formation of other
microtubule-containing structures, such as the mitotic spindle or interphase
microtubule cytoskeleton. %%% Living cells are dynamic systems that contain
architectural elements that give them form and shape. These structures must be
assembled and disassembled at appropriate times and places in order for the
cells to function properly. This investigation examines the role a special kind
of protein called a "chape rone" may play in this process. This project should
further our understanding of normal cellular functions and address a key
mechanism in life. ***