* 9506550
* Fossil Mammals, Carbon Isotopes, and Evolution of Cenozoic  Terrestrial Ecosystems in Argentina
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Bruce MacFadden, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 113,979.00

MacFadden 9506550 This proposal seeks NSF grant support for a three-year project
to investigate the ancient feeding ecology and evolution of Cenozoic mammalian
herbivore communities of southern South America using the classic 60-myr
sequence from Argentina. The research will address three interrelated themes of
fossil mammal paleoecology: (1) the long-standing enigma of why extinct
notoungulates acquired high-crowned teeth, and presumably grazing diets, earlier
in South America than most northern hemisphere high-crowned herbivorous mammals;
(2) endemic/immigrant mammal feeding ecology with the goal of a better
understanding of biotic interactions during the Plio-Pleistocene Great American
Interchange; and (3) the evolution of C3 an C4 photosynthesis and timing of
grassland spread in southern South America. This study will be accomplished by
(1) determining the stable carbon isotope ( 13C) values of tooth enamel and (2)
analyzing molar tooth morphology (i.e., relative unworn crown height). The data
from carbon isotopes combined with tooth-crown height will determine whether a
particular extinct herbivore taxon was a C3 browser, C3 grazer, mixed feeder, or
C4 grazer. (During the middle and late Cenozoic, pure C3 feeders have mean tooth
enamel apatite 13 values of ca. -13 parts per mil, whereas pre C4-feeders have
mean tooth enamel apatite values of ca. 0%. In general, low-crowned herbivorous
mammals are predominately browsers, whereas high-crowned herbivorous mammals are
predominately grazers. These two methods, which until recently have not been
used together, are a powerful new tool in fossil mammal paleontology to
understand long-term ecosystem evolution and global change through geologic
time. Funds are requested for (1) museum travel to obtain additional specimens
for isotopic analysis and to construct a data base on mammalian herbivore
hypsodonty at La Plata (1 trip), the American Museum of Natural History (1
trip), and the Field Museum of Natural History (1 trip); of Utah; (3) one trip
for my Argentine colleague (Prado) to visit the Florida Museum of Natural
History; and (4) one graduate student assistantship.