* 9506050
* Copper-Metallothionein and a Novel Superoxide Dismutase in  Organisms that Use Copper for Oxygen Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* marius brouwer, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 06/30/1996
* USD 98,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F R 5 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l 5 5 4 @ F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +' 0
$ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT METABOLIC BIOCHEMISRY Shelley A. Graves
Shelley A. Graves @ 7\ e = e 7 7 j j j j j j j ı 1 w y y y ' T Z K ı j ı j j j j
w ~ " j j j j w Metabolic Biochemistry Panel Summary Brouwer, M. MCB 9506050 The
panel recognized the benefits of working with the blue crab as a model system
for studying intracellular copper trafficking in eukaryotes. The proposal is
well focused and clearly articulated. The collaborations, especially with the
research group led by Dr. Ian M. Armitage, are seen as significantly
strengthening the project. It is felt that the present research program will
yield new, interesting, and important structural information on copper-
metallothionein (CuMT) isoforms. Form 7: This is an excellent research proposal
which is now being recommended for funding after being resubmitted a third time
to the program. The PI has made careful use of revi ewers comments and prepared
a well-organized, clearly written, compelling proposal. The panel was convinced
of the advantages of working with the blue crab to obtain important information
about Cu-metabolism applicable to higher animal systems. The proposal received
three excellent and one very good rating. I am pleased to recommend this
invertebrate project for funding. Brouwer, M. MCB-9506050 Copper is an essential
but toxic element. It is proposed to elucidate how this metal is converted
intracellularly into a biologically useful form, while avoiding copper s toxic
side effects. Blue crabs will be used as a model system. The blue crab is
dependent on the copper-protein hemocyanin (Hc) for oxygen transport. Four
copper complexes function as a first line of defense against copper toxicity in
the crab: copper-glutathione (Cu(I)-GSH), and three isoforms of the copper-
metallothionein (CuMT) family. CuMT-I and II are virtually identical. CuMT-III
is distinctive. Cu(I)-GSH can deliver copper for the activation of apohemocyanin
and apoMT. It is unknown whether CuMTs can participate in intracellular copper
exchange. The first objective then is to evaluate the hypothesis that CuMT-I/II
and/or CuMT-III may transfer copper to apoHc with GSH acting as a metal-exchange
mediator and GSSG as a copper-releasing agent. Our second objective is to
determine the metal-binding properties and three-dimensional structure of the
two distinct CuMT isoforms by 2 dimensional-NMR spectroscopy, in collaboration
with Dr. Ian Armitage at Yale University. Antioxidant enzymes, including the
ubiquitous copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (CuSnSOD), in higher animal systems
form a second line of defense against copper-induced oxidative cell damage.
However, it has not been possible to detect CuZnSOD in crabs and decapod
crustacea in general. The third objective of the project is to determine whether
the cytosolic SOD in crabs is a novel protein, or a new, hitherto unknown member
of the CuZnSOD family. %%% Copp er is an essential but toxic trace metal that
has been implicated in oxidative damage to DNA, proteins, and cell membranes.
The long-term objective of this study is to gain a better understanding of the
control of intracellular trafficking of copper, and of the molecular mechanisms
involved in defense against copper-mediated oxidative damage. Studies will be
performed with the blue crab, Callinectes sapidus, which has a high requirement
for copper in their respiratory pigment, hemocyanin. There appear to be three
metallothionein (low-molecular weight metal-detoxifying proteins) (CuMT)
isoforms in the blue crab, which are structurally and functionally different
from each other. It is unknown, however, whether the CuMTs participate in
intracellular copper-exchange processes. To find out if they do, copper-free
hemocyanin will be treated with different CuMTs in an attempt to restore normal
hemocyanin function. Secondly, two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
techniques will be used to determine the structure of blue crab CuMTs. Studies
will be performed in collaboration with Dr. Ian Arnitage at Yale University. In
addition to oxygen transport, it is believed that Cu operates in special enzymes
together with zinc (Zn) to protect cells against certain toxic effects of
oxygen. This may occur in a special enzyme called Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase
(SOD). Consequently, the third objective of this project is to determine if such
an activity exists in the blue crab, as in higher animal systems, and, if so,
isolate and purify the CuZnSOD in an attempt to determine its structure and
mechanism of operation. *** ;