* 9506519
* Mathematical Sciences:  Computational Error Estimation and  Adaptive Error Control for Numerical Methods for            Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Donald Estep, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 62,000.00

Estep The investigator develops and implements accurate approximation methods
for differential equations using a posteriori error estimates and adaptive error
control. The main target is systems of reaction-diffusion equations. Such
problems are important in practical terms because they occur as mathematical
models in applied science and engineering, including applications in genetics,
material science, chemistry, and biology, among others. The challenge is to
compute accurate approximations of solutions that generically include multiple
scales in their space and time behavior and whose behavior depends strongly on
parameters prescribed as part of the model. Moreover, using computation as a
scientific tool requires an estimate of the accuracy of the approximation. The
approach to these problems is based on developing a posteriori error estimates
that bound the error in terms of computable information obtained from the
approximation once a computation is completed. The analysis takes into account
both the difficulty of solving the differential equation over a small interval
and the global accumulation of errors. In particular, the stability properties
of the solution being approximated are measured by auxilary computations
performed during the approximation. The result is robust and reliable
computational error estimates. In addition, the investigator examines the
dynamical properties of numerical schemes in the context of obtaining schemes
with improved accuracy for a specified problem and obtaining more accurate error
estimates for such schemes. The third component of the project is the
development and implementation into code of adaptive error control algorithms
based on the a posteriori error estimates. The ultimate goal of this project is
the public release of a parallel code that can solve systems of reaction-
diffusion equations in two and three dimensions reliably and efficiently.
Mathematical models in applied science, including genetic s, material science,
chemistry, and biology, are often expressed as nonlinear reaction-diffusion
differential equations that contain source terms balanced against terms that
diffuse energy. The goal of such modelling is to describe the physical situation
in terms of the solution of the differential equation. However, the nonlinear
nature of most models makes it impossible to solve the equations explicitly;
consequently numerical approximation is an important tool in science. This
approach has its own difficulties. The balance between reaction and diffusion is
usually delicate and difficult to handle accurately. Moreover, solutions of such
problems typically evolve on several scales, i.e. some interesting behavior
occurs in very localized regions in space and time while other behavior evolves
over long times or over larger regions in space. The use of a uniform numerical
discretization for a real application results in huge computations that tax even
the largest computers. The investigator aims to produce numerical schemes that
adapt themselves to the localized behavior of the target solution so as to make
the computations both as accurate as desired and as efficient as possible.
Another benefit is that the estimate of the accuracy can then be reported, which
increases the scientific level of numerical analysis. The mathematical approach
is develop estimates of the error that use information obtained from the
approximation, which can then be used to adapt the discretization, that is make
the computations self-governing. The investigator also is implementing this
theory in a code for parallel computers that can solve very general problems
with minimum user input. The intent is to make the code publicly available,
yielding a scientific tool that benefits the engineering and scientific
infrastructure.