* 9506845
* Conformational Dynamics of Ribosomal Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,07/31/1998
* David Jameson, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9506845 Jameson The goal of this research are to elucidate and characterize the
conformational dynamics of ribosomal proteins. The specific systems to be
studied include the Escherichia coli ribosomal proteins L7/L12 and L10, free and
reconstituted into ribosomal subunits. Cysteine residues, specifically placed at
appropriate locations along the peptide chain by site-directed mutagenesis
techniques, will be labeled with various sulfhydryl specific fluorescence
probes. Neither L7/L12 nor L10 have intrinsic tryptophan residues and hence this
intrinsic fluorophore can also be introduced at appropriate locations in these
proteins. Fluorescence methods, including time-resolved and energy transfer
techniques, will then be utilized to elucidate flexibility and relative motion
of different domains of L7/L12, free in solution, in its pentameric complex with
L10 in the 50s ribosomal subunit and in the intact 70s ribosome. Flexibility of
various double mutants of L7/L12 with deletion of a putative hinge region will
also be studied to ascertain the contribution of this stretch of amino acids to
the protein's overall conformational dynamics. Fluorescence energy transfer
techniques will be utilized to elucidate distances between various sites on
L7/L12 both free and in its complexes with L10 and reconstituted into the
ribosomal subunits. The energetics of subunit interactions between the L7/L12
monomers will be studied by polarization and energy transfer methods. These
studies will be aimed at elucidating the thermodynamic aspects of the
dimer/monomer equilibrium of L7/12 as well as studying subunit exchange between
L7/L12 free in solution and in its various complexes. These biophysical
approaches will afford a better understanding of subunit interactions and
conformational dynamics of L7/L12, both isolated and associated with other
ribosomal components. This information will begin to provide a dynamic
description of the ribosome which is ultimately necessary for detailed
understanding of the coord inated chemical and physical processes involved in
protein biosynthesis. %%% The goal is to study the structure and dynamics of
ribosomal proteins using fluorescence techniques. These biophysical approaches
will provide a better understanding of subunit interactions and conformation
dynamics of ribosomal components. This information will begin to provide a
dynamic description of the ribosome which is ultimately necessary for detailed
understanding of the coordinated chemical and physical process involved in
protein bi synthesis. In addition to the knowledge this research program will
provide on an important biological problem, it will also contribute to the
infrastructure of science education in the United States by allowing the
training of undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral students. *** ??