* 9506280
* Initiation of DNA Replication in Quiescent Cell Nuclei
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Donald Sittman, University of Mississippi Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2002
* USD 382,744.00

9506280 Leno Intact quiescent cell nuclei do not initiate DNA replication in
Xenopus egg extract indicating that G1-phase nuclei lose the capacity to
replicate following growth arrest. This inability can be overcome however, by
permeabilizing the nuclear membranes of these intact nuclei prior to incubating
them in the egg extract. The long term objective of this project is to determine
the molecular basis for this loss of replication capacity and to determine if
this inability is part of a "molecular switch" designed to promote passage of
the egg-phase cell out of the cell cycle and entry into a quiescent state. These
studies will also provide insights into the requirements for the initiation of
replication upon re-entry of the quiescent cell into the cell cycle. The loss of
replication capacity upon growth arrest may be due to: 1) the loss of a
replication license; 2) the acquisition of an inhibitor of replication and/or 3)
changes in nuclear membrane structure and function. These possibilities will be
investigated by isolating nuclei from BALB/c 3T3 cells, synchronized in various
stages of the cell cycle, and by determining their capacity for DNA replication
in a cell- free system derived from Xenopus eggs. Initially, a novel nuclear
membrane permeabilization and repair strategy will be used to determine whether
or not exposure of permeable G0 nuclei to the soluble egg extract is required
for DNA replication. These studies will also address whether changes in nuclear
membrane structure are in part, responsible for the loss of replication capacity
in quiescent cell nuclei. Egg extracts devoid of licensing factor activity will
be used to determine if G0 nuclei, like G2 nuclei, lack a replication license.
Furthermore, this permeabilization and repair strategy will also serve as an
assay for the identification of a licensing factor or other essential
replication factors present in egg extract but missing from quiescent cell
nuclei. To determine if qu iescent nuclei are prevented from replicating by
growth arrest specific inhibitor of replication, extracts from quiescent cells
will be used to determine whether they can convert a replication competent G1
nucleus into an incompetent form. Quiescent cell extracts can be assayed for
inhibitory factors using this approach. The timing of, and molecular basis for,
the restoration of replication competence during re-entry into the cell cycle
will also be investigated. Extracts from competent cells will be assayed for
their ability to promote replication of G0 nuclei in egg extract. In this way, a
mammalian replication licensing activity may be identified. The initiation of
DNA replication is one of the most crucial points of control of the eukaryotic
cell cycle; therefore, a more through understanding of the regulation mechanisms
operating at this level is essential for a more complete understanding of
regulated cell growth and division. %%% This is a project which examines the
regulation od the "quiescent" state which occurs in eggs (African clawed frog
eggs) prior to fertilization. The cell cycle, which is composed of periods which
include mitosis (M Phase) and synthesis of DNA (S phase) and the gaps of time in
between these phases (G1 and G2), can also be said to have a G0 phase which is
the phase of inactive or quiescent cells. The entry of active cells into the
quiescent state (G0) occurs at G1, while reentry from G0 into G1 is followed by
initiation of replication of DNA (start of S phase). The entry of active cells
into the quiescent state can be thought of as a loss of a replication license,
since there is evidence that eggs have a "licensing factor" which can allow
replication of DNA. The existence of licensing factor is assayed by exposing
nuclei isolated from mammalian cells to egg extract in vitro. Alternatives to
the hypothesis that there is a loss of replication license include the
possibilities that there are inhibitors of replication acti vity in the egg, or
that there are changes in the nuclear membrane structure which somehow block
replication. A novel nuclear membrane and repair strategy is used to address the
latter possibility. The inhibitor hypothesis will be tested by using quiescent
egg extracts (not able to replicate DNA) to induce arrest in active mammalian
cell nuclei (competent for DNA replication). If the approaches are successful,
the identification of the mammalian licensing factor would be forthcoming. These
studies are basic to an understanding of how growth and division is regulated in
animal cells. ***