* 9506403
* RPG: Nonionic Organic Pollutant Sorption Mechanisms in Natural Clay-Rich Aquitards
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Richelle Allen-King, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 08/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

ABSTRACT EAR-9506403 Allen-King Clay-rich aquitards and constructed clay-liners
provide low permeability barriers to contaminant migration and are used for
hazardous waste disposal because of the margin of protection provided to
underlying groundwater resources. Sorption in the aquitard matrix retards
transport and provides a sink for uptake and release of organic contaminant mass
over time. However, the mechanisms of sorption in clay-rich aquitards are not
well understood. Recent observations, for example, have shown that
perchloroethene (PCE) sorption in several natural clay-rich and relatively low
carbon aquitards is significantly under-predicted by existing methods. It is
hypothesized that in natural, low-fraction organic content (foc) and clay-rich
aquitards, organic matter is the primary sorbing medium for nonionic organic
compounds (NIOCs) such as PCE. The objectives of the proposed research are: (1)
to determine the relative importance of organic carbon and/or direct sorption to
clay minerals; (2) to determine the effects of differences in oxidation and
distribution of organic matter on the magnitude and form of sorptionO and (3) to
test for competitive sorption between similar solutes. Using the Planning Grant,
the hypothesis will be tested using two contrasting natural aquitard samples
with similar clay mineralogy and foc, but markedly different PCE sorption
behavior. The results will provide insights into sorption mechanisms and bases
for establishing the best methodologies for a more comprehensive study. The
objective is to improve mechanistic understanding of NIOC sorption in natural
low-carbon geologic samples, thereby allowing more accurate assessments of
contaminant transport for groundwater resource protection and remediation.