* 9506671
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Changing Geography of  Employee Stock-Ownership Plans, 1981-1991 -- Evaluating the Influence of Local Context on Corporate Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Eric Sheppard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 6,640.00

SBR-9506671 Eric Stewart Sheppard Stephen Joseph Smela University of Minnesota
Dissertation Improvement Research: The Changing Geography of Employee Stock
Ownership Plans, 1981-1991: Evaluating the Influence of Local Context on
Corporate Decision-Making This research evaluates two competing views that seek
to explain the paucity of worker ownership in the American economy. The first
argues that worker ownership is feasible only in firms with very specific
characteristics. The second claims that while worker ownership is a viable
proposition, the small number of firms exhibiting employee ownership results
from the contexts in which the firms operate. This research investigates the
relative degree to which firm characteristics and changing local conditions
account for the rise in employee ownership in the 1980s via employee stock
ownership plans (EOSPs). The study employs statistical modeling, to evaluate the
interplay among firm characteristics and metropolitan-level conditions affecting
the decision to implement EOSPs, and executive interviews to understand the role
of business networks in th e spread of EOSPs. The project results will help
better inform the theoretical debates concerning the relative importance of firm
characteristics versus contextual factors in the viability of worker ownership
and contribute to the discussion of the importance of changing labor relations
in the American economy.