* 9506220
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of Oocyte Meiotic Prophase   Arrest in C. elegans
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Tim Schedl, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1999
* USD 270,000.00

9506220 Schedl Arrest of the cell cycle in prophase of meiosis I is a conserved
feature of oogenesis in essentially all multicellular animals. Oocytes in
organisms from starfish to humans maintain this arrested state until ovulation
by a mechanisms that is not well understood. This proposal introduces a genetic
strategy for isolating and characterizing molecular regulators of meiotic
prophase cell cycle arrest. Recent genetic screens performed in the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans have identified mutants where oocyte arrest in diakinesis
of MI prophase fails to be maintained. In oar-1 and oar-2 mutants (oar= oocyte
meiotic prophase arrest defective), oocytes leave arrest and endomitotically
replicate their DNA. Strategies have been developed to distinguish Oar mutants
from other mutants producing endomitotic oocytes. Importantly, a mutant has been
obtained with a phenotype opposite to Oar; olk-1 (olk= oocyte arrest lock)
oocytes maintain arrest under conditions when arrest is usually lost. It is
likely that the pathway for maintenance of meiotic arrest defined by the oar and
olk genes involves cell cell communication from the soma to the oocyte. Analysis
of oar-1 is consistent with the conclusion that a cell cell signal is needed to
maintain meiotic arrest; cloning reveals that oal-1 encodes a Sec61p gamma
protein known in other systems to facilitate protein translocation into the ER,
and mosaic analysis shows oar-1 activity is needed specifically in the germline
to prevent loss of oocyte arrest. Oar-1 may therefore act to translocate a
transmembrane receptor to the oocyte surface for reception of the arrest signal.
This proposal will initiate a more extensive genetic and molecular investigation
of the pathway maintaining oocyte meiotic prophase arrest in C. elegans. Dr.
Schedl will:1) Identify genes necessary for oocyte meiotic prophase arrest using
a genetic screen, 2) Genetically and phenotypically characterize mutants in the
oar collection, and 3) Genet ically characterize the arrest "loc-1" mutant,
olk-1. ***