* 9506171
* Identifiable Neurons of Molluscs:  A Neurophysiology Network Database
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Daniel Gardner, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Manfred D. Zorn
* 08/31/1999
* USD 249,993.00

The award supports planning and initial development of a database and associated
tools for developing a database of identified neurons for molluscs. The database
will serve two communities of neurobiologists. For molluscan neuroscientists,
the goal is a database containing descriptions of identified and identifiable
neurons, actual datasets of neurophysiological data from both identified cells
and candidates for neuronal identification, and model parameters useful for
electrophysiological simulations of neurons and networks. For the wider
community of neurophysiologists, the goal is a generalizable set of annotated
data structures for storage, classification, query, and distribution of
neurophysiological data from many species and techniques. An ancillary goal for
both communities is the development of user-friendly graphical tools for data
entry and viewing and database query. Project development is headed by a
molluscan neurobiologist with extensive software development experience,
coordinated with an academic multiplatform software developer with significant
research experience in identified neurons. All phases of the project will be
coordinated with user feedback from a broad representation of the molluscan
community, as well as from neurophysiologists using other invertebrate and
mammalian species. To further serve the neuroscience communities, database
access, as well as user tools and data type specifications developed by the
project, will be provided freely.