* 9506204
* Structure and Assembly of Helical Plant Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Gerald Stubbs, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 10/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9506204 Stubbs The structures of a number of helical plant viruses will be
determined in molecular detail, using the fiber diffraction methods already used
in this laboratory for several viruses of the tobamovirus (tobacco mosaic virus,
TMV) group. The viruses to be studied include three tobamoviruses, odontoglossum
ringspot virus (ORSV), ribgrass mosaic virus (RMV) and sunn-hemp mosaic virus
(SHMV), and one furovirus, soil-borne wheat mosaic virus (SBWMV). Structures of
the three tobamoviruses will be determined by molecular replacement, using the
known structure of TMV. The structure of SBWMV will be determined using the
methods of multi- dimensional isomorphous replacement developed in this
laboratory. All structures will be refined using molecular dynamics methods, as
adapted in this laboratory for use with fiber diffraction data. These refinement
methods will be developed further. The tobamovirus group is the only rod-shaped
virus group for which three-dimensional structures have been determined at the
molecular level. The structures to be determined will be important in
understanding the molecular characteristics of the group, including the
relationship between subgroups, and will advance understanding of viral assembly
and disassembly, viral-host interactions and specificity, and vector
transmission, as well as the relationship between structure and the rapid
evolution of RNA viruses. %%% The structures of a number of rod-shaped plant
viruses will be determined in molecular detail, using the fiber diffraction
methods already used in this laboratory for several viruses of the tobamovirus.
The viruses to be studied include three tobamoviruses, odontoglossum ringspot
virus (ORSV), ribgrass mosaic virus (RMV) and sunn-hemp mosaic virus (SHMV), and
the furovirus soil-borne wheat mosaic virus (SBWMV). The tobamovirus group is
the only rod- shaped virus group for which three-dimensional structures have
been determined at the molecular level. The structu res to be determined will be
important in understanding the molecular characteristics of the group, including
the relationship between subgroups, and will advance understanding of viral
assembly and disassembly, viral-host interactions and specificity, and viral
transmission, as well as the relationship between structure and the
characteristically rapid evolution of RNA viruses. ***