* 9506839
* Genetic Analysis of Endocytosis in Yeast
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Nicholas Davis, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2000
* USD 385,474.00

95-06839 Davis Endocytic trafficking entails receptor uptake from the cell
surface, and then transport through a series of poorly characterized endosomal
compartments, where decisions must be made concerning recycling back to the
surface versus delivery to the lysosome for hydrolysis. Because of the
complexity of the overall membrane transport process and its consequent
resistance to classical biochemical dissective analysis, the underlying
molecular mechanisms that control and catalyze the various membrane transport
steps remain largely unknown. This proposal describes a powerful method of
genetic analysis in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae that isolates mutants
defective in the endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors. Surface pheromone
receptor is required for the mating of the two haploid cell types. Under
conditions where synthesis of new receptor is shut off, wild-type cells mate
poorly due to loss of surface receptor to ongoing receptor endocytosis and
degradation. Endocytosis-defective mutants retain receptor at the cell surface,
mate, and can thereby, be easily isolated. Mutations isolated in the receptor
genes themselves will define the endocytosis signals on the receptor proteins
themselves. Mutations in other genes will define trans-acting functions required
for endocytosis, and serve thereby, to identify elements of the transport
apparatus. Preliminary results indicate that many of these ren mutants
(defective in receptor endocytosis) will be late-acting, blocking endocytosis at
post-surface transport steps. A pathway for yeast endocytic transport will be
defined through the genetic ordering of ren mutants by epistasis analysis.
Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of the encoded proteins will impart a
new understanding of the molecules that catalyze endocytosis. The mechanisms
that drive the fundamental processes of the eukaryotic cell -transcription,
secretion, and the cell cycle -- generally have been well conserved through
evolut ion from yeast to man. This appears to be true for endocytosis as well.
Molecules identified through this proposed research, we anticipate, will allow
isolation of the homologs that control endocytosis in mammals. %%% Research in
this proposal focuses a variety of powerful genetic approaches on the process of
receptor endocytosis, studied in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Endocytosis
is the process by which patches of the cell surface membrane are invaginated and
internalized into the body of the cell. It provides a mechanism for uptake of
essential nutrients into the cell, and by controlling the abundance of different
receptors at the cell surface, it also serves to regulate the cell's
communication and contact with the external environment. Selective
internalization of surface receptors, both regulates the capacity for response
to different extracellular hormones and also modulates contact with neighboring
cells and beneficial symbionts. Not surprisingly, endocytosis plays a major role
in disease processes as well. A variety of harmful agents -- viruses, bacterial
endotoxins, and intracellular parasites -- make malevolent use of this process.
Endocytic trafficking entails uptake of receptors from the cell surface, and
then transport through a series of poorly characterized intracellular
compartments, the "endosomes". Because of the complexity of this overall
membrane transport process and its consequent resistance to biochemical
dissective analysis, the underlying molecular mechanisms that control and
catalyze the various membrane transport steps remain largely unknown. Our newly
developed genetic approach provides a straightforward way of experimentally
dissecting this complexity. A key first step will be the isolation of a
collection of mutants that block endocytosis of the yeast pheromone receptors.
Cell surface pheromone receptor is required for the conjugal mating of the two
yeast sexes. Under experimental conditions where new receptor synthesis has been
shut-off, the yeast cells mate quite poorly due to the loss of cell surface
receptor to ongoing endocytic internalization. Mutants, specifically defective
for the endocytic process, fail to internalize receptor, retain it at the
surface, and consequently show robust mating. Such mutants are easily isolated.
Endocytosis-defective mutations that map to the receptor genes themselves, will
identify the endocytosis signals, that is those features of the receptor
proteins which direct their own uptake. More exciting are mutations in other
genes. These will identify new proteins, elements presumably of the molecular
machinery that catalyzes and effects this endocytic uptake. We expect that the
subsequent molecular cloning and sequence analysis of these novel proteins will
impart a new understanding of the molecules that catalyze this complex transport
process. The various mechanisms that drive the fundamental processes of the
eukaryotic cell, generally have been found to be quite well conserved through
evolution, from yeast to man. Endocytosis is no exception, we anticipate
therefore that the molecules identified in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae by
this research should provide an entry into the molecular analysis of endocytosis
in animal cells, allowing the isolation and characterization of the analogous
proteins from mammals. ***