* 9506338
* Lignin Degradation by Phanerochaete Chrysosporium:          Biochemical Characterization of Extracellular Peroxidases
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Michael Gold, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F -,4: C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l i *4: i *4: A B C D E F G H I J F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9506338 Gold The aim of this project is to further our
understanding of manganese peroxidase (MnP) and lignin peroxidase (LiP) from the
lignin degrading basidiomycete Phanerochaete chrysosponum. The underlying
objectives are to further characterize the structure, mechanism and function of
these enzymes. The binding interactions between MnP, Mn and oxalate will be
studied by kinetic spectroscopic and equilibrium dialysis methods. The oxidation
of oxalate by MnP and the role of oxalate in the inactivation of MnP by H2O2
will be examined. Using a homologous expression system, the P.I. intends to
construct, express and characterize site directed mutants of the Mn binding site
of MnP. In order to understand how LiP oxidizes polymeric lignin, the LiP
oxidation of several model polymeric substrates, including cytochrome c and
ribonuclease, will be examined. In particular, the P.I. will examine the role of
veratryl alcohol in facilitating these reactions. Nucleophilic substitution and
dimerization reactions will be used to monitor the formation of stable cation
radicals during the LiP oxidation of dimetho xybenzenes. By examining a series
of dimethoxybenzene and dimethoxybenzyl alcohol substrates, the requirements for
producing and stabilizing the cation radical intermediate in this reaction will
be determined %%% Lignin is the most abundant renewable aromatic polymer in the
biosphere. It constitutes 15 30% of woody plant cell walls, forming a matrix
that surrounds the cellulose. This encrusting matrix significantly retards the
microbial depolymerization of cellulose and thus lignin plays a key role in the
earth's carbon cycle. The potential utilization of microorganisms for
transforming lignocellulose into useful materials, chemicals and fuels is a
significant field of research. Most studies on lignin degradation have focused
on white rot basidiomycetes because these fungi degrade this polymer much more
rapidly than other organisms. In addition, apparently they are the only
organisms that completely degrade lignin to CO2 and H2O. The best studied lignin
degrading fungus is Phanerochaete chrysosporium. Since 1983 major breakthroughs
have occurred in the study of the lignin degradative system of P. chrysosporium.
The discovery and purification of two extracellular peroxidases involved in this
process have stimulated a great deal of further research. Of major significance
are the recent reports that both LiP and MnP are able to depolymerize synthetic
lignin in vitro) and to oxidize several aromatic pollutants. Also of major
significance is the work on the structure and mechanism of LiP and MnP. Three
major goals of this project are: (1) to elucidate the structure and mechanism of
the lignin degrading peroxidases; (2) to establish the role of these enzymes in
lignin and aromatic pollutant degradation; and (3) to study the regulation and
expression of the genes encoding these enzymes. *** @ ....()()))()() S u m m a r
y I n f o r m a t i o n ( @ Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT
marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ a 1: @ @ M 4: @ Microsoft Word 6.0 4 e = e w
" " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | #