* 9506878
* Role of HMG-I(Y) Proteins in Chromatin Structure and Function
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Raymond Reeves, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 285,000.00

9506878 Reeves The HMG-I(Y) family of "high mobility group" (HMG) nonhistone
proteins are of considerable current interest because they are founding members
of a newly described category of nuclear proteins called "architectural
transcription factors" that appear to be involved in the in vivo regulation of
both the chromatin structure and the transcriptional activity of an increasing
large group of mammalian genes. However, the HMG-I(Y) proteins are distinguished
from other HMG proteins in this category of factors by their ability to
specifically bind, both in vitro and in vivo, to A(T-rich B-form DNA by the
recognition of structure rather than nucleotide sequence. Available evidence
suggests two principal, though not mutually exclusive, models of how the
HMG-I(Y) proteins might function in chromatin as gene transcription regulatory
proteins. The first postulates a nucleosome positioning or "phasing" role for
HMG-I(Y) whereby binding of the protein to DNA substrates of a particular
structure(s) establishes a "boundary" that influences placement of adjacent
nucleosomes in important areas such as certain gene distortions in substrate
DNA, HMG-I(Y) facilitates the binding of transcription factors to
promoter/enhancer sequences and also functions to bring together separated
regulatory regions so that they can form a stereo-specific multiprotein complex
necessary for transcription initiation. This research will experimentally test
specific aspect of one of these models. We will employ care selected in vitro
systems to quantitatively evaluate the role of HMG-I(Y) in both DNA-bending and
in nucleosome positioning/phasing in reconstituted chromatin and will assess the
effects of HMG-I(Y) on the in vitro transcriptional competence of precisely
defined chromatin templates. %%% The HMG-I(Y) family of "high mobility group"
(HMG) nonhistone proteins are of considerable current interest because they are
founding members of a newly described category of nuclear proteins called
"architectural transcrip tion factors" that appear to be involved in the in vivo
regulation of both the chromatin structure and the transcriptional activity of
an increasing large group of mammalian genes. However, the HMG-I(Y) proteins are
distinguished from other HMG proteins in this category of factors by their
ability to specifically bind, both in vitro and in vivo, to A(T-rich B-form DNA
by the recognition of structure rather than nucleotide sequence. This research
will address, in a precise and quantitative manner, the important question of
how the HMG-I(Y) proteins might influence the structure and function of
eukaryotic chromatin in vivo. The results obtained from these in vitro studies
will set the parameters for, and define the limits of, future experiments aimed
at elucidating the in vivo function of these unusual and intriguing regulatory
proteins. ***