* 9506368
* Atmospheric Responses to North Pacific Sea Surface          Temperture Anomalies During Winter and Summer
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Mingfang Ting, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1999
* USD 130,000.00

Abstract ATM-9506368 Ting, Mingfang University of Illinois Title: Atmospheric
Responses to North Pacific Sea Surface Temperature Anomalies During Winter and
Summer This proposal outlines a comprehensive research and teaching plan which
will enhance the PI's early development of her academic career at the University
of Illinois. The "career" research involves the study of the dynamical effect of
the North Pacific sea surface temperature (SST) anomalies on the extratropical
atmosphere during both winter and summer seasons. The atmospheric responses to
persistent midlatitude SST anomalies has been controversial in the past. The
difficulties stem partly from the fact that the natural variability of the
midlatitude atmosphere is very large, thus there is a small signal to noise
ratio. This problem is also clouded by the fact that general circulation model
(GCM) experiments with fixed extratropical SST anomalies do not always produce a
consistent response. This project will concentrate on the North Pacific SST
anomalies and their possible impact on the Pacific and North American climate.
One novel aspect of the research is that it will make use of a series of
modeling tools, including a linear steady state model, a dry GCM and a full GCM.
The PI will also, for the first time, look int the effect the North Pacific SST
anomalies for the summer season. The results of this research are expected to
improve the seasonal forecasting for the Pacific and North American region. In
particular, the results from the summer season will help the long range
prediction of the mid-west drought and flood potentials. The education plan
consists of innovative undergraduate teaching and developing a graduate course
that is currently not available in the PI's department. One novel aspect in the
undergraduate teaching plan will be to introduce students from various
disciplines to the current weather information through the computer network at
the University of Illinois and to help students interpret the data. The main
objective of the new graduate course is to introduce the graduate students to
the most up-to date research topics in an area that is rapidly evolving, namely
the coupled ocean-atmosphere processes. The topics include the coupled air-sea
interaction in the tropical Pacific, i.e, the El Nino/Southern Oscillation
phenomenon, the air-sea coupling in the midlatitude, and the air-sea coupling
for the tropical 30-60 day oscillations.