* 9506779
* Reflexion Models:  Bridging the Gap Between Source and      High-Level Models
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* David Notkin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 245,000.00

Given an existing software system and a task to accomplish, software engineers
decide whether and how to proceed based on experience, judgment, and system-
specific knowledge. For even modest-sized software systems, there is a
substantial risk of making poor decisions because it is difficult (if not
impossible) for software engineers to maintain adequate knowledge of the source.
To manage this risk, engineers often use high-level models to focus on
particular aspects of the system relevant to the task. These models help the
engineer reduce risk only if they are sufficiently accurate representations of
the actual system. This research investigates an approach that may help
engineers determine whether their task-specific models are good enough to make
informed decisions. An engineer defines a high-level structural model
appropriate for the task at hand and also specifies how the model maps to the
source. A tool then computes a reflexion model that shows the engineer where the
high-level model is consistent with and differs from the source. Analyzing the
reflexion model and applying personal experience and judgment, an engineer can
then assess the risk of proceeding with the task. In some cases, especially when
there are unexpected inconsistencies between the model and the source,
computation of additional reflexion models may be needed before an informed
decision can be made. This project concentrates on two activities intended to
determine whether reflexion models genuinely help improve our ability to
effectively engineer software. The first activity focuses on specific enabling
technical problems related to reflexion models. The second activity consists of
case studies with industrial partners. Kevin J. Sullivan, University of Virginia
participates through a research subcontract.