* 9506091
* The Middle Paleolithic of the Crimea
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Anthony Marks, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 18,840.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Anthony Marks and his colleagues
will continue archaeological work in the Crimea. Research to date has yielded
rich assemblages of Middle Paleolithic industries at several sites. These
contain with preserved faunal remains and the team will now conduct detailed
studies of these. They will analyze these materials both to reconstruct the
environments in which Middle Paleolithic peoples lived and how they changed over
time. Faunal remains also provide information on how people utilize resources
and thus the study will provide insight into environmental stimulus and human
response. Middle Paleolithic peoples are the immediate predecessors of
anatomically modern humans who appeared in Europe about 40,000 years ago. In the
attempt to understand these later adaptations, the Middle Paleolithic provides a
benchmark and it is through an understanding of `not quite fully human` behavior
that the unique behavioral adaptations which characterize our own subspecies can
best be understood. Dr. Marks work to date indicates that these earlier
adaptations are more complex than archaeologists had expected and that groups
adapted in distinct and specific ways over very limited geographic distances.
This research is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on how
prehistoric peoples adapted to their environments and will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists.