* 9506178
* Mechanism and Macromolecular Organization in Photosynthetic Reaction Centers
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Steven Boxer, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1999
* USD 359,613.00

9506178 Boxer This research grant funds continued support for biophysical
studies of the mechanism of charge separation and recombination processes in
reaction centers (RCs) from photosynthetic bacteria. The specific approaches to
these problems include: (i) the nature of the excited state of the special pair
primary electron donor, 1P, which initiates charge separation probed by
resonance Raman and higher order Stark spectroscopies; (ii) distinguishing one
step and two step electron transfer by measurements on RCs in which components
are modified or removed by genetic engineering; (iii) electric field modulation
of the spontaneous fluorescence from 1P to determine whether the field affects
the primary charge separation step and the direction of the electric dipole
moment whose formation competes with 1P decay; (iv) studies of the interaction
between the bacteriochlorophyll molecules comprising P and the protein
environment by converting residues which make functionally specific interactions
with P into glycine, creating cavities which can bind exogenous organic
molecules to modulate photosynthetic function; and (v) the origin of
unidirectional electron transfer probed by site specific mutagenesis based both
on measurements of dielectric asymmetry and an evolutionary analysis. %%% The
initial electron transfer events in photosynthetic RCs are the key energy
transduction and storage mechanisms essential for all aspects of life on earth.
Studies of this system, both at the detailed molecular level and from a more
global perspective, can offer approaches for improving natural photosynthesis
and modeling artificial photosynthesis. The photosynthetic apparatus is largely
a membrane protein complex whose structure elucidation over the past 10 years
has provided, for the first time, information on the folding and organization of
membrane proteins. It is likely that within the next 5 years, the overall
organization of the photosynthetic membrane will be fully characteriz ed, a
unique and major achievement in biology. Electron transfer in photosynthetic
proteins provides a paradigm for understanding the factors that control the
rapid movement of electrons on the nanometer scale, and thus have greatly
influenced thinking and prospects for molecular scale electronic devices. This
research focuses on understanding the mechanism of the earliest, light driven
electron transfer reactions, the unique excited state properties that lead to
efficient charge separation, and the interactions between the chlorophyll type
molecules and their protein environment which modulate the properties of these
chromophores and uniquely determine the direction of electron flow. ***