* 9506191
* Ion Channel Regulation in Higher Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Julian Schroeder, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald A. Berkowitz
* 10/31/2001
* USD 491,000.00

9506191 Schroeder Stomatal pores in leaves close to reduce transpirational water
loss of plants in response to environmental stress conditions such as drought.
Control of stomatal movements by guard cells in response to environmental
stimuli and stress conditions is a primary factor in determining water use
efficiency and productivity of crop plants. Guard cells provide an ideal system
to elucidate early events in higher plant signal transduction. Several key guard
cell ion channels have been identified which have been proposed to function as
important signal transducers and mediators of stomatal closing. Recent data
suggest that both Ca2+- dependent and Ca2+-independent transduction cascades may
control stomatal closing. However, the intracellular signaling cascades which
link signal reception to ion channel modulation during stomatal closing remain
largely unknown. Furthermore, the molecular mechanisms have remained unknown, by
which guard cell vacuoles release ions, which is essential for stomata closing.
The long term goal of this research is to characterize the chain of events of
the signaling cascade which integrates physiological stimuli, such as abscisic
acid, intracellular coupling proteins, second messengers, and ion channels to
produce stomatal closing. To elucidate signaling mechanism in guard cells, we
propose studies using a combination of cell biological, patch clamp, biochemical
and genetic analyses. Recent research has led to the model that slow anion
channels and outward-recitifying K+ channels in the plasma membrane and newly
identified vacuolar K+ (VK) and Ca2+- activated Ca2+-permeable (SV) channels in
the tonoplast of guard cells are central transducers and mediators of stimulus-
dependent stomatal closing. The regulation and roles of the newly identified VK
channels and the proposed Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release by SV channels in guard cell
vacuoles will be investigated in detail to test the hypothesis that these
vacuolar ion chan nels are crucial for signal transduction and vacuolar ion
release during stomatal closure. Furthermore, studies of these vacuolar ion
channels together with analyses of rate-limiting slow anion channels in guard
cell plasma membrane will be pursued to determine intermediate Ca2+-dependent
and putative Ca2+- independent signaling steps which produce the integrated
response of stomatal closing. Regulation of guard cell vacuole channels and
phosphorylation-dependent plasma membrane slow anion channels will further be
studied by using isoforms of the Ca2+-dependent protein kinase (CDPK). In
addition, cell biological characterization of guard cell signaling mutants in
Arabidopsis will be pursued to elucidate the function of genetic loci within the
cascade of events which produced stomatal closing. Stomatal regulation ion
abscisic acid-insensitive Arabidopsis mutants (abi1 and abi2) and effects of the
purified recombinant ABI1 protein phsophatase on guard cell ion channels will be
pursued for enhanced ABA sensitivity and for phenotypic stomatal responses in
existing Arabidopsis mutants to identify and characterize additional genetic
loci involved in stomatal and ABA signaling. The proposed research will
contribute significantly to the understanding of the molecular mechanisms of the
signal transduction cascade which produces the integrated response of stomatal
closing. These studies may further provide important information for the design
of strategies for future engineering of improved water use efficiency in crop
plants. %%% Plants "breathe" through tiny openings or "mouths" called stomata
which are often found on the underside of leaves. However, a fine balance must
be achieved between respiration and loss of water vapor through the stomata. To
achieve this balance, the plant is sensitive to a wide variety of environmental
stimuli which induce stomatal closure, such as elevated carbon dioxide levels,
darkness and the phytohormone abscisic acid (ABA). It is known that stomatal
closing is, in part, brought about by ion efflux through ion channels in the
outer cell membrane and the membrane which surrounds the vacuole, the tonoplast
of the cells which comprise the stomate, the guard cells. This project is
concerned with the way the environment stimuli bring about changes in the amount
and rate of ion transport through these channels. The channels have been
identified. Potassium is released from the vacuole through the tonoplast, into
the cytoplasm where it is released into the cell wall via an outward-rectified
potassium channel. A rise in intracellular calcium and pH stimulates this
release. The regulation and role of the newly-identified vacuolar potassium
transporter is explored, as is the coordination of these channels with others at
the plasma membrane to produce an integrated response to intracellular calcium
signals. The integration of the signaling pathways is also explored using
molecular genetics. Mutants which have the phenotype of an altered guard cell
response to the phytohormone, ABA, are analyzed in order to identify more genes
involved in stomatal opening and ABA signaling. The role of one of these
signaling genes, one which encodes a protein phosphatase, is being explored by
purifying the protein and determining its direct effect on channel physiology.
This project has biotechnical application through the design of crop plants
which have improved water use efficiency. ***