* 9506009
* Regulation of variable surface protein gene expression      in paramecium
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* James Forney, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1998
* USD 310,000.00

9506009 Forney This project will investigate the molecular mechanism that
controls the expression of variable surface proteins in Paramecium. A single
cell line of Paramecium tetraurelia, stock 51 can express at least 11 different
surface proteins, yet only a single type is found on the surface at any one
time. We will perform a series of experiments to test the hypothesis that the
coding regions of surface protein genes are involved in the regulation of this
mutually exclusive expression. Portions of the 51A and 51B genes will be joined
using recombinant DNA techniques to form chimeras which will then be transformed
into mutants that have deletions of the A and B genes. Normally, the A and B
proteins exhibit mutual exclusion from the cell surface, therefore the chimeric
proteins will be assayed to determine if they can be coexpressed with the normal
A surface protein, the B protein, both or neither. Our preliminary studies have
shown that the 51A and 51B genes are regulated at the level of transcription,
yet the sequences upstream of the A gene are not sufficient to control the
regulation of this transcription. An important preliminary experiment has shown
that substitution of -1649 to +885 of the B gene into the A gene results in
coexpression of the chimeric gene with the wild type B gene. This remarkable
result is the first evidence that a portion of the coding region is important in
controlling mutual exclusion. Additional experiments will define the region
required for coexpression and investigate its mode of action. Evidence for post-
transcriptional mechanisms that control mutual exclusion will be examined by
simultaneously transcribing both the A and B genes using the calmodulin gene
promoter. Sequence specific antibodies will be produced against the A and B
proteins and used as tools to analyze both the structure and expression of
surface proteins. %%% This project will investigate the molecular mechanism(s)
that control the expression of variable surface proteins in Paramecium. A single
line of Paramecium tetraurelia stock 51 can express at least 11 different
surface proteins, yet only a single type is found on the surface at any one
time. Using recombinant DNA techniques, chimeras of appropriate genes will be
formed and inserted into the organism in order to identify relevant sequences.
Preliminary evidence indicates that a portion of the coding region is important
in controlling mutual exclusion. Additional experiments will define the region
required for coexpression and investigate its mode of action. It is possible
that information resulting from this work could have implications for
understanding such genetic phenomenon in higher organisms. ***