* 9506255
* Structure and Dynamics of the Chloroplast ATP Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Mark Richter, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F (& !? C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l !? !? F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +' 0
$ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9506255 cynthia m cox cynthia m cox @ +
r e = e j j j j j j j 1 # Y 8 T 5 j j j j j ~ j j j j 9506255 Richter This
research addresses the relationship between the structure, function and
regulation of the ATP synthase enzyme. This allosteric enzyme reversibly
utilizes the energy of a transmembrane proton gradient to synthesize ATP. The
long term goal of the research is to contribute toward an understanding of the
mechanism of the energy transduction process and to understand how this enzyme
is regulated under physiological conditions in plants and animals. Prior NSF
funding has led to: 1) Cloning and over-expression of all five subunits of the
catalytic F1 portion of the chloroplast ATP synthase (CF1); 2) Recovery of the
subunits from bacterial inclusion bodies and refolding them into their native,
active forms; and 3) Reconstituting them into a functional F1 complex. Further
studies will utilize this system to genetically engineer CF1 subunits for
analyzing regions of functional importance, and to examine functional dynamics
of subunits during the catalytic process using biochemical and biophysical
techniques. This proposal describes a collaborative multidiciplinary approach
focusing on the structure and function of the three smaller CF1 subunits, ( (
and (. Genetic engineering experiments will involve: 1) Site-directed
mutagenesis studies to probe the functional and structural importance of
different regions of the polypeptide chains via replacement or deletion of
specific amino acids or sequences of amino acids; 2) Studies of subunit dynamics
through attachment of intrinsic (tryptophans) and extrinsic (via cysteine
residues) fluorescent probes to specific sites on the ( ( and ( subunits.
Labeled subunits will be reconstituted with CF1 deficient in these subunits for
fluorescence studies aimed at (a) structural mapping of subunits within the CF1
complex using fluorescence resonance energy transfer measurements and (b)
monitoring subunit dynamics during catalytic turnover by the enzyme by
monitoring the time-dependent anisotropy of intrinsic and extrinsic fluorescent
probes; 3) Chemical crosslinking studies involving attachment of bifunctional
chemical crosslinking agents at various engineered sites within the ( and (
subunits. Mutant subunits will be reconstituted with the other CF1 subunits and
with the membrane-bound proton channel portion (CF0) of the enzyme for chemical
crosslinking studies aimed at identifying the sites of interaction between CF1
and CF0 subunits. %%% This research addresses the relationship between the
chemical structure and biological function of the ATP synthase enzyme of plant
chloroplast membranes. This enzyme is responsible for the conversion of the
energy from sunlight into the chemical storage form. ATP (adenosine
triphosphate). ATP in turn supplies the energy for the conversion of carbon
dioxide into sugar in plants. Analogous enzymes supply more than 90% of the ATP
required for energy-dependent metabolic processes in animals and bacteria. The
long term goal of the research described in this proposal is to identify, at the
molecular level, how the ATP synthase enzymes capture energy and convert it into
ATP. We intend to approach this goal by genetically engineering the ATP synthase
so as to probe the importance of specific sites within the enzyme for the energy
conversion (catalytic) process. Some of the genetically engineered sites will
provide sites for attachment of chemical probes which will be used to identify
specific events involving changes in the structure of the enzyme which occur
during the catalytic process. Attachment of other chemical probes to genetically
engineered sites will allow us to cross-link (tether) pieces of the enzyme
together so that we can identify specific sites of protein-protein interaction
which occur within the enzyme and which are important for catalysis. A thorough
understanding of this very efficient natural energy conserving process will
potentially lead to the design and implementation of vastly improved energy
storage and utilization processes or human use. *** ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m
a t i o n (