* 9506508
* Density Dependence of Electronic States in Non-Polar Fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Ruben Reininger, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* joyce guest
* 07/31/1998
* USD 159,570.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Ruben Reininger
of The University of Wisconsin Synchrotron Radiation Center will probe
fundamental aspects of photoionization in dense media. The main experimental
tool will be field ionization of states excited by means of vacuum ultraviolet
synchrotron radiation. The two basic quantities inherent to photoionization in
dense media, the polarization energy of the positive ion and the energy of the
quasi-free electron, will be determined. Systems to be studied include methyl
iodide in liquid argon and liquid xenon, NO in liquid argon, and pure ethane.
These studies are expected to yield experimental data with which recent
theoretical models describing the evolution of energy levels as a function of
the density of the medium may be tested and revised. A considerable amount of
theoretical work has recently been reported on the electronic structure of
liquids and the dependence of this structure on density in order to understand
how this structure changes from individual atoms to the solids they form. Dr.
Reininger will probe this structure by using field induced photoionization,
which will provide information concerning the polarization energy of the ion in
the fluid and the energy of the electron ejected by ionization. This information
will then be used to test current theories and indicate how these theories must
be modified.