* 9506425
* (ESH) Glacial Paleotemperatures for the Continental         Tropics Derived from Noble Gases Dissolved in Groundwater
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Wallace Broecker, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

9506425 Stute One of key questions in paleoclimate research is the degree of
change in tropical surface temperatures between today and the last glacial
maximum (LGM). Most sea surface temperature records suggest small (&lt;1oC)
glacial/interglacial temperature changes, while continental records indicate
considerably larger temperature changes. A resolution of this conflict is
crucial for a reliable reconstruction of past and prediction of future climate
change. We plan to address this issue by improving the continental climate
record in the tropics at low altitude, which at this stage is less quantitative
than the sea surface temperature record. We will use the concentrations of
atmospheric noble gases dissolved in groundwater as paleothermometer ('noble gas
thermometer') and confined aquifer as archive of climate change. We request
funds for collection and evaluation of geochemical data (He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe, 14
C, 13 C, D , 18 O 34 S and major dissolved ions) from two groundwater flow
systems in the tropics, the Mekong Delta aquifers in southern Vietnam and the
Rio Guayas aquifers in Ecuador. Noble gas paleotemperature records from these
aquifers will allow quantitative reconstruction of paleotemperature records for
the continental tropics covering the past 30,000 years. The aquifers are located
at altitudes less than 100 aaaaam a.s.l. and close to the eastern and western
coasts of the Pacific. The records obtained from these aquifers will therefore
allow us to directly compare continental and oceanic paleotemperatures during
the last glaciation.