* 9506725
* Mathematical Sciences: Geometric Topology and the           Fundamental Group
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* James Cannon, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Ralph M. Krause
* 06/30/1998
* USD 93,200.00

9506725 Cannon This project asks, "Does variable negative curvature imply
constant negative curvature in dimension three?" More precisely, the project
seeks a proof that a negatively curved (Gromov hyperbolic) group with 2-sphere
at infinity acts coaompactly, isometrically, and properly discontinuously on
hyperbolic 3-space. This goal would constitute a major step forward in
establishing Thurston's important geometrization conjecture for 3-manifolds and
would also have important consequences in the study of Kleinian groups,
negatively curved groups, conformal mapping, and Riemannian geometry. Prior work
of the principal investigator and coworkers has reduced the problem to the study
of discrete conformal mapping problems about finite subdivision rules in the
plane. Secondary, but related, problems concern algorithmic techniques with
negatively curved or almost convex groups. All of geometry and its applications
takes place within mathematical models or "spaces." Topology seeks to classify
these models and to understand their chief local and global properties. The most
important of these models are the "manifolds," the locally Euclidean spaces.
Mathematicians have to great effect long since classified the 2-dimensional
manifolds and have a corresponding valuable, yet conjectural, picture of
3-dimensional manifolds, called "Thurston's geometrization conjecture." The
project seeks a proof of one piece of that conjecture, namely that 3-manifolds
that in the large behave like negatively curved spaces can in fact be smoothed
so as to have constant negative curvature in the small. An affirmative answer
would reduce many problems about 3-manifolds to well-developed techniques
involving matrix theory, algebra, and analysis, with corresponding economies in
mathematical physics and elsewhere that these models are used. ***