* 9506613
* Upgrade of the Geophysics Computing Facility at the         University of Connecticut
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Timothy Byrne, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1997
* USD 16,625.00

9506613 Cormier This grant provides $16,625 as partial support for an upgrade to
the computing facilities of the geophysical research group at the University of
Connecticut, Storrs. The University will provide an equal amount for the
upgrade. The geophysics computing facility is the principal research facility
for 2 geophysics faculty (Vernon Cormier and Roelof Versteeg) and their students
working in the areas of deep Earth structure, seismic wave propagation, seismic
processing and inversion and environmental geophysics.. The facility also serves
geology faculty (Tim Byrne) as the main computational resource for modeling
regional tectonics, and serves faculty and graduate students in general as the-
computational platform for Mathematica. The PI, Cormier is one of the leading
minds in theoretical seismology and the co-PI, Byrne is a leading expert in the
tectonics of Japan. Specifically, the upgrade will consist of a central UNIX
server (Sparc 20) with large memory and 3 Mac Power PC's, which will serve both
as X-terminals and as standalone units. This equipment will improve this group's
ability to conduct simultaneous research on problems in deep Earth structure,
visualization, modeling and inversion of geophysical data for problems in
environmental remediation and regional tectonics (e.g. plate reconstructions and
deformation simulations). All purchased equipment will be completely compatible
with existing equipment and will strongly improve the present computational and
visualization capabilities. ***