* 9506778
* Acquisition of Two Global Positioning System Receivers for  Geodetic and Geodynamics Research
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Bob Schultz, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 11/30/1997
* USD 28,000.00

9506778 Wilson This award provides $28,000 as 49% of the costs of acquiring two
Trimble 4000SSE dual frequency geodetic receivers and associated field
equipment. The University of Texas at Austin will provide 51% of these costs.
These two receivers will become part of the UNAVCO pool, available to outside
researchers for up to 6 months each year. UNAVCO participation provides
technical and repair support as well. The two new receivers will supplement two
existing UT Austin Trimble 4000SSE's currently available through the UNAVCO pool
for up to 3 months each year. The two existing receivers were purchased and
upgraded entirely with University of Texas local funds. The new receivers are
required to support expanding GPS activities in a variety of graduate and
undergraduate educational and research programs at the University of Texas
within the Departments of Geological Sciences and Aerospace Engineering, and
through organized research units including the Center for Space Research,
Institute for Geophysics, and Bureau of Economic Geology. The receivers will be
used in organized instructional activities in both undergraduate and graduate
field and geodesy courses to provide essential GPS training to students in
engineering and earth sciences. Research applications include development of
advanced GPS data processing methods, monitoring of active tectonics in areas
which include the South Pacific and southern Rio Grande Rift, monitoring Gulf of
Mexico shoreline changes, and providing precise navigation for a variety of
geological and geophysical field programs. ***