* 9506568
* Evolutionary Radiations in Paleozoic and Mesozoic Crinoids
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Michael Foote, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 65,983.00

Foote 9506568 This research will (1) use explicit data on skeletal anatomy to
document evolutionary radiations in Paleozoic and Mesozoic crinoids, and (2)
test for a proposed difference between evolutionary radiations at different
taxonomic scales by comparing the radiation of crinoids as a whole to the
radiations of the constituent subgroups of crinoids. Evolutionary radiations,
involving substantial increases in the number of named taxa and in morphological
diversity, are among the most prominent features of the fossil record. It is
commonly thought that evolutionary radiations at different taxonomic, temporal,
and spatial scales do not differ significantly in temporal patterns or
underlying mechanisms. This perspective has scarcely been tested directly. There
are some hints that there may be a major difference between the evolutionary
radiations of higher taxa (clades) and the lower taxa (subclades) nested within
them, namely that morphological diversification within subclades is more gradual
in time than diversification of the larger clade to which they belong. However,
these suggestions have been based on case studies that are not ideally suited to
test this idea. By comparing the Paleozoic radiation of a major invertebrate
group, the Crinoidea, to that of subsidiary crinoid clads that diversified
concurrently with the larger crinoid clade, I will test for the existence of
such a discordance between taxonomic ranks. The Mesozoic radiation of articulate
crinoids will provide an additional comparison. The results will help to answer
questions about the hierarchical nature of evolution and our ability to predict
larger-scale evolutionary patterns from smaller-scale patterns. Changes in
morphological diversity, or disparity, during evolutionary radiations are
usually assessed by using proxies such as the number of higher taxa (mainly
classes and orders). There are a number of reasons to question the adequacy of
such proxies. The proposed research will use direct quantification o f
morphology to study evolutionary radiations in crinoids. I will use discrete
morphological characters to quantify crinoid form, and will measure
morphological disparity based on the net dissimilarities among species. I will
apply a number of quantitative approaches, including "clade-shape" statistics,
to explore the temporal pattern of morphological expectations of various
evolutionary models. The proposed research will answer questions about the
generation of morphological diversity over long spans of evolutionary time, and
will develop a morphological database that can be used by other workers to
investigate a wide range of issues, including phylogenetic relationships,
evolutionary rates, and trends.