* 9506233
* Temporal Regulation of Baculovirus Gene Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Linda Guarino, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 280,000.00

9506233 Guarino Baculovirus late and very late genes are expressed at different
times post infection. The late genes encode viral structural proteins and their
expression is maximal between 24 - 36 hr post infection. Polyhedrin is an
example of the very late genes which are involved in the formation of occlusion
bodies in the nuclei of infected cells. Transcription of the very late genes is
relatively low at 24 hr and reaches maximal levels at 48 hr, after the synthesis
of late proteins and assembly of virions. This suggests that the late and very
late promoters are controlled by different factors, although the mechanisms that
regulate differential transcription of the two classes of genes are unknown. The
goals of this project are to purify and identify the viral proteins that are
directly involved in transcription of the late and very late genes. For this
research, hybrid templates have been constructed that contain late or very late
promoters linked to a synthetic DNA fragment that lacks cytidine residues on the
transcript strand. In vitro transcription reactions performed in the absence of
CIP yield strong signals resulting from accurate initiation at the correct
sites. These constructs were used to monitor the purification of active
transcription complexes from infected cell extracts prepared at 36 hr post
infection. Phosphocellulose chromatography yielded two fractions that
differentially transcribed the late and very late templates. Addition of the
follow-through fraction to either of the active fractions resulted in an
increase in transcription from both late and very late promoters, although the
flow-through fraction had no transcription activity when tested separately. The
very late transcription complex was purified on three additional columns. The
purified complex contains only five proteins and transcribed the polyhedrin and
39k C-free constructs in the absence of additional factors, indicating that the
complex has both promoter recognition and RNA polymerase activities. Next, the
late complex will be purified in order to compare the protein compositions of
the two complexes. Proteins in the two complexes will be identified using a
combination of methods including V8 protease mapping, immunochemical analyses,
and direct protein sequencing. The DNA binding activities of the two complexes
will be compared and proteins that differ between the two complexes will be
targeted for further study, including an analysis of their promoter recognition.
The factors that increase expression of late and very late genes will be
purified and the corresponding genes identified. %%% This research should aid in
understanding the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation of baculovirus late
and very late gene expression. The baculoviruses late transcription system is
unique among eukaryotic viruses. In some respects, it seems very primitive. The
fact that late and very late promoters are preferentially transcribed by
different RNA polymerase complexes is reminiscent of bacterial RNA polymerase
and sigma factors. However, transcription is increased by the addition of
separable factors, a strategy of eukaryotic transcription systems. In addition,
results from this research may have a practical impacts on biotechnology. The
baculovirus expression system is widely used for the production of large amounts
of medically important proteins for use as vaccines, diagnostic tools, or
therapeutic agents. However, the baculovirus system has limitations: it is
transient because the viral vectors kill the cells; and recombinant proteins are
expressed late when cellular processing pathways are compromised. A knowledge of
the mechanisms that control baculovirus polyhedrin expression may aid in the
design of vectors that work in the absence of virus infection and thus do not
kill the host or impair protein processing. ***