* 9506192
* The Roles of GL1 and TTG in the Trichome Development        Pathway
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Michael Marks, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/2000
* USD 306,563.00

9506192 Marks Very little is known about the mechanisms that control cell fate
in plants. The development of hairs (called trichomes) on the leaves of
Arabidopsis thaliana plants is being used as a model to study cell fate in
plants. Two genes that are required for the commitment of leaf epidermal cells
to enter the trichome developmental pathway are TTG and GL1. Mutations in these
genes results in a loss of trichome initiation. Both of these genes are thought
to function as transcription factors that regulate other genes required for
trichome morphogenesis. This proposal will further the study of the role of GL1
in trichome development and also extend the characterization to the TTG gene.
The proposed experiments will provide information on how GL1 and TTG are
regulated and will identify genes that are regulated by GL1 and TTG. The
expected significance of this work is tow fold. first, it provides a convenient
system to study cell fate in plants. Second, trichome developments provides a
practical model. Trichomes on many plant species serve as a barrier between the
plant and a hostile environment. many crop plants such as Canola lack protective
trichomes. The ability to manipulate the morphology, density and placement of
trichomes on Arabidopsis plants is rapidly evolving. It is hoped that the
information learned about Arabidopsis can be applied to Brassica species and
other crop plants. ***