* 9506117
* Development of Time-Resolved Solid-State NMR Methods
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Jeremy Evans, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 255,000.00

9506117 Evans This proposal seeks to develop further the technique of time-
resolved solid-state NMR spectroscopy, a method introduced recently by this
laboratory for the structural investigation of fast reactions, particularly
enzymatic reactions, as a function of time. The overall goals are to (1) design,
build and test an new type of apparatus for rapidly freezing enzyme-substrate
(or for that matter, any two reactants or substrate and catalyst) in 100
microseconds or less, and (2) develop new pulse-sequences for measurement of
selective distances from dipolar coupled spins within transient species by time-
resolved rotational-echo double resonance (REDOR) solid-state NMR. The
development of these new methods will be important not just in extending the
time-resolution and structural information that time-resolved solid-state NMR
spectroscopy can currently provide, but also for setting the stage for the
delineation of the molecular events of enzymatic catalysis and culminating in
the making of a "movie" of an enzyme in action. %%% Enzymes are the agents
responsible for carrying out the majority of the chemical transformations in the
living organisms. The purpose of the work funded by this proposal is to develop
methods, based on the structural technique Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy, to determine the molecular details of an enzyme in action. Thus
the ultimate goal is to define in three dimensions the exact position of all the
atoms at the site where the enzyme carries out its chemistry, and follow them as
a function of time. The methods being developed are a completely novel approach
to this problem, and the consequences of solving this are significant for an
intellectual understanding of how enzymes work. Such knowledge could eventually
be used to develop novel drugs, herbicides or pesticides. ***