* 9506858
* 1995 FASEB Summer Research Conference:  Amyloid and other   Abnormal Protein Assembly Processes.  Conference will be    held in Copper Mountain, CO., August 20-25, 1995
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Ronald Wetzel, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

This conference will consist of a keynote address providing a history of
amyloid, and nine formal sessions of oral presentations, as well as poster
sessions, whose topics will include protein and beta sheet structure, protein
aggregation during folding in vitro, bacterial inclusion bodies, prion
particles, and anti-trypsin deposition, clinical summaries of major amyloid
diseases, structural basis of amyloid formation by peptides, basis for sequence
dependence of amyloid formation by peptides and globular proteins, the amyloid
pathway in Alzheimer s disease, physical methods for the study of insoluble
protein complexes, mechanisms of protein assembly, and factors associated with
amyloid in vivo. %%% The primary goal of the FASEB Summer Research Conference is
to bring together the cell biologists familiar with the biology of abnormal
protein deposition with the molecular biologists and biophysicists who will
ultimately establish an understanding of the molecular basis of these
phenomena.. This new conference series will provide a forum to promote increased
awareness of protein depositi on as a process that is not only biologically
relevant, but also exhibits significant molecular structure and specificity. A
related goal is to stimulate interest among established and young investigators
in doing research in this area.