* 9506064
* NSF-CONACyT:  The Intelligent Observer:  A Tool for         Collaborative Experimental Research Among Geographically    Dispersed Groups
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Jean-Claude Latombe, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 07/31/1997
* USD 90,000.00

This award in the CONACyT Initiative funds a joint research project between two
groups: the Robotics Laboratory of the Department of Computer Science at
Stanford University and the Center for Artificial Intelligence at ITESM in
Monterrey (Mexico). There have been several mutually beneficial exchanges
(visits, courses, research) between these two groups over the last four years.
The purpose of this project to expand this cooperation, not only in basic
research, but also on applications such as manufacturing and robot-assisted
surgery. The technical goal of this project is to integrate object-tracking
techniques from computer vision and motion-planning techniques from robotics, in
order to build a new tool, called the Intelligent Observer (IO for short), that
will facilitate collaborative experimental research among geographically
dispersed groups. While this project builds upon the two groups' strength in
vision, planning, control, and robotics, the resulting Intelligent Observer will
be a tool to enhance their future research capabilities in these domains. This
tool will be used interactively by people at one or several geographical
locations to observe and participate in an experiment implemented at another
site. The hardware of the IO will consist of one or more vision sensors mounted
on mobile platforms available at the experimental site. The software of the IO
will accept high-level commands input by the users on their workstations, plan
and control the motions of the platforms to allow the vision sensors to acquire
enough visual information to meet the users' requests, apply image understanding
techniques to extract information pertinent to the users' requests, and for each
user, provide a pertinent graphic rendering of the experimental scene on a
display. In addition to facilitating remote collaborations in research, the IO
technologies should also benefit operations such as telepresence,
teleconferencing, surveillance, and interactive TV.