* 9506411
* Workshop on Research Opportunities for Vegetation Science   Arising out of National Vegetation Classification and       Mapping Initiatives, June 4-9, 1995 at Rice University
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Paul Harcombe, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1995
* USD 18,000.00

9506411 Harcombe This proposal seeks funding for a two-day conference meeting in
conjunction with the 38th Symposium of the International Association of
Vegetation Scientists to be held in June 1995, in Houston, Texas. The focus of
the conference will be opportunities for basic research arising from efforts by
federal agencies and non-governmental organizations to classify and map
vegetation associations in large areas of the United States. The main goals of
the conference are to catalyze collaborations to take advantage of newly
available data, to provide critical communication among scientists, to improve
national vegetation classification efforts, and possibly to help fine-tune
ongoing classification and mapping efforts. The conference will focus the
research agenda by addressing three questions: 1) How can academic ecologists
respond to the national scientific need to address problems encountered in the
national vegetation classification and mapping process? 2) What breakthroughs
will become possible as a consequence of the rapid proliferation of information
engendered by national classification and mapping efforts? 3) What new
analytical, data management, and administrative tools will be necessary to
ensure full realization of the potential afforded by the dramatic increase in
ecological data? The timing of this conference is ideal. The IAVS meetings are
the only ones in the world likely to bring together people doing cutting-edge
research from many different, and somewhat isolated, areas and perspectives.
Hence they constitute a unique forum for discussion and dialog. In fostering
dialog between academic ecologists and resource managers, the conference will
ensure that data are collected in such a way as to maximize their scientific
utility, as well as their applied value.