* 9506300
* DNA-Porphyrin Complexes:  In 3-Dimensions
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Loren Williams, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/1999
* USD 258,124.00

9506300 Williams A molecular understanding of DNA-porphyrin interactions will
facilitate design of a host of technologically useful molecules such as new
artificial nucleases, structural probes and conjugates, photodynamic agents,
biomaterials and nano-devices. Porphyrins interact with DNA by several modes.
Porphyrins intercalate, groove bind, and may bind in novel, currently
uncharacterized modes. Some porphyrins form non-covalent complexes with DNA
while others are reactive, causing strand scission, base release and other
reactions. One attractive aspect of porphyrins is the systematic manner in which
DNA mode of binding and reactivity vary with porphyrin shape, metal center,
charge and additional structural and physical properties. These parameters are
easily manipulated because techniques for elaboration of porphyrin structure are
extensively developed. However, no detailed 3-D structures of DNA- porphyrin
complexes have been determined thus far. The goal of this proposal is to
determine 3-dimensional x-ray structures of DNA-porphyrin complexes. Initial
work will focus on previously obtained crystals of the following DNA-porphyrin
complexes: (1) (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGATCG, (2) (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGATICG, (3) (Cu)TMPyP4 -
CGATCG - K2PtCI, (4) (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGATCG - SmCI3, (5) (Cu)TMPyP4 - ICGATCG, (6)
(Ni)TMPyP4 - CGATCG, (7) (Pd)TMPyP4 - CGATCG, (8) (Cu)TMPyP4 - CGCG, where IC=
5-iodoC and TMPyP4 = meso-(4-(N- tetra-methylpyridyl))porphyrin . X-ray
intensity data has been obtained from several of these crystals and structure
solution is in progress. Teaching Philosophy. Georgia Tech is a combined
research and teaching institution. Training pof undergraduates, graduate
students and post-doctoral associates is an essential part of the PI's research
program. The PI's goals are to teach and conduct research in an academic
environment. Motivation for classroom teaching is enjoyment, intellectual
challenge, and to gain and maintain breadth of knowledge that research alone
does not necessarily foster. The PI has developed new curricula for several
courses. His teaching philosophy is to excite students by incorporating the
latest techniques and results into the curriculum. %%% Porphyrins and porphyrin-
like molecules are brightly colored, biologically critical molecules that give
color to hemoglobin and chlorophyll. Porphyrins can interact by several modes
with DNA, the genetic material. A molecular understanding of DNA-porphyrin
interactions will facilitate design of a host of technologically useful
molecules such as new artificial nucleases, structural probes and conjugates,
biomaterials and nano-devices. Porphyrins sometimes intercalate, sliding between
base pairs and increasing the length of DNA. Under other conditions porphyrins
bind in the DNA grooves. In some instances porphyrins may bind to DNA by novel,
uncharacterized modes. Certain porphyrins are reactive, causing DNA strand
scission, base release and other reactions. DNA mode of binding and reactivity
vary with porphyrin shape, metal center, charge and additional structural and
physical properties. These parameters are easily manipulated. However, thus far
no detailed 3-D structures of DNA-porphyrin complexes have been determined.
X-ray crystallography is a method by which molecules can be visualized in atomic
detail. For this work, x-ray crystallography will be used to visualize complexes
of DNA with porphyrins. Crystals of DNA-porphyrin complexes will be grown and a
beam of x-rays will be directed through each crystal. The atoms of the crystal
scatter the x-rays. After collection and proper processing of the intensities of
scattered x-rays, the positions of the atoms of the DNA and of the bound
porphyrin molecule can be reconstructed. ***