* 9506094
* Ionic and Cytoskeletal Control of Developmental Polarity in a Plant Zygote
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Darryl Kropf, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1999
* USD 340,000.00

9506094 Kropf The research described in this proposal will investigate the
cytoskeletal and ionic bases of polarity in zygotes of the brown alga Pelvetia.
The premise in this proposal is that the acquisition of polarity is a highly
regulated reorganization of the cell which will be best understood by
investigating relationships between key regulatory processes. Dr. Kropf will
study cytoskeletal control of polarity, and then investigate the relationship
between the cytoskeleton and cytosolic regulatory ions. Preliminary evidence
indicates that cortical F-actin localizes in a patch soon after fertilization,
and expands into a ring that portends the future rhizoid site. Dr. Kropf
hypothesizes that sperm entry induces local F-actin polymerization that then
serves as a determinant of polarity, specifically marking the future rhizoid
site. This hypothesis will be examined using cryofixation, confocal microscopy
and TEM. Prior to mitosis, the nucleus rotates 90 degrees bringing centrosomes
into an axial alignment. This nuclear rotation determines the axial orientation
of the spindle and transverse alignment of the first division plane.
Microtubules are thought to be primarily responsible for nuclear rotation, and
their dynamic behavior during rotation will be investigated in real time by
injecting zygotes with fluorescently tagged tubulin. Centrosome assembly and
function will also be investigated. Finally the hypothesis that the assembly and
function of cytoskeletal elements are regulated by local ion activities,
specifically H+ and CA+2 activities, will be investigated. ***