* 9506330
* Nitrogenase in a Methanogenic Archaeon
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Stephen Zinder, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* A Berry
* 08/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F }>a J C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t L O b j e c
t P o o l P ` J P ` J ? @ A B C D E F G H I F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Zinder, Stephen H. MCB-9506330 In 1984, the
discovery of nitrogen fixation was reported in methanogenic Archaea
(Archaebacteria), the first discovery of this process outside the eubacterial
domain. Methanosarcina backeri has two sets of nitrogenase (nif) genes, one
which clusters with the nitrogenase from the eubacterium Clostridium
pasteurianum, N-terminal sequencing of the purified Fe protein and RNA-blot
analysis showed that the latter nitrogenase was expressed in M. barkeri cells
growing on Mo-containing medium. Phylogenetic anayses of the nitrogenase
sequences have found groupings which are not easily reconciled with the 16S rRNA
phylogenetic tree, raising interesting evolutionary questions concerning
nitrogenase diversity. Additional nif genes will be cloned and sequenced from M.
barkeri. At the present time there are only two nifD sequences for methanogens
known, two partial nifK sequences, and no sequences of any other nif genes. The
polymerase chain reaction and related cloning techniques are being used to
obtain DNA sequences from a wider diversity of Eubacteria and Archaea, includi
ng relatives of Methanosarcina and diverse other eubacteria known to fix
nitrogen, but which have not had their nif genes sequenced, such as Chlorobium
and Heliobacterium. The similarities between methanogenic and clostridial
nitrogenases will be examined further in the hope that important gaps can be
filled in the phylogenetic tree for nitrogenases and in our understanding of
nitrogenase evolution and diversity. %%% Nitrogen is second only to carbon in
its importance to animal, plant, and microbial nutrition. Although, we are
surrounded by an atmosphere of nitrogen gas, only certain nitrogen-fixing
bacteria re able to convert nitrogen to forms which can be used by organisms. A
chemical process for fixing nitrogen requires temperatures near 1000 F and
pressures over 10,000 pounds per square inch, while bacteria can fix nitrogen at
room temperature using the enzyme complex called nitrogenase. This reaction is
crucial to nutrient cycling in nearly all ecosystems, including agricultural
ones. This laboratory discovered that methane-producing bacteria (or
methanogens) can fix nitrogen. Not only are these bacteria of obvious practical
significance, but molecular studies have shown that they are members of the
Archaebacteria or Archaea, a group completely unrelated to the bacteria
previously shown to fix nitrogen (eubacteria), and, in fact, probably more
closely related to eucaryotes--cells with nuclei. Studies of the biochemistry
and molecular biology of nitrogen fixation in Methanosarcina barkeri were
performed. Interestingly, the sequence of amino acids in its nitrogenase
resembles that from the eubacterium, Clostridium parteurianum, suggesting that
genes were transferred between two distantly related organisms. The differents
will be examined further with nitrogenases from a wide variety of cells in order
to better understand the evolution and biodiversity of these enzyme complexes.
*** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( > D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Zinder, Stephen H. Robert Uffen Robert Uffen @ E J
@ @ ? J @ L Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e L j j j j j j j 1 %