* 9506123
* Globalization, Crisis, and Response:  Education Strategies  of Middle Class Families in Istanbul, Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Henry Rutz, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 08/31/1996
* USD 121,117.00

This project involves an ethnographic study of how middle class families in
Turkey strategies to obtain appropriate education's to assure their children's
access to good jobs as Turkey opens its markets to the West. The investigators
are an anthropologist and an economist who will conduct in-depth interviews and
participant-observation to study the life course and family histories of a
sample of families from a larger survey done by the investigators recently. The
economic context of middle-class work is changing in response to global changes
in financial markets leading to the liberalization of local economies. The
procedures families use to gain access to new jobs and to maintain their class
status through proper educational and forms of credentials will be studied in
depth. This research is important because it will add a case study of middle
class insecurity and social strategies to the small body of cases focused on the
US and other Western nations. Increased understanding of the Turkish case will
advance our understanding of general processes as against culturally particular
reactions. General knowledge of middle-class situations and strategies is
valuable because many anti-government political movements have been fueled by
middle-class resentment and frustration at being blocked from the high standard
of living and social position promised by governments instituting radical socio-
economic changes. This sort of in-depth ethnographic study will provide valuable
information on local middle-class reactions to global changes.