* 9506257
* Two Ryanodine Receptor Ca2+ Release Systems
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* John Sutko, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 06/30/1999
* USD 275,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 4 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l 4 4 4 @ ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; Abstract 9506798 Sutko Calcium release channels, known as
ryanodine receptors (RyR) are present in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) of
muscle cells, and they release the calcium that triggers muscle contraction. Two
RyR isoforms are co-expressed in vertebrate skeletal muscles, and two mechanisms
have been proposed to act in concert to activate SR Ca++ release in these
muscles. One mechanisms, directly coupled Ca ++ release (DCCR) involves
interactions between a RyR and the dihyropryidine receptor (DHPR) Ca++ channel
acting as a voltage sensor. In the second mechanism, calcium induced calcium
release (CICR) , a RyR channel is activated by Ca++ released by DCCR. This
project will test the hypotheses that each RyR isoform is activated by one of
these mechanisms, the (RyR isoform by DCCR, and the (RyR isoform by CICR. The
involvement of the (RyR in DCCR involves association with DHPR, therefore
biochemical and immunological approaches will be used to lomk for this
association and to see if this association involves the SR protein triadin. A
peptide from the cytoplasmic loop of the DHPR will b e tested to see if it can
activate the (RyR. In bilayer studies the (RyR is inactivated by Ca++ in the
absence, but not the presence of mMATP, so caged ATP in single muscle fibers
will be used to test if RyRs are liganded by ATP and subject to inactivation by
high Ca++. %%% The results of these studies will provide new information on how
a SR Ca++ release system based on two ryanodine receptors, operates to support
the functions of vertebrate skeletal muscles. *** Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o
r m a t i o n ( ' $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Barbara Zain
Barbara Zain @ 4 @ = 4 @ U 4 @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e 7 7 j j j j j j j A
1 # # r T 4 A j A j j j j ~ j j j j 6 Abstract 9506798 Sutko Calcium release
channels, known as ryanodine receptors (RyR) are present in the sarcoplasmic
reticulum (SR) of muscle cells, and they release the calcium that triggers
muscle contraction. Two RyR isoforms are co-expressed in vertebrate skeletal
muscles, and two mechanisms have been proposed to act in concert to activate SR
Ca++ release in these muscles. One mechanisms, directly coupled Ca ++ release
(DCCR) involves interactions between a RyR and the dihyropryidine receptor
(DHPR) Ca++ channel acting as a voltage sensor. In the second mechanism, calcium
induced calcium release (CICR) , a RyR channel is activated by Ca++ released by
DCCR. This project will test the hypotheses that each RyR isoform is activated
by one of these mechanisms, the (RyR isoform by DCCR, and the (RyR isoform by
CICR. The involvement of the (RyR in DCCR involves association with DHPR,
therefore biochemical and immunological approaches will be used to look for this
association and to see if this association involves the SR protein triadin. A
peptide from the cyto