* 9506517
* Secular Evolution in the Composition of the Mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Stein Jacobsen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 01/31/2000
* USD 219,600.00

9506517 Jacobsen The compositional variation of the present-day mantle results
from a number of crust-mantle and intra-mantle differentiation processes
operating over geologic time. Some of these ancient processes many have been
markedly different from those occurring today. The production of continental
crust has had the greatest influence in establishing the composition of the
present-day mantle, but exactly how and when this occurred is controversial. It
is proposed to conduct a series of high quality geochemical measurements of
modern and ancient mafic to ultramafic lavas and their melt inclusions that will
yield new insights into the secular evolution in the composition of the mantle.
Foremost among these studies will be the use of microbeam techniques on olivine-
hosted melt inclusions in ancient lavas to determine the compositional
characteristics of the primary lavas and their source regions. Komatiitic
samples containing olivine-hosted melt inclusions from widely varying temporal
and spatial associations will be investigated. These microbeam techniques will
also be applied to determine the compositions of glassy portions of modern
oceanic basalts in order to establish variations in "constant ratios" of
incompatible elements in the lavas and their source regions. Characterizing the
secular evolution of the composition of the mantle will lead to a enhanced
understanding of crust-mantle and intra-mantle differentiation processes and the
rate at which they occurred.