* 9506167
* RUI: Ribosomal RNA Mutations and Ribosome Function
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Melvin Santer, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 08/31/1999
* USD 213,000.00

9506167 Santer Ribosomes are complex ribonucleoprotein organelles which are the
sites of one of the most complex of biological processes, protein synthesis. It
has been recognized for a number of years that the primary structure of rRNA
plays a crucial role in the reactions of protein synthesis.The discovery of the
catalytic capabilities of a number of RNA molecules including rRNA has refocused
attention on the functional capabilities of RNA. However, even in the most
completely described ribosome, that of the procaryote E. coli ,the relationship
between structure and function is still incompletely understood. Genetic and
biochemical methods are used here to study the relationship between the primary
structure and function in the 30S subunit of the ribosomes of E. coli. The focus
is on bases which are involved in a number of reactions which assure the
accuracy of protein synthesis: those in the 530 and 980 loop regions and
positions 1492 and 1493 of 16S rRNA of 30S ribosomes. The mutated region of rDNA
is cloned into plasmids containing the rRNA operon under the control of
constitutive or inducible promoters to permit the study of any type of mutation,
including those which are lethal to the cell. To study the effects of these
mutations, in vivo studies have been carried out to determine the effect of
mutant 30S ribosomes on cell viability and the ability of these ribosomes to
synthesize proteins and accurately translate mRNA coding for b-galactosidase.
These studies have demonstrated, for the first time, that position 981 is
essential for translation. It is now proposed to try to define the steps in
protein synthesis in which each of the mutated bases are essential. To determine
the accuracy and extent of translation, a linked transcription-translation
system will be used to study the translation of mRNA transcribed from a plasmid
coding for a small molecular weight protein of known sequence employing an
extract of cells containing mutant ribosomes. Addition al in vitro experiments
will be carried out to assemble a homogeneous population of mutant 30S ribosomes
to study many of the partial reactions of protein synthesis. "Suppressors" of
lethal mutations will be selected to identify bases, distant on the primary
structure of rRNA, which affect a common function. Selection of "suppressor"
mutations which may be involved in translational initiation can help us to
identify bases in rRNA which are specifically involved in initiation of protein
synthesis. These studies should help ultimately to genetically identify the
components involved at each step of protein synthesis. %%% All cellular proteins
are synthesized by complex organelles called ribosomes. which are composed of
ribosomal RNA (rRNA) and protein. However, even in the most completely described
ribosome, that of the procaryote E. coli, the relationship between structure and
function is incompletely understood. The discovery of the catalytic capabilities
of a number of RNA molecules has refocused attention on the functional
capabilities of rRNA. Our studies use genetic and biochemical methods to study
this relationship. A rRNA gene can be mutated at a specific, crucial position
and introduced into the cell on a special vector which permits the study of
lethal changes. The focus is on specific positions which are involved in
assuring the accuracy of protein synthesis. We propose to define the steps in
protein synthesis which are affected by each of the mutated positions. It is
important to thoroughly study this process since it is essential for cell growth
and development, and the basis of much production biotechnology. These studies
will involve undergraduate students in every phase and constitute a major part
of their biology training. These students will thus be learning first hand the
importance and excitement of molecu1ar biology in solving fundamental biological
questions. ***