* 9506346
* Early Muscle Cell Fate Determination During Embryogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Judith Venuti, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1998
* USD 224,243.00

9506346 Venuti Studies on the MyoD family of muscle specific gene regulatory
factors have provided enormous insight into the mechanisms that regulate
myoblast determination and differentiation. But a fundamental question that
remains in muscle developmental biology is: what activates the myogenic
transcription factors? The prime objective of this proposed research is to
identify the earliest molecular events that commit a pluripotent mesodermal stem
cell to a myogenic fate. These experiments are designed to identify factors that
influence early embryonic muscle cell determination and explore the capacity of
embryonic cells which are not part of the myogenic program to differentiate as
muscle cells. The sea urchin embryo, whose development is extremely well
understood and whose embryos are particularly amenable to micromanipulation
during early development, will be the experimental organism. Dr. Venuti has
developed an in vitro assay that will enable her to ask if and when
extracellular signaling is required for the determination and differentiation of
muscle precursors or if they develop cell autonomouqly. These experiments should
identify the signals or cues that initiate the decision to follow a muscle fate
and determine when muscle progenitors first become committed. Dr. Venuti has
cloned and characterized the muscle specific basic helix-loop-helix (b-HLH)
transcription factor, SUM-1, from the sea urchin embryo and shown that it is
activated very early in the muscle differentiation program. She has shown that
SUM-1 can activate muscle specific reporter elements in vertebrate tissue
culture cells and in microinjected sea urchin embryos. She will examine the
consequences of expressing SUM-1 at premature times and at ectopic locations in
the embryo either alone or in combination with interacting factors. To identify
factors that act directly to regulate the transcription of SUM-1, the cis
regulatory elements and trans acting factors of the SUM-1 promoter wil l be
characterized. Once important temporal and spatial regulatory elements of the
SUM-1 promoter are identified, she will test the effects of the extracellular
signals identified in in vitro assays on these elements. The combination of
these experiments will help direct long term investigations into muscle cell
fate determination and the role of extracellular signals in the decision of
embryonic cells to commit to a myogenic fate. They will also provide a better
understanding of the role of the myogenic transcription factor, SUM-1, and other
regulatory molecules in these determination events. ***