* 9506574
* Quantitative  Analysis of Turbidites and Related Sediment   Gravity Flow Deposits
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* John Grotzinger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1996
* USD 68,290.00

Grotzinger 9506574 One year of funding is requested in order to support a pilot
project designed to conduct quantitative tests of the scaling relationships of
sediment gravity flow deposits. The plan is to test the hypothesis that the
statistical distribution of bed thicknesses of subaqueous sediment gravity flow
deposits with minimal erosional truncation and amalgamation should obey the
power law N(h) h-B where N(h) is the number of layers of thickness greater than
h and B is the scaling exponent (as suggested by Rothman et al, 1994). This
indicates that, at least in some cases, sediment gravity flow deposition is
scale invariant (fractal). We will determine (or at least devise a strategy for
future research) whether power-law scaling for sediment gravity flow deposits
represents an intrinsic dynamical property of the depositional system itself
(e.g. self-organized criticality), or whether it indirectly reflects the power-
law scaling of external, causal mechanisms (e.g. earthquakes, floods).
Furthermore, if it can be demonstrated (regardless of its cause) that the
sediment gravity flow triggering and deposition process is indeed scale
invariant, then departures of bed thickness statistics from the predicted power
law may possibly be interpreted as quantitative evidence of erosional and/or
non-depositional processes that influence completeness of the stratigraphic
record. The research effort itself will consist of a close collaboration between
the PI's whose backgrounds are widely divergent, and a graduate research
assistant. Several recently obtained data sets will be analyzed. Additional data
will be collected that pertains specifically to the temporal scaling of sediment
gravity flow deposits. Finally, data collection will proceed in parallel with
development of new, physically-based theory that relates bed thickness, volume,
and geometry. The results of this research will be of broad interest to members
of the physics as well as earth science communities. Additionally, the rese arch
has clear relevance to the petroleum industry where there is growing evidence
that thin-bedded turbidite reservoirs may be of great economic importance.