* 9506222
* APS Conference on Understanding the Biological Clock:  From Genetics to Physiology; July 8-12, 1995; Hanover, NH
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Martin Frank, American Physiological Society
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/1996
* USD 7,000.00

Biological rhythms are an important way in which living organisms interact with
the environment, and a variety of mechanisms have been found for "biological
clocks." This conference is the first major conference in many years to provide
a comprehensive overview of chronobiology, the study of the mechanisms
underlying daily (circadian) and other cyclically timed functions and behavior
of living organisms. Speakers represent a full range of approaches from
molecular biology and genetics of invertebrates and bacteria to comparative
physiology and human behavior. Diversity of chronobiological systems is a
central theme, as the conference evaluates the current status of the field and
directions for the future. The conference organizers have encouraged
participation by men and women who are from several nations and different kinds
of institutions, representing a range of research opportunities for the
attending younger investigators and students. The final publication will be a
lasting reference source as well as an authoritative overview on the current
knowledge about biological clocks. The book along with the interactions at the
conference will have a significant impact on the field. Results are likely to
extend beyond simply biological rhythms, to sensory neuroscience, sensorimotor
control, neuroendocrine and behavior studies in general. Results also are likely
to have an impact on improving areas of human performance in the workplace where
features such as shift-work can affect daily rhythms.