* 9506805
* Structural Determinants of Substrate Specificity in Trypsin-Like Proteases
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Lizbeth Hedstrom, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2000
* USD 282,350.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ' 5 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l ' 5 ' 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +'
0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ d
5 @ @ _ 5 @ 0 Microsoft Word 6.0 2 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( # $
&amp; ' ( ) + , / 0 u c u D c c # % &amp; ' ( * + - . / 0 ' ' ' ' ' ' ' , 0 ! K
@ Normal a " A@ " Default Paragraph Font +@ Endnote Text c *@ Endnote Reference
h " @ " Footnote Text c &amp;@ ! Footnote Reference h , @ , TOC 1 0 , $ ( @ (
TOC 2 0 , $ ( @ ( TOC 3 p 0 , $ ( @ ( TOC 4 @ 0 , $ ( @ ( TOC 5 0 , $ &amp; @
&amp; TOC 6 0 , $ @ TOC 7 0 , &amp; @ &amp; TOC 8 0 , $ &amp; @ &amp; TOC 9 0 ,
$ * @ * Index 1 ` , $ * @ * Index 2 0 , $ &amp; .@ &amp; TOA Heading , $ "@
Caption c O _Equation Caption 0 ! 0 0 0 7 marcia
steinberg#\\CLM11\MCBPUB\BIOCHEM\HEDSTROM.WP5 @HP DeskJet Printers LPT1:
HPDSKJET HP DeskJet D L f , , " g d }w;g } d " W HP DeskJet D L f , , " g d }w;g
} d " W " " " " C Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 5 Courier New 9 ) C C "4
marcia steinberg mar cia steinberg ; e = e 0 # " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x
| | | | | | | # h Y T 4 " | | | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 &gt; " " " " | |
7 | 9506805 Hedstrom A major goal of biochemistry is to understand the
structural basis of enzyme specificity. This P.I. outlines experiments designed
to define the structural components of substrate specificity in the trypsin
family of serine proteases. This family is chosen because its members display a
great variety of different substrate specificities, the enzymatic mechanism is
well characterized and a large amount of structural information is available. In
previous work, this laboratory constructed trypsin mutants with chymotrypsin
like specificity. These mutant enzymes have been extensively characterized: the
kinetics of substrate hydrolysis, inhibition and inactivation have been
analyzed, and the x ray crystal structures have been solved. This work revealed
surface loops, which do not contact the substrate or determine specificity in
the S 1 site. These mutants process substrates at rates comparable to
chymotrypsin, but are defective in substrate binding. The specificity of the Sl
site is linked to the Sl' and S2 S4 binding sites, and the structure of the Sl
site i