* 9507779
* Sabre and Environmentally Responsive Cell Expansion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Philip Benfey, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9506308 Emmons The aim of this project is to elucidate the molecular genetic
basis for the evolution of a morphological novelty. The organisms to be studied
are free living soil nematodes related to the model genetic organism
Caenorhabditis elegans. In previous work it has been shown that a novel
morphological feature of the male copulatory structure has appeared during
evolution of the genus Caenorhabditis. Genetic studies in C. elegans have
revealed that development of this feature involves several genes acting in a
morphogenetic pathway. One gene of this pathway is the nematode homolog of the
transcription factor Pax-6. Pax-6 is found in many multicellular organisms, from
insects to vertebrates, and is thought to play an essential role in patterning
the central nervous system, as well as in the development of the eye. The role
of evolutionary change at the Pax-6 locus in the appearance of the novel
morphological feature of nematodes will be investigated. Cell lineages will be
determined for several species and compared to those of C. elegans to determine
what role change in cell lineage has played in evolution of morphology. The
Pax-6 homolog of one non- Caenorhabditis species will be isolated, sequenced,
and compared to the gene of C. elegans. The aim is to determine whether genetic
changes affecting morphology have occurred upstream of Pax-6, in the promoter of
Pax-6, in the protein coding region of Pax-6, or downstream of Pax-6. If the
genes of C. elegans and the second species are identical in amino acid sequence
and are expressed in the same cells, then evolutionary change must have affected
downstream functions. If the two genes are not identical, then a series of
hybrid genes constructed from the genes of the two species will be tested in C.
elegans and in the second species. By identifying in detail the genetic changes
in a developmental gene that have given rise to changes in morphology, Dr.
Emmons hopes to help elucidate both the genetic determi nants of morphogenesis,
and the nature of the genetic changes that result in evolution of morphology.
The results of this study should contribute towards answering several
outstanding questions concerning the mechanism of evolution. ***