* 9507697
* U.S.-Germany Program:  Dissertation Research on Trace Gas   Fluxes in a Woodland Ecosystem
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1995
* Thomas Nash, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 11/30/1995
* USD 9,630.00

This award supports Joanne Romagni, a Ph.D. student of Professor Thomas Nash at
Arizona State University, for a ten week period of dissertation enhancement
research at the Max Planck Institute for Chemistry in Mainz, Germany. She will
work in the Department of Biogeochemistry with Drs. Franz Meixner and Juergen
Kesselmeier and members of their research groups. The specific objectives of her
research visit are to learn methodologies to measure trace nitrogen gases, to
gain additional experience with trace sulfur gas analyses, and to construct and
test gas sampling chambers appropriate for her research on lichens and leaves.
This experience will be very useful in her research to quantify sources and
sinks of nitrogen and sulfur trace gases in a blue oak woodland ecosystem in
California. Such information will improve our understanding of the biogenic
origins of atmospheric trace gases which play a role in climate change. The Max
Planck Institute for Chemistry is one of the most respected research institutes
in the world in the area of atmospheric chemistry and the interactions between
the atmosphere and the biosphere. The scientists with whom Ms. Romagni will work
are experts in the study of trace gas fluxes and global biogeochemical cycling
of nitrogen and sulfur. They have developed new and efficient
micrometeorological methods to monitor trace nitrogen and sulfur gases in
vegetation and soils. Gaining experience with these techniques will directly
benefit Ms. Romagni's doctoral dissertation research on trace gas fluxes in a
woodland ecosystem.