* 9507855
* Uncovering Relationships Between Geo-Statistical and Spatial Autoregressive Modelling
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Daniel Griffith, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/28/1998
* USD 138,847.00

The investigator undertakes to complete establishing connections between two
separate contemporary areas of statistics, namely geo- and spatial statistics.
These connections are developed (1) by analyzing popular scientific models in
both of these sub-fields; (2) by evaluating these models within the context of
the sizes and shapes of geographic regions to which they are applied; (3) by
studying the role geographic direction plays in preserving or altering these
connections; and (4) by investigating properties of these models for geographic
maps upon which similar or markedly different classificatory color codings tend
to cluster. Much of the theoretical research will be pursued with the use of
computers. Selected U.S. EPA Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program
(EMAP) data already obtained for the Chesapeake and Delaware estuaries and the
northeast forest inventory will be used for empirical analysis and demonstration
purposes. The practical importance of this proposed research arises within the
U.S. EPA EMAP project, a major national endeavor in which statistics are being
applied to environmental issues as well as monitoring and analysis undertakings.
Articulation of a common foundation for geo- and spatial statistics will better
enable consistent statistical application and analysis of the massive amounts of
geo-referenced, or locationally tagged, EMAP data becoming available. These data
currently are being collected and geo-referenced in terms of a network of
approximately 12,600 hexagons overlayed on the continental United States.