* 9507209
* DNA Replication, Bacterial, Cell Cycle, and Cell Growth
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Judith Zyskind, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 12/31/2000
* USD 360,000.00

9507209 Zyskind The rate of DNA replication is controlled by the frequency of
replication fork assembly at origins of replication and not by the rate of chain
elongation in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. It follows that the
coupling of DNA replication to cell growth requires that the frequency of
initiation of DNA replication from origins be a function of growth rate. Because
the determinants of the rate of DNA replication are only involved in the
initiation step, an understanding of how these determinants control initiation
will provide an explanation for how the rate of DNA replication is regulated. In
bacteria, the concentration of the initiator protein, DnaA, is a critical factor
in determining when initiation of DNA replication occurs, and this proposal
concentrates on the mechanisms that control the rate and timing of DnaA protein
synthesis. The regulatory mechanisms that provide sufficient DnaA protein for
the correct frequency and spacing of initiation events depending on growth rate,
growth phase, stage in the cell cycle, and starvation conditions will be
deciphered. A recent discovery suggests that the synthesis of DnaA may be
controlled by another protein, Fis. Fis is itself growth phase regulated; thus,
it may act as a sensor of the growth conditions of the cell. The objectives of
this proposal are to delineate the Fis binding sites in the dnaA promoter
region; determine whether Fis and DnaA proteins exclude the other from binding
to their sites in the dnaA promoter region; examine the possibility that Fis
prolongs hemimethylation of the dnaA promoter region during the eclipse phase by
testing the ability of Fis to bind to unmethylated, hemimethylated, and fully
methylated DNA; discover whether Fis activates or represses DnaA expression;
determine if DnaA is an activator, repressor, or inhibitor of Fis activation of
the dnaAP2 promoter; identify cis-acting elements in the dnaA promoter region
required for growth rate regulation, growth phase regulation, and inhibition by
th e alarmone, ppGpp; characterize the growth rate regulation of DnaA protein;
and search for other regulators of DnaA expression. The methods to be employed
and their uses include DNaseI and hydroxyl radical footprinting for defining
protein binding sites, gel retardation for examining protein-DNA interactions,
directed and random mutagenesis of nucleotide sequences to identify cis and
trans-acting elements, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis for characterizing
growth rate regulated proteins, vector expression systems for inducing the
synthesis of ppGpp or DnaA, the lambda bacteriophage integration system for
moving fusions to the bacterial chromosome at unique locations, and assays of
chitobiase activity for reporter gene function in fusion studies with the dnaA
promoter region. %%% This research includes novel approaches for studying the
regulation of a required gene that can be applied to studies of other required
genes. Results from this study will provide an explanation for how the bacterial
cell is able to adjust its concentration of the initiator protein, DnaA, in
response to changes in the environment, thereby ensuring that initiation of DNA
replication occurs once and only once in the bacterial cell cycle. ***