* 9507488
* The Function of Nonprismatic Enamel in Mammals:  Dental     Structure, Oral Physiology and Dietary Niche
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Elizabeth Dumont, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1998
* USD 81,208.00

9507488 Dumont The organization of enamel in mammalian teeth can vary between
simple parallel arrangement of crystallite (nonprismatic enamel) to complicated
non-parallel arrangements (prismatic enamel). Prismatic enamel increases the
strength of the tooth, but we know relatively little about the function of non-
prismatic enamel. In humans, non- prismatic enamel is more resistant to erosive
destruction by dietary acids and sugar by-products than is underlying prismatic
enamel. This research examines tooth structure, diet diversity, and salivary
chemistry in an array of mammal species. It will test the hypothesis that
exaggerated superficial layers of nonprismatic tooth are adaptations that permit
dietary emphases on acidic or sugary food sources. For each species, food
hardness, sugar content and acidity of natural diets are measured, together with
salivary pH and buffering capacity. The proportion of nonprismatic enamel in
molar teeth is measured using scanning electron microscopy. Mammals with high
proportions of nonprismatic enamel are predicted to consume foods that are more
sugary, acidic, and softer than those eaten by species that exhibit relatively
little nonprismatic enamel. Salivary pH and buffering capacity are predicted to
be relatively lower among species that exhibit large proportions of nonprismatic
enamel. This study will provide evidence of the interactions between tooth
enamel morphology, oral physiology and feeding behavior that limit the diversity
of foods that mammals select. It will lead to better understanding of the
relationships between anatomy, physiology and behavior that influence the ways
in which animals share food plant resources. It will provide insight into the
diets of extinct or poorly known species. The results of this study may also
yield insights into the role of human nonprismatic e namel in resisting dental
erosion and the initiation of tooth decay.