* 9507873
* Spin, Charge, and Disorder in Correlated Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Thomas Rosenbaum, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 255,000.00

9507873 Rosenbaum The physics of the metal-insulator transition is intimately
tied to the unusual ground state properties of highly-correlated metals,
including the heavy fermions compounds, the high-Tc superconductors, and the
Mott-Hubbard systems V2O3 and Ni(S,Se)2. An important, unresolved issue is the
nature of the interplay of the itinerant magnetism with the Coulomb interactions
and the disorder. This research project focuses on the transition metal oxides
and sulfides. It aims to deconvolute the influences of the spin and charge
degrees of freedom in the barely-delocalized, disordered metal through a program
of electrical transport, magnetic susceptibility, specific heat, neutron
scattering, and optical measurements. Temperature capabilities down to the
milliKelvin regime provide new diagnostics of localization and electron
interaction effects as well as simplifying the theoretical description of the
problem. Moreover, possible deviations from the usual Fermi-liquid behavior,
with different forms posited for the quantum and classical regimes, should be
revealed by high-resolution pressure studies of the transport and calorimetric
response. %%% A sharp change from a state where electrons can flow freely to one
where they are unable to move lies at the heart of many device applications.
This "metal-Insulator" transition can be driven by a number of external
parameters, including the application of pressure, the introduction of disorder,
and the manipulation of material characteristics. The research proposed here
seeks to explore the interaction between disorder, found in all real materials,
and control parameters such as changing electron density and internal chemical
pressure at the boundary between metal and insulator. Of prime interest are
transition metal oxides and sulfides, classes of materials whose electronic and
magnetic responses are acutely sen sitive to small changes in the control
parameters. Depending on the particular material and the nature of its
preparation, it may have potential as an electronic switch, a magnetic storage
device, or a high- temperature superconductor. ***