* 9507144
* Protein Phosphorylation as a Biophysical Switch:  NMR       Determination of Structural and Dynamic Responses to        Phosphorylation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Linda Nicholson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

This research addresses the biophysical basis of protein regulation by
reversible phosphorylation. High resolution multidimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) techniques will be employed to elucidate the structural and
dynamic aspects of protein phosphorylation in a model system. Two protein
fragments derived from chicken c-Src (Src) that contain key regulatory domains
will be studied to investigate the biophysical mechanisms responsible for
control in this system. Determination of the structure and dynamics of the first
fragment, composed of the Src- homology 3 (SH3) and Src-homology 2 (SH2)
domains, will serve a dual purpose: a) it will provide a foundation on which to
build more adva nced studies of larger fragments of Src, and b) it will
enableidentification of intramolecular interactions that may contribute to the
recently established role of the SH3 domain in stabilizing SH2/phosphopeptide
interactions. The second and larger fragment, which has an additional 80
residues that comprise the unique N-terminal region of Src, will be utilized to
investigate the structural and dynamic response of the protein to
phosphorylation. This fragment contains specific phosphorylation sites that are
known to regulate the tyrosine kinase activity of Src. The structure and
dynamics of this protein fragment in phosphorylated and unphosphorylated states
will be pursued using the now-standard multidimensional techniques. These
studies will reveal interactions that are disrupted and those that are formed by
phosphorylation, and will provide an atomic level view of the changes induced in
these common regulatory modules by this important covalent modification. %%%
Protein phosphorylation is known to be involved in the control of a diverse
array of biological processes, including metabolism, cell proliferation and
differentiation, membrane transport, gene expression, locomotion, memory, and
learning. However, the biophysical basis of regulation by phosphorylation is
clearly established for only two proteins, both of which exhibit different
mechanisms of control. Hence, high resolution structure determinations of a
model system in phosphorylated and unphosphorylated states will provide much
needed information that will aid in understanding of the atomic level events
responsible for this ubiquitous protein regulatory switch. Relatively small,
conserved protein domains, typified by the Src-homology 2 (SH2) and Src-homology
3 (SH3) domains, are found in a large number of signaling proteins and have been
shown to function as modular binding domains that can mediate both inter-and
intramolecular interactions. The Src protein, a cellular proto-oncoprotein and a
paradigm protein-tyrosine kinase, con tains both SH3 and SH2 domains as well as
several different regulatory phosphorylation sites. In Src, SH2 interactions
have been shown to be mediated by nearby SH3 domains and by phosphorylation of
specific Ser and The residues remotely located in the primary sequence. The
proposed research involves structural and dynamics studies of the Src regulatory
apparatus in phosphorylated and unphosphorylated forms, and will employ recently
developed high resolution multidimensional NMR spectroscopic techniques.
Overall, these studies will enable relationships between structure, dynamics and
function in a protein regulated by phosphoylation to be established, and will
have broad implications for numerous other proteins that utilize phosphorylation
as a biophysical switch.