* 9507503
* Comparative Experimental Studies in Avian Flight:           Mechanical Power Output, Neuromuscular Control, 3-D Flight  Kinematics, and Field Flight Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,12/31/2001
* Kenneth Dial, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 12/31/2001
* USD 324,500.00

9507503 Dial Flight is the most common form of animal locomotion and birds
represent one of nature's finest locomotor experiments. Recent studies are
providing new insights into the intricacies of the biomechanics, neuromuscular
control, and the range of behaviors associated with aerial locomotion. To
interpret more clearly internal and external mechanisms associated with avian
wing and tail movements during different modes of flight, Dr. Dial will employ
several recently developed techniques (e.g., sonomicrometry, miniature tendon
force-buckle recording, and 3-D infra-red, high-speed video motion analysis)
along with well-established methods (e.g., electromyography, strain gauge
implantation, high-speed 16mm cinematography) as birds fly within a variable-
speed wind tunnel and flight obstacle course. A number of separate projects are
planned. 1) To determine how force production from the principal locomotor
muscle (m. pectoralis) scales with body size, four species of birds (House
sparrows, Black-billed magpies, Common ravens, and Canada geese), spanning a
wide range of body sizes (25g to 4000g), will be implanted with strain gauges
and recorded during different modes of flight. Data from the two species will be
augmented with in vivo sonomicrometric recordings to obtain more reliable
measurements of pectoralis length changes during each wingbeat cycle, thus
permitting more accurate estimates of mechanical work generated by the wings. 2)
Tendon force buckle and electromyographic analyses will more accurately evaluate
force production and activity patterns of key flight muscles within the wings of
crows. 3) Strain records from wing skeletal elements and flight feathers of
pigeons will significantly improve the understanding of wing kinematics as well
as measure aerodynamic forces imposed on the flight apparatus. 4) Infra-red,
high-speed motion analyses will produce the first 3-dimensional records of wings
and tails of pigeons during maneuvering (asymmetrical) flight and of magpies d
uring wind tunnel (symmetrical) flight over a wide range of speeds. ***