* 9507660
* The Economic, Social, and Political Reorganization of Late  Prehistoric Pueblo Communities in the Silver Creek Area,    Arizona
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Barbara Mills, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 136,936.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Barbara Mills and her colleagues
will conduct two field seasons of archaeological research at sites located in
the Silver Creek region of Arizona. Archaeologists believe that this area marks
the location of significant and far-reaching changes during the late prehistoric
period in the American Southwest. There is strong evidence from settlement
pattern data to support the idea that large groups of peoples moved into the
region between 1000 and 1400 AD. The region therefore has the potential to shed
light on the causes and consequences of population reorganization, including the
processes of migration, aggregation, integration and dispersion. Relatively
little archaeological research however has been conducted, and Dr. Mills' work
will remedy this situation. Over the course of two field seasons she will
excavate three sites representing different time periods between the 11th and
14th centuries. She will collect ceramic and tree ring samples to refine
chronology. She will examine demographic trends and note changes in social and
economic organization. She will also compare and synthesize cultural and
paleoenvironmental data. The membership of small-scale agricultural societies
throughout the world is often fluid as individuals, households, groups of
households and even whole communities change residences. These moves vary in
their causes, the distances moved, their permanence and ultimately in their
effects. In some cases new residential sites are colonized through village
fissioning and connections are maintained with the original villages through
extension of existing social networks. In other cases, portions of the
population are incorporated into preexisting communities and social, political
and religious institutions established or extended to integrate the host and
migrant populations. In both cases, changes in integrative mechanisms may ensue.
Understanding changes in community organization, especially those processes
relating to community integration is a key to understanding wider economic,
social and political changes. Dr. Mills Silver Creek study provides an excellent
opportunity to study these processes over an extended period of time. This
research is important for several reasons. It will shed new light on the
prehistory of the United States and provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. Given the fluidity of populations in today's world, the work
will increase our understanding of how new social entities emerge and are
maintained.