* 9507376
* The Myosin Family of Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Margaret Titus, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

MCB 9507376 Margaret Titus The myosin family is rapidly expanding and currently
consists of nine distinct classes, based on phylogenetic comparisons. This
variety of myosins has raised interesting questions about the nature and extent
of the actin-based motors utilized by the cell to generate movements. The best
known classes of myosins, myosins I, II and V have been the subject of intense
study, however information regarding the in vivo role of other types of myosins
is lacking. The structural diversity in the myosin family suggests that each
class of myosin generates a unique form of actin-based motility. A systematic
approach to assessing the role of individual classes of myosins in generating
actin-based movements is required to explore this possibility. The goal of our
work is to explore the in vivo function of the different classes of myosin in a
single cell by gene targeting. Dictyostelium is the subject of our
investigations as undergoes a simple, yet elegant developmental program and
exhibits chemotaxis and motility similar to that observed in higher eukaryotic
cells. It is amenable to molecular genetic manipulation and cell biological
investigations. Five unconventional myosins have been previously identified in
this organism. A novel screen that combines physical mapping techniques with low
stringency hybridization has identified at least seven additional myosin (myo)
genes. Two of these, myoH and myoJ, appear to encode members of a new class of
unconventional myosin, based on preliminary phylogenetic analyses. These myosins
are expressed through the developmental cycle of Dictyostelium, suggesting that
they play roles in morphogenesis and development. The in vivo role of the myo H
and myoJ gene products, will be investigated using a combined approach that
encompasses both cell biological and molecular genetic techniques. The genes
will be fully cloned, sequenced, and used to generate fusion proteins. The
fusion proteins will then be used to obtain specific antibodies for
immunolocalization. Gene targeting studies will be carried out to generate
strains that do not express either myoH or myoJ, and the mutants carefully
analyzed for defects in various aspects of motility and development. Together,
these experiments will provide insights into the role of this potentially new
myosin family in generating different types of actin-based cellular movements
that are carried out during the Dictyostelium life cycle. Understanding the role
of myoH and myoJ gene products in movement carried out during development will
provide important information about how cells use their actomyosin cytoskeleton
to generate various movements. These potentially include, but are not limited
to, organelle movement, the anchoring of organelles, or cellular translocation.
%%% This project examine a class of molecules referred to as nonconventional
myosins. These molecules have only recently been discovered, and they do a
variety of types of work within the cell. They are essential for life and act in
cell motility and the movement of components within cells. This project will
result in a better understanding of these essential molecules. ***