* 9507476
* RUI:  Testing Einsteinian-Newtonian Theories In             Strong Gravitational Fields and At Galactic                 Distances
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Ernesto Esteban, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 05/31/1998
* USD 36,400.00

Two topics will be investigated in this research project. First, to gain a
physical insight of Einstein's general relativity (in strong gravitational
fields) Professor Esteban will study the bending of light, periastron shift, and
time delays near millisecond pulsars and rotating black holes. To this purpose
an alternative procedure to the standard methods found in the literature will be
developed. Neither spacetime curvature nor relativistic rotational effects will
be neglected. Secondly, he will investigate the physical implications of Weyl
gravity's linear term in the gravitational potentials of self-gravitating
ellipsoids and disks. This is important because in astrophysics, ellipsoids
often have been considered as models of galactic bars. To confront Weyl gravity
with observations and experiments he will study light bending and time delays by
using an exact exterior solution for a static, spherically symmetric gravitating
source in locally conformal invariant Weyl gravity. This solution is the analog
of the exterior Schwarzschild vacuum solution of Einstein's general relativity.
One important aim of this project is to involve physics and mathematics students
in undergraduate research experiences. This project will provide talented
students with the opportunity for planning, carrying out, and reporting
scientific research. By using advanced computational tools, they will develop
computing skills needed for their future advancement in science or engineering.