* 9507872
* Mapping and Characterization of Genes Controlling Ovarian   Function in Mice
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Jimmy Spearow, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9507872 Spearow Recent studies have discovered major genetic differences in the
control of reproduction, especially in ovarian responsiveness to hormones. Dr.
Spearow has found that the hormone-induced ovulation rate (HIOR) of one strain
of mice is six times higher than in a second genetic strain of mice.
Furthermore, the enzyme aromatase, responsible for generating the hormone, is 16
to 21 times higher in the second strain of mice. This enzyme converts androgens
into estrogens. He has found that genetic differences in these reproductive
traits segregate in crosses as though they are controlled by the action of a
small number of loci with major effects. The proposed studies will utilize mouse
genetic models to confirm and characterize the physiological mechanisms by which
genes on mouse chromosome 2 control major differences in ovarian response to
gonadotropins. These studies will also characterize and clone the genes which
control major genetic differences in ovarian function. Identifying genetic
markers for divergent hormone responsive genotypes, and determining the
physiological mechanisms through which these genes control differences in
ovarian function could aid in improving and controlling reproduction in a wide
range of mammalian species. ***