* 9507339
* Signalling in Plant Development Conference,                 September 27th-October 1, 1995 New York
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Venkatesan Sundaresan, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1996
* USD 4,000.00

9507339 Sundaresan The meeting on Signalling in Plant Development will be held
at the Cold Spring Harbor laboratory from September 27 to October 1, 1995. It
will be an open international meeting that will be devoted to recent advances
and discoveries at the interface of two swiftly progressing fields - signal
transduction mechanisms in plants, and the molecular biology of plant
development. The development of a higher plant is regulated by a multitude of
signals from within and without, that evoke both generalized and specific
biological responses, and elucidation of the mechanisms of signalling is vital
to understanding plant development. The emphasis of the forthcoming meeting is
on interpreting and integrating new finding on the mechanisms of signal
transduction within the context of plant development. The need for such a
meeting is evidenced by the rapid advances during the last few years, e.g.
cloning of regulators of photomorphogenesis, elucidation of the roles of calcium
and cGMP in the developmental response to light, cloning of regulators of
pollen-stigma interactions, cloning of genes that control flowering time, and
cloning of genes involved in pathogen recognition. The meeting will allow
presentation of recent results and methodologies in these different topics
within a common framework, in an atmosphere of face to face contact. In keeping
with the traditional format of Cold Spring Harbor meetings, the oral
presentations will be primarily on new unpublished finding. and particular
encouragement will be given to presentations by younger scientists. The areas to
be covered by the meeting are: 1) Germination, 2) Photomorphogenesis, 3)
Vegetative growth, 4) Flowering, 5) Pollination and fertilization, 5) Fruit
development and embryogenesis, 6) Altered developmental programs- environmental
effectors and 7) Altered developmental programs- biological effectors. ***