* 9507416
* Experimental Evolutionary Studies of Temperate Adaptation:  The Evolution of Bioenergetic and Growth Rate Responses of a Mesophilic Bacterium
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Albert Bennett, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 350,000.00

9507416 Changes in temperature have significant effects on the rates of
biochemical reactions. We know how short term changes in temperature affect the
growth rate, respiration and growth efficiency of microbes, but we know
relatively little about how these factors change during evolutionary adaptation
to change in temperature. This research will contrast the effects of temperature
on energetics and growth of ancestral strains of the bacterium Escherichia coli
with changes that occur during evolutionary adaptation of the bacteria. Multiple
lines of bacteria derived from a common stock will be cultured in new thermal
environments, including high, low, and variable temperature. For each line,
growth rate, respiration rate, and the efficiency with which the bacteria
convert food into new bacterial tissue will be determined. The research will
determine how adaptation to a particular thermal regime alters the ability of
the bacteria to grow and compete in other thermal environments. Replication of
selection experiments with multiple lines of bacteria will reveal the range of
variation in genetic responses to new thermal environments. This research will
increase our ability to predict the long term response of bacteria to
environmental variation, which is important because microbes are important
energy consumers and nutrient recyclers in natural ecosystems. It will identify
traits that confer adaptive advantages at different temperatures, and
demonstrate the impact of those adaptations on bioenergetics. The identification
of traits that increase growth efficiency at different temperatures will be of
potential value in commercial culture operations.