* 9507126
* Probing the Mechanism of Translocation
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Jacek Wower, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F EbA @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l ^ DbA ^ DbA F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh
+' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen jack cohen @ jSj6 @ e =
e j j j j j j j 4 1 e T ( 4 j 4 j j j j ~ j j j j . 9507126 Wower Translation in
Escherichia coli follows a universal mechanism. Proteins are synthesized on the
ribosome according to the information encoded in messenger RNA (mRNA). Transfer
RNA (tRNA) acts as an adaptor molecule that supplies activated amino acids and
decodes mRNA. Formation of the peptide bond is followed by translocation, a
process that shifts mRNA by one codon, displaces peptidyl tRNA from the A site
to the P site and transfers deacylated tRNA from the P site to the E site. An
ordered series of interactions between ribosomes, tRNA, mRNA and translational
factors is required during this process. Our knowledge about the ways
translational apparatus work is still limited, because the nature of the
interacti ons in the translocation process is not well understood. The molecular
mechanism of translocation of tRNA mRNA complexes through the ribosome is
evolutionarily conserved. In Escherichia coli, this process is mediated by
elongation factor G (EF G) while in eukaryotes, translocation is catalyzed by
elongation factor 2 (EF 2). Recently EF 2 has been linked to cancer and aging
process based on levels of EF 2 in normal and cancerous cells. Both EF G and EF
2 are thought to act as molecular switches regulated by their ribosome dependent
GTP hydrolysis activities. Evidence gathered during the last two decades
strongly suggest that EF G interactions with 23S rRNA and tRNA play an important
role in translocation. While EF G 23S rRNA interactions have been extensively
studied, nearly nothing is known about potential EF G tRNA interactions. The
main questions which will be addressed in this proposal are: (1) How are EF G
and tRNA arranged on the ribosome at different stages of translocation ? (2)
Which structural determinants within tRNA are recognized by EF-G ? To begin
answering these questions, thereby broadening our understanding of
translocation, the following experiments will be performed: (1) Transfer RNA
derivatives containing photoreactive nucleotides will be constructed using
recently developed recombinant RNA techniques. Photoreactive tRNA species will
be cross linked to EF G at various stages of translocation. As photolysis of
photoreactive nucleotides generates 'zero length' cross links, photoaffinity
labeling experiments will be used to identify the components of EF G and tRNA
that are in contact. (2) Cross linking experiments will be followed by chemical
footprinting of variants of native and unmodified tRNAs to determine which
structural features of tRNA are required for its recognition by EF G. Data
derived from the cross linking and chemical footprinting studies will be used to
initiate in vitro mutagenesis of EF G. This line of investigation will build a
foundation for future studies on amino acids in EF G which contribute to EF G
tRNA interaction. Data derived from cross linking studies, when incorporated
into the recently solved three dimensional structure of EF G, will provide the
first information on the mutual arrangement of EF G and tRNA on the Escherichia
coli ribosome during the elongation cycle of protein synthesis. Identification
of nucleotides and, in the future, amino acids involved in EF G tRNA
interactions will also further our insight into the mechanism of translocation
during protein synthesis in Escherichia coli. Given the considerable
conservation of the translational apparatus throughout evolution, this
information should lay the groundwork for better understanding of ribosomal
translocation in other organisms. %%% The molecular mechanism of translocation
of transfer RNA (tRNA) and messenger RNA (mRNA) through the ribosome is
evolutionarily conserved. In Escherichia coli, this process is promoted by
elongation factor G (EF-G) while in eukaryotes, translocation is catalyzed by
elongation factor 2 (EF-2). Recently EF-2 has been linked to cancer and the
aging process. Evidence gathered during the last two decades strongly indicate
that EF-G interactions with ribosomal RNA (23S rRNA) and tRNA play an important
role in translocation. While EF-G 23S rRNA interactions have been extensively
studied, nearly nothing is known about EF-G:tRNA interactions. Recombinant RNA
technology, cross-linking and genetic approaches will be used to answer two
questions: (1) How are EF-G and tRNA arranged on the ribosome? (2) Which
structural determinants within tRNA are recognized by EF-G? Results of these
studies will be used to initiate in vitro mutagenesis experiments designed to
identify amino acids which contribute to EF-G tRNA interactions. Data derived
from the proposed studies will provide the first information on the mutual
arrangement of EF-G and t