* 9507539
* Group Travel to Tenth International Nitrogen Fixation       Congress, St. Petersburg, Russia, May 28 to June 3, 1995
* BIO,IOS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* William Newton, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Hans J. Bohnert
* 04/30/1996
* USD 23,000.00

9507539 Newton The Tenth International Congress on Nitrogen Fixation will be
held in St. Petersburg, Russia from May 28 to June 3, 1995. Nitrogen fixation is
one of the most important subject areas relating to the support of life on Earth
and encompasses concerns related to natural resource conservation, particularly
fossil fuels, plant-microbe signalling and interaction, regulatory mechanisms,
nutrition, food production, etc. This Congress is the single most important
meeting for the scientific field. Participants from over 30 different countries
are expected to attend. The topics to be discussed will include virtually all
aspects of biological and non-biological nitrogen fixation, including the
following major symposia: I Chemistry and Biochemistry of Nitrogenase II
Genetics and Regulation of Nitrogen Fixation III Signalling Processes in Plant-
Microbe Interactions IV Structure and Evolution of the Nodule Bacterial Genome V
Plant Response in Symbiosis VI Carbon, Nitrogen, and Oxygen Metabolism VII
Agricultural and Ecological Aspect of Nitrogen Fixation Of the 77 scientists who
have been invited to participate in the Congress, 20 are from the United States.
The award will support travel for approximately 10 graduate students who are the
recipient of the Russian grants to cover in-Russia expenses. It will also be
used to support the travel of younger U.S. scientists, women and minorities who
attend the Congress.