* 9507513
* Post-transcriptional Control of Immunoglobulin Expression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Martha Peterson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9507513 Peterson Regulated transcriptional termination and RNA processing of the
immunoglobulin (Ig) heavy chain ( gene will be examined during B cell
development. The long-term goal of this research is to better understand the
general mechanisms governing these events as well as to determine the basis for
the developmentally regulated changes that occur during B cell maturation. The
regulated alternative processing of a ( precursor RNA to form (s and (m mRNA
does not require any Ig gene-specific sequences. Instead, the important feature
of this gene is that it contains signals for competing splice and cleavage-
polyadenylation reactions. Thus, the amount or activity of a general factor(s)
involved in these two processes must be altered during B cell maturation. It
will be determined whether splicing is regulated during B cell maturation by
analyzing alternative splice choices made in the absence of a poly(A) site in B
cells as compared to plasma cells. An in vitro splicing/polyadenylation system
that will mimic in vivo ( gene characteristics will be examined. Successfully
establishing an in vitro system to study ( regulation would provide the basis
for many future experiments. The expression of the known general RNA processing
regulators in B cells and plasma cells will be examined to identify factors that
potentially mediate the regulation; any whose expression correlates with (
processing changes will be studied further by over-expression in B cells and/or
plasma cells. These experiments, taken together, will provide a more complete
picture of ( processing regulation and should begin to identify the trans-acting
RNA processing components that are altered during B cell maturation. To
investigate transcriptional termination and its regulation, the transcription of
intact and modified ( genes, stably introduced into plasma cell and B cell
lines, will be analyzed by nuclear run-on experiments to identify their
termination regions. Gene modifications will be designed to determine the
contributio n that the two ( poly(A) sites, the poly(A) site strength, and the
downstream sequences within the termination region make to the overall
termination process. This study, by comparing normal and modified genes in a
single cell type will provide information about the general process of
termination and, by comparing the modified genes in both B cells and plasma
cells, will examine the basis for regulatory changes in this process. %%%
Regulated transcriptional termination and RNA processing of the immunoglobulin
(Ig) heavy chain ( gene will be examined during B cell development. The long-
term goal of this research is to better understand the general mechanisms
governing these events as well as to determine the basis for the developmentally
regulated changes that occur during B cell maturation. ***