* 9507972
* CAREER:  Brain Aromatase Cytochrome P-450 and CNS           Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Edwin Lephart, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 06/30/2001
* USD 521,300.00

IBN-9507972 Lephart, Edwin D. The sex steroid hormones can be transformed from
one class to another by certain enzymes. The conversion of androgens (e.g.
testosterone) to estrogens by an enzyme known as aromatase cytochrome P450 plays
an important role in influencing the development of the central nervous system.
The dramatic impact of estrogen formation via the aromatase enzyme is
responsible for structural differences between males and females in specific
brain regions. These structural differences determine how the central nervous
system will function along male versus female patterns for hormone secretion and
the regulation of sexual behavior. This study will determine how brain estrogen
biosynthesis is controlled by the aromatase gene. This will be accomplished by
utilizing various molecular biological techniques. The goal of these studies is
to determine the molecular basis of brain aromatase regulation by determining
the regulatory elements governing how the aromatase gene is activated. To
accomplish this goal, Dr. Lephart will characterize the regulatory sequences
upstream of the start site of transcription for the aromatase gene and whether
these elements change during development. The regulation of aromatase gene
expression by androgen will be investigated and the message in brain encoding
this critical enzyme will also be studied. The outcome of these studies will
allow the development of a picture about how the proteins in the brain control
the expression of enyzmes critical for the development of essential centers in
the brain.