* 9507109
* p35, The Neural-specific Regulatory Subunit of the cdk5     Kinase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Li-Huei Tsai, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1999
* USD 298,000.00

9507109 Tsai The cell division cycle is mainly regulated by a cascade of protein
phosphorylation and dephosphorylation events. In higher eukaryotes, a family of
cyclin-dependent kinases (cdks) are known to participate in the protein
phosphorylation cascade that is required for the progression of cells through
the cell division cycle. A common feature of these kinases is their requirement
for a positive regulatory subunit named cyclin. One of these kinases, cdk5,
shares a high degree of sequence homology to cdc2 and cdk2, however, its
putative cell cycle function has yet to be determined. In search for a function
of cdk5 we and others have isolated a regulatory partner of cdk5 known as p35.
The primary sequence of p35 shares no homology to other isolated proteins
including cyclins. During embryonic development, p35 is only expressed in post-
mitotic neuronal cells of the central nervous system (CNS) but not in
proliferating cells. Thus, p35 represents a novel cdk regulator that renders
cdk5 active only in post-mitotic neurons, Appearance of the cdk5/p35 kinase
activity correlates with the advancing differentiated phenotype of neurons in
developing rodent neocortex and primary cell cultures derived from the embryonic
forebrain. In adult animals, p35 is expressed at a high level only in certain
regions of the forebrain including CA1 and CA3 of the hippocampus, the dentate
gyrus and amygdala. These observations suggest a role of the cdk5/p35 kinase in
neuronal differentiation/development and possibly for normal functioning of
neurons in certain regions of the adult brain. The aim of this research proposal
is to understand the regulation of the cdk5/p35 kinase and to get better insight
into the biology of the p35 molecule. It has been shown that p35 is the only
element required for activation of cdk5 kinase activity, therefore, the cdk5/p35
kinase activity may be regulated by the synthesis and degradation of p35.
Alternatively, a negative regulator may be required to monitor the activity of
the cdk5/p35 kinase. Preliminary results indicated the presence of an inhibitory
activity in cell lysates. Thus, conventional protein purification procedures
will be used to identify this activity. Primary cultures from embryonic as well
as newborn rat cerebral cortices will be used to study the regulation of the p35
subunit in vivo. These cultures have been shown to express p35 and display
active cdk5/p35 kinase. Thus, the half-life and the subcellular localization of
p35 will be analyzed in these cells. Immunoprecipitations from the cortical
cultures using p35 antibodies indicated the existence of multiple cellular
proteins associated with p35. These proteins will be purified via their affinity
for p35 and protein microsequencing will be used to determine their identify.
This will help elucidating the in vivo function of p35. While the regulation of
cell division has been explored extensively at the molecular level, the
mechanism of cell differentiation is relatively less understood. To date, the
cdk protein kinase family is known for their roles in cell cycle regulation,
this research proposal will add another dimension to our understanding of the
role of the cdks in a different biological aspect, namely cell differentiation.
Studying the biology of the cdk5/p35 kinase might also help learning the
differentiation process of neurons and possibly, how the cell fate between cell
proliferation and differentiation might be determined by the interplay among
different cdks and their regulators. %%% This project examines a protein which
appears only in differentiating nerve cells. The protein interacts with a cell
cycle regulatory protein which normally stimulates cell division. However, this
protein appears in large quantities only in forming nerve cells. Its appearance
suggests that it may play an important role inhibiting the cell cycle as nerve
cells form. Investigation of this novel protein is likely to shed light on the
function of this unique cell cycle protein. * **