* 9507962
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Catalytic Decomposition  of Nitric Oxide with Metal-Containing Molecular Sieves and  Pillared Clays
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Larry Kevan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/2000
* USD 34,000.00

9507962 Kevan This award provides funds to permit Dr. Larry Kevan, Department
of Chemistry, University of Houston, to pursue with Professor Chong Shik Chin,
Department of Chemistry, Sogang University, Korea, for 36 months, a program of
cooperative research on the catalytic decomposition of nitric oxide (NO) with
improved metal-containing molecular sieves and pillared clays. The initial
objective is to synthesize, characterize, and catalytically evaluate zeolite-
based catalysts with incorporated metal ions for use in the catalytic
decomposition of NO. The de-NOx catalytic activity then will be assessed as a
function of different methods of metal ion introduction, including impregnation,
ion-exchange in aqueous solution, ion- exchange by solid state reaction, and
chemical vapor deposition. The third objective is to incorporate metal ions of
copper, rhodium, iridium, and others into alumina-pillared hectorite clays and
to evaluate these materials for de-NOx activity. Zeolites are aluminosilicates
so bonded as to form molecular-sized cages and channels which give rise to the
term "molecular sieves." The aluminosilicate framework has a net negative charge
which is balanced by exchangeable cations. Zeolites are used extensively for
various catalytic reactions such as cracking, hydrocracking, and isomerization.
The PI and his Korean collaborator will investigate the effectiveness of various
zeolites and smectic clays in removing from automobile exhaust nitrogen oxides,
major contributors to air pollution and acid rain. If successful, their zeolite-
based and smectic clay-based catalysts might replace the expensive platinum,
rhodium, and palladium catalysts presently in use. The PI and his Korean
collaborator are highly respected researchers who have made a number of
significant contributions in the field of this proposal. This project is
relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which
seeks to increase the level of cooperation bet ween U.S. and Korean scientists
and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean
participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). This project adds an international cooperative dimension to
the PI's ongoing research under NSF Grant No. CHE-9420766 and provides an
international research experience to a U.S. graduate student. ***