* 9507585
* Dissertation Research:  Blade Production in the Early       Levantine Mousterian
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Anthony Marks, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,912.00

Marks/Monigal Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Ms. Katherine Monigal
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will study collections of
lithic materials which have been excavated from Mousterian sites in Israel and
are stored in museums in both the United States and Israel. The lithics are all
attributable to an archaeological industry termed "Tabun-D"; are all older than
40,000 years and may span a period of up to 200,000 years. The sites themselves
are located in a number of environmental regions. Ms. Monigal will describe and
measure a large number of attributes on selected pieces and with these data will
reconstruct the technology used to make stone tools. Archaeologists
traditionally focus on the final products which are produced and not on the
process used to reach this end. With the data collected, Ms. Monigal will then
compare Tabun-D sites across time and environmental subzone, attempt to
determine whether technological data support the incorporation of these sites
into a single cultural tradition and try to explain the causes of variation
which may be observed. Based on work in Europe, archaeologists have argued that
the production of certain stone tool types, such as blades, is tightly
associated with anatomically modern humans. In this region of the world, the
emergence of blade producing industries dates to about 40,000 years ago.
However, as Ms. Monigal and others have noted, blades appear much earlier in
sites in the Near East and a number of assemblages support this conclusion.
Using this single characteristic, archaeologists have grouped these occurrences
under the heading "Tabun-D." However it is very unclear what this designation
means in social terms and whether the makers of this industry belonged to the
same group or tradition. Until this is done, it is not possible to ask whether
this data is relevant to questions such as the emergence of anatomically modern
humans. Through her study of technological process, Ms. Mo nigal will be able to
address this question in an original way. This research is important for several
reasons. It will produce data of interest to many archaeologists. It will
providfe insight into the emergence of modern humans and help to train a
promising young scientist.