* 9507018
* Stopped-Flow and 18O Exchange Studies of Partial Reactions  in Sodium Pump Catalysis and Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Larry Faller, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 147,581.00

9507018 Faller Active, or primary, transport is arguably one of the most
important unsolved problems remaining in biology. In active transport, an enzyme
couples the catalyzed release of energy from a storage molecule to the movement
of ions across a membrane against a concentration gradient. In mammals the
storage molecule is usually adenosine 5'-triphosphate ATP. Release of the energy
iq accelerated by transferring a phosphate group from ATP to the enzyme before
transferring it to water, so pumps of this type are called P-type ion motive
ATPases. The three principle members of the group are named for the ion they
transport. The proton pump acidifies the stomach as part of the digestive
process, and its malfunction is one immediate cause of ulcers. The calcium pump
relaxes muscles by removing calcium ions from the space around the contractile
apparatus in muscle cells. The sodium pump maintains osmotic balance by pumping
sodium ions out of cells in exchange for potassium ions and is found in nearly
all cells. The sodium gradient generated by the primary transporter is then used
by secondary transporters to move metabolites like sugar into cells. The sodium
gradient is also used to excite nerve and muscle cells. The sodium pump is the
target of the drug digitalis, a primary therapy in congestive heart failure. The
basic research problem is to explain how the energy released by splitting ATP is
used to pump ions and how the ions are physically translocated. The working
hypothesis in the active transport field is that the enzyme undergoes a cycle of
conformational changes. What is not known are the molecular details of these
changes in three dimensional shape. For example, how do transported ions trigger
the molecular rearrangement and how extensive is it? The conformational change
il unphosphorylated sodium pump can be observed directly by attaching
fluorescent reporter groups. The reaction is fast, so it must be initiated by
mechanically mixing labeled pump with ions within a few millise conds in what is
called a stopped-flow machine. In the preceding grant period it was shown that
two potassium ions must bind to the pump before, the conformational change
occurs. The hypothesis to be tested in this grant period is that the transported
ions control the conformational change by randomly binding to identical and
independent sites instead of anticooperatively to an ion well. A second
objective is to learn how big the change in shape is by measuring how much the
distance between two points on the molecule changes. This will be done by
simultaneously attaching two reporter groups to the pump and measuring the
transfer of fluorescence energy between them. A third objective is to test
theories about the number of intermediate conformations of phosphorylated enzyme
and their role in catalysis and transport. This will be done by synthesizing ATP
and inorganic phosphate containing a stable isotope of oxygen. When the
phosphoenzyme is formed and hydrolyzed, the stable isotope is replaced by oxygen
atoms from water. The rate of isotope exchange and the distribution of stable
isotope in the product can be measured by mass spectrometry. The isotopomer
distribution depends on the relative probability of two reaction steps
occurring, so if it changes with sodium concentration, for example, it means
that sodium changes the mechanism of the reaction. A fourth objective is to
exploit the greater sensitivity and information content of isotope exchange
measurements to learn how changing individual amino acids in the pump by genetic
engineering affects the molecule's function. Conformational changes in proteins
are dynamic events that cannot be completely understood by even the most
sensitive static methods for structural determination. How much can be learned
from genetically engineering proteins depends on the sensitivity of assays
available to assess the effect of amino acid substitutions on function.
Therefore, the research that is proposed will also advance studies of other
biological molecules that function by changing their shape. It will provide
postdoctoral students with training in rapid mixing and stable isotope exchange
techniques. %%% The sodium pump maintains osmotic balance by pumping sodium ions
out of cells in exchange for potassium ions and is found in nearly all mammalian
cells. The sodium gradient is then used by secondary transporters to move
metabolites into cells. The basic research problem is to explain how the energy
released by splitting an energy storage molecule is used to pump ions and how
ions are physically translocated. The working hypothesis is that the enzyme
undergoes a cycle of conformational changes. What is not known are the molecular
details. One hypothesis to be tested by rapid reaction methods is that the
transported ions control the conformational change by randomly binding to
identical and independent sites. A second objective is to learn how big the
change in shape is by fluorescence energy transfer measurements of the distance
change between two points on the molecule. A third objective is to test theories
about the number of intermediate conformations of phosphorylated enzyme by
measuring stable oxygen isotope exchange. A fourth objective is to exploit the
greater sensitivity and information content of isotope exchange measurements to
learn how changing individual amino acids in the pump by genetic engineering
affects the molecule's function. ***