* 9507491
* RUI: Antioxidant Defenses of Legume Root Nodules
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1999
* David Dalton, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1999
* USD 307,645.00

9507491 Dalton The proposed work deals with the relation between biological
nitrogen fixation and defenses against active forms of oxygen such as hydrogen
peroxide and superoxide. Nitrogen- fixing systems, such as legume root nodules
and cyanobacteria, are at high risk from active (partially reduced) forms of
oxygen due to the strong reducing conditions required to reduce dinitrogen to
ammonia. A major source of free radicals in nodules is leghemoglobin, an
extremely abundant protein in nodues with the unfortunate tendency to autoxidize
and release superoxide and hydrogen peroxide. Defense against active oxygen in
legume nodules and in some cyanobacteria is provided by a series of coupled
reduction-oxidation reactions involving ascorbate peroxidase,
monodehydroascorbate reductase, dehydroascorbate reductase, and glutathione
reductase. This pathway effectively removes hydrogen peroide from the cytosol. A
major objective of this work is to determine the extent to which ascorbate-
glutathione pathway is essential for the process of nitrogen fixation. This will
be examined by constructing transgenic plants that are antisense for ascorbate
peroxidase. Nodules of these plants will be examined on molecular and
physiological levels to determine the effects of impaired peroxide scavenging.
In addition, an in vitro system containing functional bacteroids, leghemoglobin
and the components of the ascorbate- glutathione pathway will be constructed.
Criticality of this pathway will be investigated by examining the consequences
of omission of various components such as ascorbate, glutathione or the
individual enzymes. The role of the ascorbate-glutathione pathway in
cyanobacteria cultured under various nitrogen and light regimes will also be
examined in hopes of developing a flexible prokaryotic system for genetic
manipulations. Finally, nodule oximetry will be used to investigate the role of
the ascorbate- gluthathione pathway vis-a-vis the variable oxygen diffusi on
barrier in antisense and wild type legume root nodules. Since nitrogen fixation
is oxygen-limited, an increased understanding of oxygen defense processes could
facilitate long range goals of improving nitrogen fixation by increasing the
oxygen supply.