* 9507241
* Protein DNA Interactions Probed by UV Resonance Raman       Spectroscopy
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2001
* Ishita Mukerji, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/2001
* USD 350,000.00

9507241 Mukerji This research addresses molecular recognition and specificity in
genetic regulatory processes which are mediated by protein binding, using a
combination of spectroscopic and biochemical approaches. An understanding of
these processes is gained by directly studying the molecular contacts defining
the protein-nucleotide interface, using UV resonance Raman (UVRR) spectroscopy.
This spectroscopic technique investigates the sequence specificity of the
protein-DNA interaction by monitoring the H-bond pairings of nucleotide
exocyclic amino and carbonyl groups. Additionally, the Raman effect is enhanced
by tuning into an absorption band; therefore, different regions of the binary
complex can be probed by varying the excitation wavelength. Thus, in addition to
identifying the contacts which confer specificity to the binding site, UVRR
spectroscopy also monitors conformational changes in both the protein and DNA.
Investigations are conducted on two proteins, HU and Integration Host
Factor(IHF), both members of a class of prokaryotic histone- like proteins.
These proteins facilitate the binding and action of regulatory proteins by
binding to the minor groove and bending the DNA. The majority of previously
characterized protein-nucleic acid interactions have typically involved direct
contact between the protein -helix and the major groove. In HU and IHF, binding
and recognition occurs between -strands and the minor groove, representative of
a different class of interaction. To date very few crystal structures exist for
this type of protein-DNA interaction and this research provides a mechanism for
identifying the factors which confer specificity and stability to the nucleosome
complex. %%% Understanding the growth and development of cells centers on an
understanding of the factors that regulate growth. At the most basic level this
involves knowing how genes work and the factors that cause them to "turn on or
turn off." In this research the mec hanism of regulation is studied by examining
the interface between genetic regulatory proteins and the gene or the DNA. These
proteins bind to the gene and either promote or repress its function. To
understand how these proteins function, it is important to know in detail how
they interact with DNA. A laser spectroscopic technique, UV resonance Raman
spectroscopy, is used to investigate the interface between the proteins and the
DNA. This method monitors the internal vibrations of molecules, which are a
sensitive measure of the structure and bonding of a molecule. Using this
technique, different parts of the protein or the DNA can be selectively
examined, thereby allowing direct investigation of the important regions and
contact points. These experiments probe the complex formed between regulatory
proteins and genes and contribute towards understanding how genetic function is
regulated in the cell. ***