* 9507082
* A Molecular and Genetic Analysis of Apical Dominance
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Carolyn Napoli, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1998
* USD 259,981.00

9507082 Napoli A contributing factor to the enormous diversity observed for
plant form is the outgrowth of lateral buds, and the subsequent formation of a
characteristic shoot system. This proposal is a renewal of previous funding
supporting a genetic analysis of axillary branching and apical dominance.
Previous work demonstrated that sufficient genetic diversity can be induced
through mutagenesis in order to make a genetic study of axillary branching
possible. Three genetic loci have been identified in Petunia hybrida that
control the degree of axillary branching. The recessive alleles condition the
phenotypic expression of increased branching potential or decreased apical
dominance (dad). The following objectives will be pursued: 1) continued
developmental and physiological characterization of dad1 and dad3 mutants, 2)
genetic studies to isolate second site suppressors of dad1 and dad3, along with
the genetic characterization of suppressor mutants, 3) double mutant and triple
mutant analysis employing dad mutants and increased apical dominance mutants,
and 4) transposon tagging to clone the dad1 gene. A transposon tagging system
using the maize element Dissociation (Ds) has been developed in this laboratory
for an inbred genetic line of P. hybrida. The Davis collection contains 159
plants containing independent Ds donor loci. Ds can be transactivated to excise
from donor sites at a high frequency in F1 progeny resulting from a cross to
provide active transposase from Activator (Ac). Dr. Napoli has analyzed 51 of
the Ds donor loci and have demonstrated the occurrence of pre-meiotic events
giving rise to germinal excision events. Two donor Ds loci have been mapped to
approximately 2.8cM of the dad1 gene. A test cross has been initiated to tag and
clone the dad1 gene. ***