* 9507992
* Bone Phosphate Isotopic Patterns of Modern and Extinct      Terrestrial Vertebrates
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* William Showers, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1998
* USD 169,455.00

Barrick 9507992 The question of whether dinosaurs lacked effective temperature
control and were heterotherms or were endothermic homeotherms has important
implications for their life histories, evolution, rise to dominance in
terrestrial ecosystems, and eventual extinction. A great deal of evidence has
been amassed regarding dinosaur endothermy which includes brain size, feeding
mechanics, paleobiogeography, posture and gait, behaviors, bone histology and
predator/prey relationships (Carroll, 1988; Weishample et al., 1990). These
studies have changed the general perception of dinosaurs and they are now
thought of as active animals, though considered to be ectothermic or mass
homeotherms (Ostrom, 1980). During the initial phase of funding (EAR91-06660),
we investigated the application of a new high precision 18O isotopic technique
for the analysis of bone phosphate. By using the isotopic difference between
core body and extremities and the phosphate paleotemperature equation, realtive
body temperature differences can be calculated to determine if an fossil animal
was a heterotherm or homeotherm. Of the 13 species of dinosaurs analyzed, all
appear to be homeotherms with one Jurassic species exhibiting regional
heterothermy. These homeothermic bone isotope patterns cannot be ascribed to
diagenetic alteration, because none of the specimens have isotopic equilibrium
between the co-existing phases of bone phosphate with structural carbonate or
calcite cements (co-existing phase test). This proposal seeks funds to expand
our modern bone isotope data base by working with the NCSU School of Veterinary
Medicine on 5 modern target species. The species will also propose to expand our
fossil data base to complete our survey of different dinosaur clades, and also
to search for the origins of homeothermy in therapsids and in a Triassic
assemblage from Argentina.