* 9507672
* Dissertation Research:  Ethnic Identity Formation in a      Mixed Heritage Population
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Carol Smith, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 08/31/1996
* USD 12,000.00

This dissertation project involves the research of a cultural anthropology
student from the University of California-Davis. The project involves
ethnographic interviews with a group of mixed-heritage Cherokee Native Americans
in Oklahoma. The student will administer a demographic survey to about 300
Cherokee tribal members in Tulsa and in Tahlequah, the political center of the
Cherokee nation. Then a sample of pictures of mixed-race faces blending `white`,
`black` and `red` phenotypes, along with brief hypothetical biographies will be
used as stimuli for in-depth interviews to probe for biases and decision rules
used by Cherokee to attribute Indian and non-Indian identity. In addition the
student will collect oral histories from traditional community leaders, study
published media about Cherokee identity and relations with `mixed-bloods`, and
will conduct at least 50 open-ended, in-depth interviews with different sub-
types of Cherokee identities on mixed heritage identity formation. This research
is important because it will clarify the issues seen by Native Americans in
attributing identity as tribal members. In a society where the national
government insists on clear criteria for inclusion into Native populations, but
where the lived history and genealogy of individuals is extremely diverse, the
advance in understanding of how different types of people use racial and ethnic
attributions will be valuable information for understanding how and why people
react to policies.