* 9507189
* Membrane Dynamics as a Control of Chemical Processes in     Bacterial Adaptation
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Rawle Hollingsworth, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 279,999.00

9507189 Bacteria and other microorganisms are surrounded by a thin molecular
skin or membrane across which they interact with the external environment. The
molecular structure of this membrane adapts dynamically to allow the organism to
survive in the particular environment. Information about the organism's
environment is transmitted via components of this membrane known as lipids.
These lipids are constantly changing in structure in response to the
environment. Understanding this capacity for dynamic adaptive change and the
nature of the actual changes themselves constitute the central foci of this
research. The structural modifications that occur in the membrane during
adaptive change are directed by enzymes that, in addition to functioning under
extremely adverse conditions, have activities that are regulated by the actual
conditions themselves. This constitutes an important molecular feed-back
phenomenon that is critical to our understanding of adaptation. The research
will use spectroscopic and chromatographic techniques to determine the changes
in fatty acid structure and molecular cross-linking that occur in bacterial
membranes during adaptation to extreme conditions. The ability of bacteria to
adapt to extremes of temperature, pressure, acidity and the presence of organic
solvents and other chemical species is important because of their potential
utility as biocatalysts, bioremediation agents or to fix gases such as nitrogen
or carbon dioxide. Better understanding of the critical features that determine
this adaptability will improve our ability to use it to human advantage.