* 9507509
* Genetic Determinants of the Neurospora crassa Life Cycle
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Chuck Staben, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 315,000.00

9507509 Staben The goal of this research is to determine the molecular basis of
the mating type-specific responses in the Ascomycete fungus, Neurospora crassa.
The N. crassa mating type locus regulates critical aspects of fungal development
and sexual reproduction that are widely conserved in fungi. This research
focuses upon the biochemical and biological functions of the mating type
polypeptides, particularly the MT a-l polypeptide encoded by the mt a idiomorph
of the mating type locus. The MT a-1 polypeptide appears to be the only product
of the mt a idiomorph essential to determine a mating type. This polypeptide
binds specific DNA sequences. It is proposed that MT a-l regulates the
transcriptional activity of the DNA segments that it binds. In addition, MT a-l
has separable properties essential for its vegetative incompatibility function.
The biochemical functions of MT a-1 in both mating and vegetative
incompatibility are likely to be modulated after mating or after heterokaryon
formation by interaction with A-specific products. At least one of these
polypeptides, MT A-3, binds to DNA fragments that also bind MT a-1 in vitro. The
proposed research will determine whether MT a-l directly interacts with products
of the mt A idiomorph, whether these interactions affect DNA binding by MT a-l,
and whether such interactions have biological consequences. This research will
involve molecular genetic and biochemical characterization of the functions of
MT a-l and its interactions with other developmental regulators in vegetative
incompatibility and mating responses. The research will involve the creation of
novel genetic tools including libraries of Neurospora genomic or cDNA suitable
for yeast-based two-hybrid screens for interacting gene products. MT a-1 is a
member of an important class of DNA binding proteins and developmental
regulators, the HMG box proteins. MT a-l, unlike many members of this family, is
amenable to genetic analysis. These studies will also yield valuable insi ghts
into fundamental aspects of developmental biology of filamentous fungi like
Neurospora. %%% The filamentous ascomycetes include important animal and plant
pathogenic fungi. In this project the investigator will study the mating system
of one such fungus, Neurospora crassa. His work will further our understanding
of what signals control certain mating proteins and how these proteins, in turn,
lead to the developmental consequences of mating. The insights into mating may
be crucial in applied concerns such as control of infection as well as to
understanding basic biological phenomena, such as how control of mating may
relate to species barriers and to speciation mechanisms within the ascomycetes.
*** ??