* 9507681
* Sugar-Modulated Expression and Developmental Control of     Genes for Sucrose Metabolism
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Karen Koch, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9507681 Koch Adaptive plasticity of form is one of the most remarkable features
of multicelled plants. At least one contributor to this flexibility appears to
be the sensitivity of specific plant genes to sugar levels (ie. photosynthate
availability). Among these are the genes for sucrose metabolizing enzymes.
Import of translocated sucrose by growing organs can be strongly affected by the
capacity for sucrose metabolism, which is catalyzed by only two known pathways
in plant (invertase and the reversible sucrose synthase reaction). Under
previous NSF grant, Dr. Koch has demonstrated that genes encoding both these
enzymes in maize are carbohydrate-responsive, providing a potential mechanism
for coarse adjustment of capacity for sucrose use relative to its overall
availability. In addition, the newly cloned isozyme genes for invertase exhibit
a differential carbohydrate responsiveness with surprising similarity to that
observed among isozyme genes of sucrose synthase. In this project, Dr. Koch will
address the significance of these developments using a combined molecular,
genetic and physiological approach. Probes for an invertase gene family
(putatively soluble) provide an opportunity to address the relationship between
sugar-responsive gene expression and the widespread role of soluble invertases
in initial growth by newly expanding sink tissues.