* 9507255
* Studies of the Folding of Thioredoxin by Fragment           Complementation on the Development of New Tools to Improve  the Understanding of Biomolecular Structure and Function
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Maria Luisa Tasayco, CUNY City University of New York
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/1999
* USD 330,000.00

9507255 Tasayco The goal of the research is to establish the principles
underlying the folding of -sheets. The approach chosen is to study the
structure, stability, dynamics and folding of a family of protein fragments. It
is proposed to dissect E. coli thioredoxin, a well- characterized small
monomeric protein with a mixed -structure, into fragments. They will be
generated using tools of biochemistry, chemistry and molecular biology. These
fragments will be characterized using a combination of biochemical and
biophysical tools with increasing level of structural detail. Circular dichroism
in the far and near UV, fluorescence, multidimensional nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy and computer modeling will also be used. The educational
aspect of this proposal aims to complement the lectures of the standard one-
semester Physical Chemistry course for Biochemistry majors using the Inverse
Prediction Approach, which consists of building a physical 3D-model of a
macromolecular and using it to predict its biophysical properties. %%% The
ability to correlate structural changes with ahanges in the biological function
holds the key to the understanding of the structure-function relationship of
biological macromolecules. However, protein structures are not established at
the same pace at which new amino acid sequence are generated. Thus solving the
"protein folding problem," that is, predicting the three dimensional structure
of a protein based solely on its primary sequence, has become an area of intense
research. Much progress has been made in the understanding of the principles
behind the formation of one kind of structure commonly found in proteins, the
-helix. However, little is known about the formation of -sheets, another equally
important structural component. This research will compare the structure,
stability and folding of the fragments of thioredoxin and their association
products with those of the original protein to elucidate the folding of the
still little understood -sheets. ***