* 9507786
* The Molecular Organization of Chromosome I:  Control        of Meiotic Recombination
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* David Kaback, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 360,000.00

9507786 Kaback During meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair, undergo
recombination and then segregate from each other. Reciprocal recombination
(crossing over) is required for proper pairing and segregation. However, the
mechanisms that control recombination and insure that all homologues crossover
with each other are not understood. Chromosome I is the smallest Saccharomyces
cerevisiae chromosome and contains a DNA molecule that is only 231 kb. This
chromosome has been studied extensively and much is known about its meiotic
behavior. Recombination rates were mapped over its entire length and were found
to be 3-4 fold lower within 20 kb of the centromere and both telomeres. In
addition, several recombination "hot spots" were found to correspond to meiotic
double-strand break sites believed to be involved in initiating meiotic
recombination. Most important, these studies revealed that small yeast
chromosomes had higher reciprocal recombination rates than large yeast
chromosomes, an observation that appears to be true in other organisms including
humans. High recombination rates were found over most of the physical length of
these small chromosomes and appear to be necessary to insure that small
chromosomes crossover during meiosis. The investigator discovered that high
rates of recombination on small chromosomes were due to a global control
mechanism that regulated recombination rates by responding directly to
chromosome size. This mechanism was investigated and found to be closely linked
to chiasma (crossover) interference. Indeed, the level of chiasma interference
was proportional to a function of the chromosome size. Chiasma interference is
believed to regulate reciprocal recombination by inhibiting further crossing
over in regions that have already recombined. Its mechanism is unknown but may
involve the synaptonemal complex. To better understand the mechanisms that
control recombination and insure that all chromosomes crossover with their
homologues, the investigator will study how chias ma interference responds
directly to chromosome size. He has proposed a model for this control and
experiments to test the model. The model predicts that, on average, large
chromosomes crossover earlier. As a result, more time is available for
interference to occur. Accordingly, on average, single crossovers will affect
more DNA on larger chromosomes. This prediction will be tested by measuring the
average length of interference tracts on well-marked constructs containing small
and large copies of chromosome I. Finally, he will continue two studies on cis
acting elements that control recombination. A 50 kb functional chromosome I
fragment that segregates from its homologue with a high degree of fidelity has
been isolated. This minichromosome recombines at very high rates and is believed
to contain only a single meiotic double-strand break site. He will investigate
this construct and use it to critically test the hypothesis that meiotic double-
strand break sites are required for proper meiotic pairing and recombination. He
will also complete studies that appear to show that telomeres inhibit
recombination in subtelomeric regions. The zone of telomeric inhibition will be
measured. He will also determine if the SIR3 gene, which is involved in
telomeric repression of gene expression, is also involved in suppressing meiotic
recombination. In total, these studies will further our understanding of how
recombination is controlled so that homologous chromosomes pair and segregate
properly during meiosis. %%% For sexual reproduction, cells which have two
copies of each chromosome (diploid cells) must give rise to cells which have
only one copy of each chromosome (haploid cells). This process is called
meiosis. During meiosis a diploid nucleus normally undergoes replication and
then two divisions, meiosis I and meiosis II, producing four haploid nuclei. At
meiosis I homologous chromosomes pair and exchange genetic material (recombine).
Reciprocal recombination between homologues is believed to be essential for
proper pairing and segregation of chromosomes. The mechanisms that control
meiotic recombination so each chromosome recombines with its homologue are not
fully understood. The scientist will investigate these mechanisms. ***