* 9507010
* RUI: Memory in the Immune Response to Fluorescein
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Judith Owen, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 01/31/1999
* USD 269,682.00

; R o o t E n t r y F Y4E C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t L O b j e c t
P o o l Y4E Y4E 4 @ 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; &lt; = &gt; F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; INDOWPOS GETWINDOWTASK GETDOUBLECLICKTIME
ISCHARALPHA BEAR3062 DLGDIRSELECTc LOCKWINDOWUPDATE&amp; SETCOMMEVENTMASK
SETPROP GETDLGCTRLID POSTMESSAGEn EQUALRECT DEFFRAMEPROC SETTIMER LSTRCMP
LOADDIBCURSORHANDLERd INSENDMESSAGE SETMEAbstract 9507010 Owen This proposal is
studying the differences in lymphocytes responding to a foreign body for the
first time (primary response) and those lymphocytes responding after having had
prior exposure to that antigen (memory response). Long term cultures of B cells
derived from primary and memory mice immunized with fluoresceinated
macromolecules (as the antigen) will be generated by fusion with myeloma cells.
The density of the fluorescein on the carrier as well as the nature of the
carrier used for immunization , will be varied to alter the extent of T cell
help in the development of the antibody response. The DNA sequences of IgM anti-
fluorescein antibodies from primary and memory mice will be compared to
determine whether there is evidence for a unique population of secondary B cells
expressing an antibody repertoire different from that secreted by animals
recognizing the antigen for the first time. Sequence comparisons will also be
made between antibodies derived from animals in which T cell help has been
optimized or minimized. Cytotoxic T cells from memory and primary mice differ in
their abilities to recognize and respond to cells with low densities of surface
antigens, but the biological mechanisms for these differences are not
understood. This proposal will test whether immunization with fluorescein-
coupled cells increases the frequency of fluorescein-response cytotoxic T cell
precursors, whether different populations of cytotoxic T cells respond after the
animal is antigenically experienced, or whether each type of cytotoxic T cells
responds after the animal becomes antigenically experienced, or whether each
individual cytotoxic T cell proliferates more efficiently and or binds more
effectively to its target cells once it had prior antigenic exposure. Cytotoxic
T cells will be generated from primary and memory mice, fused with long-lived
tumor cells and their receptor genes analyzed by DNA sequencing. Cell surface
density of the receptor and its associated molecules will be measured by flow
cytometry, and the frequencies of cytotoxic T cell precursors measured by
limiting dilution analyses. %%% These studies looking at differences in cells of
the immune system during primary and secondary immune responses will increase
our understanding of the basis of immunological memory. *** Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Barbara S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o
n ( 3 Zain Shirley Parker @ W1 8 @ @ J4E @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e 4 L
4 l l l l l l l 1 3 5 5 5 S s T 6 l l l l l 3 l l l l 3 Abstract 9507010 Owen
This proposal is studying the differences in lymphocytes responding to a foreign
body for the first time (primary response) and those lymphocytes responding
after having had prior exposure to that antigen (memory response). Long term
cultures of B cells derived from primary and memory mice immunized with
fluoresceinated macromolecules (as the antigen) will be generated by fusion with
myeloma cells. The density of the fluorescein on the carrier as well as the
nature of the carrier used for immunization , will be varied to alter the extent
o