* 9507409
* Regulation of Oviduct-Lineage Myogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Elizabeth Bucher, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/1996
* USD 44,451.00

9507409 Bucher The long term goal of this pilot project is to understand the
genetic mechanisms of muscle cell specification in a developing organism. In
vitro studies of vertebrate muscle gene regulation have revealed a complexity of
transcription factors involved in muscle cell differentiation and determination.
The analysis of muscle gene regulation in vivo should extend these studies to
understand genetic pathways and to define regulatory factors that can only be
discovered in vivo. This pilot project undertakes one aim, comprised of
transgenic studies, to investigate the in vivo sequence requirements for
temporal and oviduct lineage specific expression of the C. elegans troponin T
(CeTnT) muscle gene. C. elegans is an organism having well established genetic
and molecular transgenic approaches and the C. elegans oviduct is an ideal
tissue to undertake these studies: the oviduct is comprised of only 10 muscle
cells that arise through a simple stereotyped series of cell divisions.
Furthermore, similar to some vertebrate muscle types, the oviduct dose not
express the CeMyoD transcription factor and thus other factors may be revealed.
The CeTnT gene structure is simple and provides an ideal molecular target to
study gene expression. Different CeTnT genomic sequences will be cloned upstream
of reporter genes. Reporter gene expression will then be assayed in individual
cells of transgenic worms to characterize the in vivo requirements for oviduct
specific expression. Dr. Bucher will test the hypothesis that MEF2 and E-box
consensus sequences are required for oviduct expression. She will also test the
hypothesis that novel consensus sequences are required for oviduct expression.
Identification of new cis sequences elements that direct oviduct expression will
provide the basis for future experiments involving the cloning of new
transcription factors using molecular/biochemical approaches and by genetic
suppression strategies. The expectation is that these appro aches will
ultimately elucidate in vivo genetic pathways and define new genes involved in
extracellular and intracellular signalling, as well as transcriptional
regulators of the myogenic regulatory pathway. ***