* 9507809
* Accumulation, Inequality, and Commodity Prices
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Angus Deaton, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1999
* USD 345,786.00

This research will contribute to our understanding of two economic phenomena,
neither of which has been satisfactorily explained to date. The first is why the
prices of primary commodities such as rice, tin, copper, etc. have trended
slowly downward over time, in spite of vast increases in demand. For many of
these goods, it is thought that supply disturbances are the most important
determinants of price; the coffee harvest fails in Brazil, or there is a miners'
strike in Zaire or Chile. If so, it is hard to explain why it is that booms and
slumps in prices last so long, instead of coming and going with the fluctuations
in weather or political events that cause them. Another widely canvassed
explanation looks to the behavior of speculators whichy can prolong slumps and
booms. However, previous research has shown that speculative activity, even in
conjunction with supply shocks, cannot explain what is observed. This project
will focus on wage trends in developing countries as a possible explanation for
falling commodity prices and industrial demand as an explanation for shorter-
term fluctuations. If these explanations are correct, it will switch attention
away from speculators and storage as the main source of commodity price
fluctuations. The second topic analyzes saving and wealth accumulation, with a
particular focus on explaining disparities between people in their living
standards and wealth. Many industrialized economies have experienced sharp
increases in inequality during the 1980s. There are many potential explanations
for this increase including technological shifts, demographic changes, and
increasing competition from developing countries, but the dynamics of inequality
remain mysterious. Recent research has drawn a link between asset accumulation,
time, and inequality. Because different people are differentially lucky in their
earnings and income, and because differences in luck cumulate over time,
inequality in living standards is likely t o increase with time for any given
group of people. This appears to be true for the United States, with much
greater earning and consumption inequality among older than younger Americans.
This research will look at whether this is also true for wealth, and whether, as
the theory suggests, wealth inequality increases particularly rapidly over time.
More generally, the links between earnings inequality and wealth inequality and
the role played by saving will be analyzed.