* 9507361
* Is the Diversity of Trypsins in the Insect Midgut a         Determinative Factor in Host Plant Selection?
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Carl Batt, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 265,000.00

Lay Abstract 9507361 As one defense against herbivory, many plants produce
proteinase inhibitors that interact with digestive enzymes produced by insect
herbivores. The inhibitors reduce the insect's ability to digest plant tissue.
Some insects, however, respond to proteinase inhibitors by producing forms of
the digestive enzymes that are not susceptible to the inhibitor. This ability
may permit some insects to feed successfully and grow rapidly on a wide range of
plants, using a different suite of digestive enzymes for each. This research
will test that hypothesis by comparing two insects, a dietary specialist (the
black cutworm) and a dietary generalist (the corn earworm). The genes that code
for the digestive enzymes called trypsins will be isolated and characterized in
each species, and the susceptibility of each form of trypsin to inhibitors will
be determined. The results should yield insight into the diversity and
regulation of digestive enzymes in plant-eating insects, the importance of plant
proteinase inhibitors as defenses against insect attack, and the importance of
digestive physiology in controlling the range of plants on which a particular
insect can feed. Ultimately, the research may lead to development of effective
strategies for controlling herbivorous insects by manipulating the level and
diversity of proteinase inhibitors in agricultural and horticultural plants,
and/or disrupting the mechanisms that insects use to regulate digestive enzyme
production and secretion.