* 9507132
* Anaerobic Toluene Metabolism in the T1 Denitrifying Strain
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Lily Young, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/1999
* USD 279,500.00

; R o o t E n t r y F VxZ6 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t F O b j e
c t P o o l 6 uZ6 6 uZ6 4 @ 6 7 8 9 : ; &lt; = &gt; ? @ F Microsoft Word 6.0
Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; { { { { Frazer, Anne C. MCB-9507132 The
goal of this project is to characterize the biochemical features of the
anaerobic degradation of toluene by strain T1. This is a novel isolate obtained
in this laboratory and preliminary work has already been done on the anaerobic
pathway for toluene utilization in the microbe. Toluene has two fates in T1,
either productive metabolism and eventual conversion to carbon dioxide and
biomass, or transformation to two dead-end metabolites, benzylsuccinate and
benzylfumarate. The formation of the same dead-end products during anaerobic
toluene metabolism has also recently been reported in certain sulfate-reducing
environments, and in several other denitrifying toluene degraders. Thus, ths
transformation may be environmentally significant. It is proposed to develop
enzyme assays using anaerobic cell extracts with an emphasis on identifying the
reactants and products of key enzyme steps in the toluene metabolism by T1.
Emphasis includes, determining the initial enzyme step in the toluene
utilization pathway, designated the TUT pathway, as well as defining the initi
al step in the formation of the toluene dead-end metabolites. The research
proposed is complementary to work currently underway by colleagues in the
laboratory working on the genetic features of anaerobic toluene degradation by
strain T1, and will make use of mutants unable to use toluene in order to
resolve toluene degradation pathways. %%% Toluene is a major industrial chemical
as well as a component of fuel. It is also a hazardous waste in soil and aquatic
environments. A good deal has been learned about the degradation of toluene in
air. However, oxygen in pollution sites is rapidly used up, which makes the
study of anaerobic metabolism so important. The goal of this project is to
characterize the beginning reactions performed by T1 anaerobically metabolize
toluene. Toluene has two fates in T1, either mineralization or transformation
into two dead-end chemical products that accumulate in the growth medium.
Studies will first be undertaken to identify initial reactions of toluene
metabolism in extracts from cells, with the intention of continuing on to
identify key enzymatic reactants and products in the separate degradation
pathways. This project will help provide a better understanding about the
natural degradative processes in the environment and to use them effectively to
remediate contaminated sites. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m
a t i o n ( 5 R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Frazer, Anne C. Robert Uffen Shelley
A. Graves @ Sv 4 @ @ tfZ6 @ Ik Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; ; e = e F j j j j j j j 1
# % % % C c T @ j j j j j # ~ j j j j # { Frazer, Anne C. MCB-9507132 The goal
of this project is to ch