* 9507878
* Mechanisms of Directionally Selective Motion Detection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Raymon Glantz, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 01/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

IBN-9507878 Raymon Glantz A broad spectrum of brain activities, from object
recognition to postural adjustments, require that neurons and neural circuits
make computations. In recent years, neurobiologists have made impressive
progress in two related areas: one concerns the biophysical and molecular
mechanisms of synapses and the second concerns the mathematical and logical
operations which formally describe what whole systems of nerve cells do. In the
study of how the visual system works, algorithms successfully model visual
tracking and fixation, binocular vision, and motion detection. Future progress
in understanding more about the visual system depends upon integrating the
biophysical and algorithmic approaches. This will require detailed information
about the structure and dynamic properties of neurons involved in particular
computations. Many visual systems can compute the direction and velocity of
moving targets. Recent studies indicate that directional motion detection is
achieved through synaptic operations embedded in the structure of the neuron's
receptive field. The same directional mechanisms were independently found in
visual neurons in higher vertebrates and in the crayfish. The mechanisms depends
upon spatial and temporal asymmetries of the excitation and inhibition within
the receptive field. This project focuses on experimental and theoretical
studies of the synaptic mechanisms which support directional motion detection.
Physiological measurements will quantify the characteristics of the synapses
which form the directional mechanism. The simulations will determine if the
measured properties of the synapses are sufficient to support the directional
mechanism.