* 9507331
* Is Fungal Laccase Truly Necessary for Lignin Degradation?
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Karl-Erik Eriksson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/1999
* USD 309,483.00

Phenoloxidases are absolutely essential for lignin degradation by white-rot
fungi. The known phenoloxidases functioning in the process are lignin peroxidase
(LiP), manganese peroxidase (MnP), or laccase. Phanerochaete chrysosporium, the
model organism for studies of the enzyme mechanisms involved in lignin
degradation, produces multiple forms of both LiP and MnP, but laccase is not
used as part of this ligninolytic system. It is now becoming evident that the
majority of white-rot fungi operate with a different set of phenoloxidases,
i.e., laccase in combination with either LiP or MnP or even all three together.
To investigate the role of laccase for lignin degradation Pycnoporus
cinnabarinus was identified as an excellent organism for further study because
it produced only one isoelectric form of laccase. To investigate the importance
of laccase, the classical approaches of creating and identifying mutants, i.e.,
laccase-less (lac-) and peroxidase-less (per-), as well as pleiotropic (i.e.,
lac-per-), mutants will be used. Substantial efforts will also be expended for
the physico-chemical and spectroscopic characterization of the laccase.
Materials and procedures earlier developed in this laboratory for cloning of
plant laccase genes, will be used to clone the genomic DNA sequence encoding the
P. cinnabarinus laccase. This research will provide information on the role of
fungal laccases in lignin degradation to be compared with that of the well
studied P. chrysosporium system. %%% The oil crisis during the 1970's turned
interest towards the utilization of renewable resources, and towards
lignocellulosics, in particular. Lignocellulosic materials are a source of
fiber, energy and liquid fuels. However, the technologies presently used to take
advantage of this raw material are mostly energy consuming and not always
environmentally friendly. Since one of nature's most important biological
reactions is the degradation of wood and other lignocellulosic material,
biotechnical methods for utilization of lignocellulosic materials from
agriculture and forestry are both possible and important to develop. Efficient
ways to degrade lignin are particularly important in this context. White-rot
fungi are the only microorganisms which can degrade lignin to any extent. To
efficiently use these organisms for a better utilization of lignocellulosic
materials requires an incisive knowledge of the enzyme mechanisms they utilize
in the lignin degradation process. The approach we will take in our proposed
research will particularly provide information on the role of laccase, i.e.,
whether or not this is one of the necessary phenoloxidases for lignin
degradation.