* 9507153
* Biological Synthesis and Material Properties of Bacterial Polyesters
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1998
* R. Clinton Fuller, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* A Berry
* 12/31/1998
* USD 275,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F J2B C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t H O b j e c t
P o o l I2B I2B 4 @ @ A B C D E F G H I J F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; }' ^ t |L t |D u q |H u h ~ t@ F F Pj j j j u N ~ u
F Pj j j j u F Pj j j ~ u + U F P W > t >L t 6 6L 6 6J F P u F P F P ~ u Q ^MM Ã•
M U > t. ^ G ; 9507153 Fuller The major objective of the research project is to
continue our innovative program on the study of the synthesis, material
properties, containment and degradation of microbial thermoplastics. This
program has involved the closely coordinated activities of three Principal
Investigators, PIs, including a polymer chemist, a biochemist and a
microbiologist. In the studies on the containment and degradation of
poly-(-hydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), the inclusion bodies or PHA granules in
Pseudomonas oleovorans, the bacterium of choice, have been clearly shown to
contain at least five proteins, tow of which are polymerases, one a
depolymerase, and two that have a unique paracrystalline array lattice-like
structure. We will particularly concentrate on the structure and function of
these latter two structural polypeptides. In the polymer chemistry studies on
biosynthesis and materials properties studies, an extensive array of new
microbial polyesters has been produced and examined, including flexible
homopolymers, elastomeric and adhesive copolymers, functionalized polymers and
chemically modifi ed bacterial polyesters with specific materials properties.
All of these have been made available from several, biologically diverse
microorganisms. In addition, emphasis will be pursued investigating the
mechanisms, control processes and the enzymology of both intra- and extra-
cellular PHA depolymerase enzyme systems. This research program is being
supported jointly by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
(Directorate fmr Biosciences) and the Division for Materials Research
(Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences. %%% The major objective of
the research project is to continue our innovative program on the study of the
synthesis, material properties, containment and degradation of microbial
thermoplastics. This program has involved the closely coordinated activities of
three Principal Investigators, PIs, including a polymer chemist, a biochemist
and a microbiologist. In the studies on the containment and degradation of
poly-(-hydroxyalkanoates (PHAs), the inclusion bodies or PHA granules in
Pseudomonas oleovorans, the bacterium of choice, have been clearly shown to
contain at least five proteins, tow of which are polymerases, one a
depolymerase, and two that have a unique paracrystalline array lattice-like
structure. We will particularly concentrate on the structure and function of
these latter two structural polypeptides. In the polymer chemistry studies on
biosynthesis and materials properties studies, an extensive array of new
microbial polyesters has been produced and examined, including flexible
homopolymers, elastomeric and adhesive copolymers, functionalized polymers and
chemically modified bacterial polyesters with specidic materials properties. All
of these have been made available from several, biologically diverse
microorganisms. In addition, emphasis will be pursued investigating the
mechanisms, control processes and the enzymology of both intra- and extra-
cellular PHA depolymerase enzyme systems. *** ; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r
m a t i o n ( ? $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Fuller, R.C. Robert
Uffen Shelley A. Graves @ i> @ 1B @ W8F2B @ G Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e H j j
j j j j j 1 # % % % # H