* 9507917
* CAREER:  Composition Effects in Cyclical Productivity
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Susanto Basu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2000
* USD 101,891.00

9507917 Basu This project focuses on a continuing puzzle in macroeconomics: why
is aggregate productivity procyclical? Initially interpreted as unobserved
changes in utilization, this stylized fact has been reinterpreted as an
indication of large changes in production technology and, more recently, as
evidence of large increasing returns to scale in production. This project
explores an explanation based on composition effects: the idea that inputs may
consistently move, in cyclcial fashion, from less- to more-productive uses. For
example, industries with higher returns to scale (e.g. durables) also account
for a larger fraction of input growth in booms. A numerical example shows that
composition effects can lead to a large overestimate of the degree of returns to
scale and a severe overstatement of the importance of technology shocks. A
preliminary application of these ideas to U.S. manufacturing data shows they are
quantitatively significant: correcting for compostiion bias reduces the
correlation between output and technology shocks by one-half, and the estimate
of increasing returns by two-thirds. These preliminary results indicate that
neither large technology shocks nor large firm-level returns to scale are
plausible building blocks of business cycle theory. The project conducts more
empirical work to document the full magnitude of compostiion effects; analyzes
the link between aggregate productivity and welfare; studies how composition
effects may arise naturally in a purely neoclassical model with multiple sectors
and quasi-fixed inputs, since quasi-fixity naturally creates divergences between
marginal products of inputs across sectors; and models composition effects
within the context of endogenous-fluctuation models. The education plan has four
components: course development for intermediate macroeconomics that emphasizes
giving students practice in evaluating policy debates; written handouts for
graduate macroeconomics that better prepare students for future research; prog
ram development to smooth the transition from graduate coursework to disertation
research; and the development of a plan to increase minority student retention
in the graduate program. ??