* 9507532
* Collaborative Proposal:  Mechanisms of Low Temperature      Tolerance in Chaparral Shrubs
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Stephen Davis, Pepperdine University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 67,430.00

9507532 Chaparral vegetation in southern California neighbors one of the largest
metropolitan areas in the United States and occupies invaluable watershed land.
Chaparral deters soil erosion, maintains slope stability, furnishes browse and
cover for wildlife, and provides aesthetic and recreational value. While
research has previously focused on the response of chaparral to fire and water
stress, there is growing evidence that low temperature tolerance is an important
factor underlying chaparral distribution and abundance. Based on frequency,
subzero temperature episodes may be as important to chaparral communities as
fires and drought. Loss in productivity, injury, and in some cases death of
native plants has been observed after freezing events. Seedlings may be
particularly vulnerable as the reduction of plant cover after fire can expose
them to potentially lethal radiation freezes at night. This research will
examine the hypotheqes that seedlings are more vulnerable to low temperature
damage than adults, freezing- induced embolism (air blockage) of the stem xylem
(wood) can cause shoot death, and the amount of freezing-induced embolism is
related to both wood structure and rate of thaw. The combination of a steep
gradient in minimum temperatures from the coast inland and recently burned sites
in southern California provide an excellent model system. The results will have
implications for land use management, such as mitigation of fire-burned areas in
southern California; for revegetation projects; and for the use of temperature
sensitive species of chaparral as climate indicators.