* 9507828
* Americas Program:  Cooperative Research on the Seismic and  Geodetic Behavior of Arenal Volcano, Costa Rica
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Susan Schwartz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 10/31/1997
* USD 33,762.00

; R o o t E n t r y F NU @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t # O b j e c
t P o o l NU NU 4 @ " # $ % &amp; ' ( ) * + , F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; ; H * T d d d d ?Tu( e f d d d d Zw, S9507828
Schwartz This Americas Program award will support a research collaboration
between Dr. Susan Schwartz, University of California Santa Cruz, and Dr. Marino
Protti, Universidad Nacional , Costa Rica. They propose to install a
continuously operating broadband seismic and space-based geodetic monitoring
system on Volcan Arenal, an active volcano in north-central Costa Rica. Their
goal is to use the data collected to gain a better understanding of volcanic
processes, such as magma conduit initiation and magma transport, and to
integrate this knowledge with observations of precursory deformation, leading to
improvements in volcano eruption forecasting. Only a few volcanoes world-wide
are presently being monitored with geodetic instrumentation. In almost all of
these, measurements are made too infrequently, or the land-based techniques are
too imprecise to define the time-varying signal associated with volcanic
deformation. The researchers will remove these limitations by installing a
continuously operating monitoring system . This information will be beneficial
not only to the two parti cipating countries, but also to other countries with
active volcanoes. *** Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9507828
Beverly D. Diaz Beverly D. Diaz @ UrS @ 5 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (
! @ 5 @ d Microsoft Word 6.0 6 ; e = e # p p p p p p p Q E 3 T 9 Q p Q p p p p p
p p p , 9507828 Schwartz This Americas Program award will support a research
collaboration between Dr. Susan Schwartz, University of California Santa Cruz,
and Dr. Marino Protti, Universidad Nacional , Costa Rica. They propose to
install a continuously operating broadband seismic and space-based geodetic
monitoring system on Volcan Arenal, an active volcano in north-central Costa
Rica. Their goal is to use the data collected to gain a better understanding of
volcanic processes, such as magma conduit initiation and magma transport, and to
integrate this knowledge with observations of precursory deformation, leading to
improvements in volcano eruption forecasting. Only a few volcanoes world-wide
are presently being monitored with geodetic instrumentation. In almost all of
these, measurements are made too infrequently, or the land-based techniques are
too imprecise to define the time-varying signal associated with volcanic
deformation. The researchers will remove these limitations by installing a
continuously operating monitoring system . This information will be beneficial
not only to the two participating countries, but also to other countries with
active volcanoes. ***