* 9507000
* Tyrosine Kinase Coupling of Muscarinic Acetylcholine        Receptors to Potassium Channels
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Xin-Yun Huang, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1998
* USD 313,653.00

9507000 Huang The long term goal of this project is to understand the signal
transduction mechanisms of the muscarinc acetylcholine receptors (mAchRs) and
how they modulate ion channel activities. This investigator has demonstrated
that regulation of the activity of a delayed rectifier potassium channel (RAK)
by the mAchR involves activation of a tyrosine kinase by the G protein coupled
to the receptor. Tyrosine phosphorylation of the receptor channel protein
results in its suppression. Two hypotheses will be tested in this proposal:
whether the (( subunits of the G protein directly activate the pleckstrin-
homology domain containing tyrosine kinases and whether the channel
phosphorylation state is correlated with the channel subconductance state. This
investigator has shown that the mAchR can activate multiple families of tyrosine
kinases. One family, Btk/Tsk, is a new class of tyrosine kinases which contains
the pleckstrin-homology (PH) domain, which has been suggested to interact with
the (( subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins. In this study the PI will see if
the these subunits can activate the kinase in vitro and after cotransfection
into cells. The region of the BtK/Tsk that binds to the G protein subunits will
be identified. Studies will be done to determine which tyrosine kinases that act
on the RAK channel to decrease its activity, and the effects of tyrosine
phosphorylation on channel function will be determined. %%% These studies will
provide information on how tyrosine kinases couple to the muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors and how the resultant tyrosine phosphorylation of the
potassium channel affects it s activity. This is an important signal
transduction mechanism which has not been elucidated. ***