* 9507625
* Continued Development of a Software Framework to Maintain   and Query Features of Biological Macromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Calton Pu, General Atomics
* Standard Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 06/30/1997
* USD 141,007.00

This proposal seeks to maintain and further develop an object oriented software
framework to represent and access macromolecular structure data of proteins,
DNA, RNA. and their complexes. In this context a software framework implies a
set of reusable software components that encompass the storage, intuitive,
efficient retrieval and processing of macromolecular structure-based information
leading to a better understanding of structure-function relationships. A
continuing major design goal is the ability to quickly combine and apply these
components in hitherto unthought of ways. An approach of particular value to the
fast evolving domain of structural biology where the amount of data, our
knowledge about that data, and presumably the new questions that data raises,
continues to grow at a near exponential rate. The existing framework, based on
PDBlib, a ~++ class library for representing a macromolecular structure, already
interfaces to a variety of backend storage formats including Protein Data Bank
(PDB) ASCII files. Object Oriented PDB (OOPDB - a persistent version of PDBlib)
and a Derived Features DataBase (DFDB). Query of all backend storage formats is
available through MacroMolecular Query Language (MMQL), a domain specific non-
formal query methodology. More limited query of OOPDB and DFDB and reports
generated from these databases are available globally through the Macromolecular
Object Oriented Search Engine (MOOSE), a World Wide Web (WWW) server. This
proposal seeks to maintain and expand all facets of the framework. The specific
goals of this proposal are as follows: Maintain and make available through the
resources of the San Diego Supercomputer Center (SDSC) the existing and evolving
framework. This implies: providing access to current native and derived data,
database maintenance, software maintenance, software distribution, and limited
assistance to the community of users. Extend the framework to: 1. Support a
broader range of information on biological macromolecules through extensions to
PDBlib. Namely, functional classification of macromolecules, primary sequence
where no 3-D structure exists, NMR ensemble d~ta, and experimental data
including that from sources other than X-ray and NMR. 2. Provide new query
methods (predominantly for comparative analysis) to effectively use existing and
new data by extensions to MMQL. 3. Provide the ability to store and subsequently
operate on the results of previous queries as specialized databases. Optimize
the storage and query methodology used by the framework. Continue in-house
research using the framework to explore correlations between various structural
parameters found in protein structures. While it is far from proven that the
community will use and further develop software frameworks such as the one
proposed here, the rationale behind it would seem sound in a time when the
falling cost of hardware has not been matched by a significantly decreased cost
in software development.