* 9507392
* The 15th International Conference of Plant Growth Substances in Minneapolis, MN, July 14-18, 1995
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Gary Gardner, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1996
* USD 7,000.00

9507392 Gardner Support is requested for an international conference on plant
growth regulators to be held in Minneapolis, MN, July 14-18, 1995. This
conference will be the 15th in a series of conferences sponsored by the
International Plant Growth Substance Association (IPGSA). Progress in
understanding the perception and action of plant hormones is advancing at a
rapid pace as a result of technological advances in the areas of genetics and
molecular cloning. These advances have led to the identificaiton of genes that
are involved in the perception of hormonal signals, and plant biologists are now
beginning to unravel the signal transduction pathways that link hormone
receptors to the cellular response. The goals of the 15th International
Conference on Plant Growth Substances are to bring together researchers who are
working in this field to report on new developments and to share new ideas.
Topics to be covered in plenary sessions and symposia include signal
transduction, hormonal regulation of gene expression, integration of growth
processes, the use and application of transgenic plants in hormone research ,
identification of new signalling molecules, hormone biosynthesis and metabolism,
and hormone perception and sensitivity. Two non-plant biologists, Ira Herskowitz
and Keith Yamamoto, have also been invited to participate in our plenary
sessions to provide breadth to the topics of signal transduction and hormonal
regulation of gene expression. The program promises to be exciting and to
stimulate research on plant growth. These compounds have long been established
as important for U.S. agriculture, and our understanding of the cellular and
molecular basis of their action is essential for the long-term sustainability of
agriculture.