* 9507662
* Dietary Tracing of Amino Acids in Bone Collagen by Stable Isotope Analysis
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Suzanne M. Young, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1999
* USD 173,746.00

van der Merwe With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Nikolaas van der
Merwe will analyze bone, muscle and hair tissue from pigs which have been raised
on 14 different controlled diets. These materials will be obtained from animals
raised at the USDA Agricultural Research Service in Beltsville Maryland and Dr.
van der Merwe will analyze the carbon and nitrogen isotopic ratios in amino
acids in both dietary items and pig tissue. The goal of the research is to study
biochemical routing from dietary components to consumer tissues at the amino
acid level. The diets are designed to identify the dietary components used in
the synthesis of pig protein tissues, particularly where more than one protein
source (animal and/or plant) is available. Dietary items have been chosen for
their characteristic stable carbon isotope characteristics, depending on whether
the plant foods have a C3 or C4 photosynthesis or the animal proteins are
derived from such plants. The food items and pig tissues will be separated into
constituent amino acids and their isotope ratios measured to model the relevant
biochemical pathways. The long-term goal of the study is to reconstruct past
human diets through the isotopic analysis of archaeological human skeletons.
This procedure has been in use for more than fifteen years and has had a major
impact on the understanding of past human subsistence and processes. However
contradictions between isotope data and other evidence suggest that the
relationship between the dietary importance of a food and the isotopic signal in
consumer bone tissue is not linear. It appears for example that protein
dominates in the construction of consumer collagen, while bone carbonate
averages the carbon from the total diet. The work on pigs will help to refine
this biochemical model and allow improved application to archaeological
materials. This research is significant for a number of reasons. It will help to
refine a technique which is widely used in archaeo logical research and which
has potentially wide application in nutritional and metabolic studies as well.
The work will increase our understanding of how past populations made use of
their environment.