* 9507510
* U.S.-Slovak Chemistry Research on the Role of               Oligosaccharides in Nonenzymatic Browning (The Maillard     Reaction)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Milton Feather, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 12/31/1998
* USD 67,096.00

9507510 Feather This U.S.-Slovak cooperative research project between Dr. Milton
Feather of the University of Missouri-Columbia and Dr. Jan Hirsch of the
Institute of Chemistry, Slovak Academy of Sciences, will address a series of
disaccharides, as starting compounds in the Maillard reaction (nonenzymatic
browning), a naturally occurring reaction between sugars and proteins and/or
amines. These sugars will be used to study the effects of position and
substitution of the nonreducing residue on the course of the reaction. In the
process, the researchers intend to chemically synthesize several series of
disaccharides derived from D-xylose and D-glucose to convert them into Amadori
compounds (1-amino-1- deoxy-2-ketose sugar compounds). These compounds will then
be studied for degradation reactions. Results are expected to provide insight
into far ranging natural processes such as those that affect food flavor and
aroma production to an in vivo reaction involving protein modification related
to aging and diabetes. This biochemistry project in organic dynamics fulfills
the program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading
experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents
and pool research resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.
***