* 9507791
* Matching in Centralized and Decentralized Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,05/24/1999
* Alvin Roth, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/24/1999
* USD 327,567.00

9507791 Roth This proposal is for parallel theoretical and empirical
investigations into the matching processes which go on in centralized and
decentralized labor markets. It builds on an investigation carried out with
prior NSF support. The theoretical part of the investigation has so far focused
on "two-sided matching" models. The empirical part of the investigation has so
far included studies of the entry level labor markets for physicians in the US
(including entry into specialties) and in Britain (where differently organized
markets operate in each region of the National Health service), as well as entry
level labor markets for lawyers (for associate positions in law partnerships and
clerkships in Federal courts in ;the US, and for "articling" positions in
Canada), dentists (particularly oral surgeons but also pediatric dentists and
periodontists), clinical psychologists, and new graduates of elite Japanese
universities. Matching processes which are not labor markets have also been
studied, such as the (different) recruitment processes of American sororities
and fraternities, and the market for post-season college football bowls. The
most striking empirical discovery of the recent part of the investigation is
that each of these markets has a period in its history which exhibited the
phenomenon of unraveling of transaction times ("jumping the gun"), in which
market transactions came earlier and earlier in response to competition,
resulting in various types of market failure. The present institutional
structure of each of these diverse markets, whose organizations range from
almost completely decentralized to almost completely centralized, is in
substantial part a response to this history. The past work concentrated on the
analysis and comparison of entry level marketq which employ centralized market
clearing mechanisms. The present investigation is intended to analyze
decentralized labor markets, both entry level and senior level, and compare
their operation and matching effectiv eness both with other decentralized
markets and with centralized ones. The five broad lines of inquiry in the
current project can be summarized as: Market clearing and the effective length
of a decentralized market namely how long the market remains open, how long
individual offers remain open, and how long it takes to make a new offer after a
previous offer has been rejected; Decentralized markets as matching processes
with random elements such as which firm reaches a given candidate first by
telephone, when more than one is trying to do so; Improving existing markets and
designing new ones in order to better understand how different market
regulations work in combination with each other, and what incentives and
disincentives they create singly and together in particular contexts such as
computer assisted markets; Senior level labor markets namely highly
decentralized markets in which firms and workers begin matched and matchings are
destabilized by retirements and the creation of new positions; and Advice to
individual market participants such as whether or not a student physician's
self-interest is served by revealing her true preference order for hospitals.