* 9507124
* 8th International Symposium of Microbial Growth on C1       Compounds at the Bahia Resort Hotel, San Diego, CA., August-September, 1995
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Mary Lidstrom, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 1 @ K @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c
t P o o l O? K O? K 4 @ &amp; ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9507124 Lidstrom This is an award for partial
support for the Eighth International Symposium on Metabolism of C1 Compounds to
be held August 17-September 1 at the Bahia Resort Hotel, San Diego, California.
This prestigious meeting is held once every three years and brings together the
international community of scientists and engineers working on a variety of
aspects of C1 metabolism by microorganisms, including both methylotrophic and
autotrophic cells. The small size and traditional informality of this conference
provide a unique opportunity for researchers from different disciplines to
interact, share information, and develop long-lasting ties. It is traditional
for all speakers and poster presenters to provide their latest, unpublished data
and, as a result, this conference always serves as the focal point for future
research in this diverse field. A wide range of research topics will be
presented including discussions on catalytic mechanisms of oxidases, oxygenases
and quinoproteins, genetic regulation of complex genetic regulons, and new
approaches for understanding and manipulating microb ial metabolism for both
environmental and commercial applications. %%% This NSF award is funded by the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the Division of Environmental
Biology (Directorate of Biological Sciences), and the Division of Ocean Sciences
(Directorate of Geosciences). *** ; Oh +' 0 D h @ d S u m m a r y I n f o r m a
t i o n ( % R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT $ Metabolic Biochemistry Program Note
Shelley A. Graves Shelley A. Graves @ 3 @ @ @ 22 K @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 4 ;
e = e j j j j j j j } 1 # ? _ T Y } j } j j j j ~ j j j j r 9507124 Lidstrom
This is an award for partial support for the Eighth International Symposium on
Metabolism of C1 Compounds to be held August 17-September 1 at the Bahia Resort
Hotel, San Diego, California. This prestigious meeting is held once every three
years and brings together the international community of scientists and
engineers working on a variety of aspects of C1 metabolism by microorganisms,
including both methylotrophic and autotrophic cells. The small size and
traditional informality of this conference provide a unique opportunity for
researchers from different disciplines to interact, share information, and
develop long-lasting ties. It is traditional for all speakers and poster
presenters to provide their latest, unpublished data and, as a result, this
conference always serves as the focal point for future research in this diverse
field. A wide range of research topics will be presented including discussions
on catalytic mechanisms of oxidases, oxygenases and quinoproteins, genetic
regulation of complex genetic regulons, and new approaches for unders