* 9507497
* Effects of Clonal Integration and Architecture on Plant Growth in Natural Resource Landscapes: Test of a Multiple Level Hypothesis in Ecology
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Peter Alpert, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Kitti Williams
* 09/30/2000
* USD 245,727.00

Alpert 9507497 Clonal plants include some of the moat invasive, rapidly
spreading, and persistent species known. They are also unique among plants in
their capacities to place potentially independent units (ramets) non-randomly
and to share resources among connected ramets. Two central hypotheses have been
developed about clonal plants: (1) that integration among ramets confers
significant advantages in habitats where resources are concentrated in small
patches; and (2) differences in the degree of integration among clones reflect
selection in response to different patterns of resource patchiness - i.e.,
clonal plants with a certain pattern of how ramets are placed and how they are
integrated will be best adapted to an environment with a very specific
distribution of light, water, nutrients, etc. Given the invasive potential of
clonal plants, understanding the role of plant architecture in allowing the
transfer of materials from patches where resources are abundant to patches where
resources are limiting is critical in order to be able to predict and mitigate
clonal plant invasions of natural or agricultural landscapes. The clonal herb,
Fragaria Chiloensis, beach strawberry, is common in coastal sand dunes and
grassland communities in Northern California where it plays an important
ecological role. On dunes, the nitrogen fixing shrub, Lupinus arboreous, creates
a landscape in which high light and soil nitrogen levels occur in different
places. In grassland, Lupinus creates high soil nitrogen patches in a uniformly
low light environment. In this study it will be determined whether: (1)
connected ramets grow faster than unconnected ramets in the field due to
resource sharing; and (2) differences in clonal architecture and the degree of
sharing will vary between populations taken from dunes versus those from
grasslands in a manner consistent with the patchiness of resources in those
habitats..