* 9507437
* Ecophysiological Correlates of Vertebrate Freeze Tolerance
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Jon Costanzo, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 185,753.00

9507437 Freeze tolerance is an adaptation that permits some organisms to
tolerate ice formation within their bodies. Previous studies of freeze tolerance
have been conducted in the laboratory, under conditions far removed from those
experienced by animals in nature. This research combines both field and
laboratory studies to elucidate the role of freeze tolerance in promoting over
winter survival in two freeze-tolerant species. Freezing episodes naturally
experienced during winter will be characterized using computer-assisted
monitoring systems to record body temperature, environmental temperature, and
water content and water potential of the microenvironments in which over-
wintering occurs. Parallel measurement of protective responses including glucose
mobilization and relocation of organ water will provide understanding of the
physiological mechanisms that protect against freezing injury to cells, tissues,
and organs, and of the ecological importance of these responses in the natural
environment. Some studies will focus on the energetic costs of hibernation,
particularly with regard to freezing and thawing. Nuclear magnetic resonance
(NMR) imaging will be used to determine cell energy status and show whether
survival duration in the frozen state is limited by the availability of finite
energy reserves. These integrated field and laboratory studies will provide
insights into the physiological mechanisms that promote survival at temperatures
below the freezing point of tissue, and into their ecological significance. The
research may also provide valuable clues for developing technology for the
preservation of tissues and organs by freezing.