* 9507757
* Two Projects in Human Capital:  "Culture and Language" and  "A Jobs-Based Analysis of Labor Markets
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Edward Lazear, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/2001
* USD 401,319.00

9507757 Lazear This project continues the development and implementation of a
jobs-based analysis of labor markets and starts a new human capital related
research agenda on the acquisition of culture and language skills. The entire
notion of a job, which seems central to the thinking of businesspersons and
administrators, is virtually absent from most labor market analyses. The
institutional literature, and especially the work on internal labor markets,
asks questions that differ from those asked by human capital theory. This is a
proposal to consider these questions and to provide answers to them based on new
data sets, which will be collected as part of the project. A few of these
questions are: What is the meaningful definition of a job and when should the
job category be defined narrowly and when broadly? What theory explains how
workers move from one job to another? How are job categories determined in the
organization? How much of wage growth over a worker s career depends on
promotion from one job to another and how much is accounted for by within-job
wage growth? Do jobs (as opposed to workers in them) display different turnover
behavior? Are there ports of entry into the firm? Are there dead-end jobs? The
research on the acquisition of culture and language skills is based on the
premise that common culture and common language facilitate trade between
individuals. Minorities have incentives to become assimilated and to learn the
majority language so that they have a larger pool of potential trading partners.
The value of assimilation is larger to an individual from a small minority than
to one from a large minority group. When a society has a very large majority of
individuals from one culture, individuals from minority groups will be
assimilated more quickly. Assimilation is less likely when an immigrant s native
culture and language is broadly represented in his new country. Also, when
governments pr otect minority interests directly, incentives to be assimilated
into the majority culture are reduced. The theory is developed and tested by
examining U.S. Census data on the relationship between the likelihood that an
immigrant will learn English and the proportion of the local population that
speaks his or her native language.