* 9507430
* Delta Excitations in Nuclei, US-Jordan Cooperative          Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* James Vary, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 19,346.00

Description: This project supports cooperation between Dr. James Vary of the
Physics Department at Iowa state University and Dr. Mahmoud Hasan of the Physics
Department at the Applied Science University in Amman, Jordan. The collaborative
research will be in the area of theoretical nuclear physics dealing with Delta
excitations in nuclei. Specifically, realistic nucleon-nucleon and nucleon-delta
interactions will be used to map out the properties of nuclei under extreme
conditions. For light nuclei, exact diagonalization with effective Hamiltonians
will be performed. A Brueckner constrained mean field approach will be used to
relate finite nuclear results to the nuclear equation of state. The effort
encompasses a collaboration involving the two scientists, from Iowa State and
from Jordan, and Dr. T.-S. H. Lee at Argonne National Laboratory (ANL) to solve
for a set of Brueckner-Bethe-Brandow effective NN and ND interactions in a
realistic single particle basis. Scope: This project will allow a cooperative
activity between two investigators with complementary expertise. Dr. Vary is a
member of the Nuclear Theory Group under the International Institute of
Theoretical and applied Physics (IITAP) at Iowa State. The group has two
faculty, two postdoctoral associates, and six graduate students. It collaborates
with the ISU nuclear experimental group, has established strength in microscopic
nuclear theory and aims to use those strength to address issues related to high
energy reactions with nuclei. Vary has developed capability and techniques to
evaluate effective nuclear Hamiltonians which will form central elements of this
project. Dr. Hasan has developed a major constrained mean field dynamic
capability and techniques for evaluating effective ND Hamiltonians. The IITAP,
with sponsorship from UNESCO, will provide research support for the project and
will assist the ASU in building its electronic networks, and in internet access.
The project represents a good case of meeting INT objectives in promoting
cooperation with benefits to both sides.