* 9507406
* Molecular Analysis of Pattern Refinement in Development
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Tadaatsu Goto, Thomas Jefferson University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1998
* USD 285,000.00

IBN-9507406 Tadaatsu Goto Thomas Jefferson University Pattern formation is the
process by which embryonic cells form ordered spatial arrangements of cells.
This process and the differentiation of embryonic cells make ordered development
of embryos possible. An effective system to study pattern formation in
development is segmentation in Drosophila, controlled by a hierarchically
organized set of genes encoding transcription factors. Molecular events
underlying the formation of segments can be considered as a progressive
refinement of positional information, reflected in the expression patterns of
these genes. Maternal mRNAs for segmentation genes first activate downstream
genes in a series of broad, overlapping domains along the anterior- posterior
axis; these in turn activate the "pair-rule genes" expressed in 7 regularly
spaced stripes, which then activate subordinate genes in 14 stripes. This leads
to the formation of 14 repetitive metameres, or segments. One pair-rule gene
critical to this cascade is even-skipped (eve). The initial broad stripes of eve
expression, that span 4-6 nuclei, become narrow and sharply defined, 1-2 cells
in width, as time progresses. This refinement of the pattern apparently enables
eve to play a series of roles in regulating other genes with increasing
precision. These investigators will explore the mechanisms and function of this
refinement. They have already identified a cis-regulatory region call the "late
element" in the eve locus that controls the expression of refined stripes; this
element seems to be activated by products of other pair-rule genes. The
investigators will identify pair-rule gene products that interact with the late
element directly. First, they will locate and analyze cis- regulatory sites
within the late element critical for interactions, employing a novel transgenic
strategy they have developed. Second, they will perform detailed biochemical
studies of protein-DNA interactions at these sites. These studies will allow the
investigators better understand how eve and other pair-rule genes combine their
regulatory effects, contributing to understanding the molecular mechanisms of
embryonic development. ***