* 9507526
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Testing the New Keynesian Synthesis: An Experimental Examination of Nominal Price Frictions in a Model with Endogenous Costs and Efficiency Wages
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* James Cox, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 01/31/1997
* USD 10,950.00

James Cox and Bart Wilson SBR-9507526 For the last twenty years, so-called new
Keynesian macroeconomists have been trying to construct their macroeconomic
theories from solid microeconomic foundations. They have proposed models in
which prices and wages are sticky and monetary policy has real effects in the
short run. This work has rested on the assumptions of imperfect competition,
menu costs, and real rigidities. Menu costs are the cost of changing prices. A
real rigidity is a failure of the firm s costs of fully adjust to an aggregate
demand shock. Real rigidities are a consequence of efficiency wages. Efficiency
wages are wages above the competitive equilibrium level that firms pay in order
to reduce shirking by its workers. This proposal consists of two experiments
designed to test the assumptions of new Keynesian macroeconomic models. The
first experiment will test Mankiw s menu cost model using an experimental design
in which monopoly sellers face fluctuations in nominal demand and cost. The
second experiment will test an efficiency wage model using an experimental
design in which p roducers face menu costs and workers can shirk. The results of
these experiments will shed light on the dynamics of price and wage adjustment
to demand shocks and suggest the directions in which the current theories need
to be developed.