* 9507857
* The Role of the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor Signaling  Pathway in Drosophila Retinal Development
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Kevin Moses, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 281,573.00

9507857 Moses The Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is a cell-surface
protein that acts to carry signals from outside the cell into its interior. One
of the molecules that binds to the EGFR, on the outside of the cell, is
Transforming Growth Factor-alpha (TGF-alpha). Such signals are then used to
regulate cell division and growth, and are necessary for normal development. For
these reasons the EGFR, and the other steps in its pathway are the objects of
intense study, and much is known about the molecular events that follow
activation of the EGFR. Unfortunately, little is known of how the signals that
act on the EGFR are regulated (such as TGF-alpha): the genes that control TGF-
alpha are unknown. This is due, in large part, to the great expense and time
needed to do genetic experiments in vertebrate animals. This research will use
the economy and power of invertebrate genetics to overcome these difficulties to
search for the genes that control TGF-alpha. Invertebrate homologs of TGF-alpha
and the EGFR function in the development of the compound eye. Some mutations in
the invertebrate EGFR affect the number and spacing of developing eye facets.
Mutations in an invertebrate homolog of TGF-alpha (called spitz) also affect
compound eye development. Recent data suggest that spitz function is required in
the founding cell of the developing facet, and in the absence of spitz function,
the founding cell cannot induce the differentiation of its neighbors, and facet
development is aborted. The immediate objectives for this research project are
to study early spitz mutant eye defects by histological examination, make
antibodies to spitz protein to study its expression in the developing eye, make
heat-sensitive mutations of invertebrate EGFR, to study its activity over time
and, finally, to search for other genes that regulate the spitz signal. The
results of these studies will provide fundamental information concerning the
mechanisms by which extracellular signalling molecules regulate the growth and
development of the nervous system.