* 9507034
* Role of Phosphorylation in DNA Replication and Nuclear      Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Radhakrishnan Padmanabhan, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F L 5 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l L 5 L 5 B C D E F G H I J K F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9507034 Padmanabhan PRIVATE DNA tumor viruses, adenovirus in
particular, have played a pivotal role in our current understanding of
biological processes in a eukaryotic cell, such as replication, transcription,
and translation, primarily due to the protein protein and protein DNA
interactions involving viral and cellular regulatory sequences and proteins. The
cell free adenovirus and SV40 DNA replication systems have contri`uted immensely
to our current understanding of the functions of viral and host proteins that
participate in the replication machinery in a eukaryotic cell. Recent evidence
indicate that phosphorylation states of adenovirus DNA polymerase (AdPol) and
preterminal protein (pTP) are important for their interaction with the origin of
DNA replication (Ori DNA). The major phosphorylation site of AdPol has been
mapped in the vicinity of its bipartite nuclear localization signal (NLS)
sequence, and by site directed mutagenesis, this site has been shown to be
important for its replication initiation activity. Many nuclear proteins have
potential phosphorylation sites in the vicinity of their NLS. The presence of a
major phosphorylation site in AdPol in a region proximal to its bipartite NLS
could modulate the nucleocytoplasmic transport of AdPol and its associated
proteins. Recent evidence suggests that the viral DNA polymerase is
phosphorylated in vivo by an associated protein kinase of the cdc2 family. This
project focuses on understanding of the role of phosphorylation in protein
protein and protein- DNA interactions during DNA replication and nuclear
transport. These studies are likely to shed light on (1) the role that
phosphorylation plays in the protein protein and protein DNA interactions
occurring during DNA replication and in nuclear transport of the replication
proteins. These studies are especially important because currently the role of
phosphorylation on the nuclear targeting of proteins with bipartite NLS
sequences is unknown. %%% DNA tumor viruses, adenovirus in particular, have
served as excellent model systems for providing a clear understanding of complex
biological processes in eukaryotic cells. Many of these processes are regulated
by phosphorylation/dephosphorylation reactions carried out by a number of
protein kinases and phosphatases, which respond to intra as well as
extracellular stimuli. In this project, the role of phosphorylation of proteins
involved in DNA replication and in their intracellular location, cytoplasm
versus nucleus, will be studied. This project focuses on understanding of the
role of phosphorylation in protein protein and protein DNA interactions during
DNA replication and intracellular localization. To achieve these specific aims,
the sites of phosphorylation of replication proteins will be identified and
characterized using a number of biochemical and genetic experimental approaches.
*** @ ....()()))()() Z : phoenix @ Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ m 5 @ @ 5 S u
m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( A @ 0 Microsoft Word 6.0 2 e = e b U " " " " "
" " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | #