* 9507282
* Poly-3-Hydroxybutyrate/Polyphosphate Ion Channels
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Rosetta Reusch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1999
* USD 235,928.00

; R o o t E n t r y F o9 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l o9 o9 4 @ + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; Abstract 9507282 Reusch Polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate
are polymers found in all biological cells, yet their functions are largely
unknown. This investigator has isolated an ion channel from bacterial membranes
which is composed of polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate. The polymers combine
to form a calcium-selective ion channel with many of the same properties as the
protein calcium channels found in plant and animal cell membranes. The capacity
of polyhydroxybutryate and polyphosphate to form ion channels derives from the
ability of the polyhydroxybutryate to dissolve salts, and that of polyphosphate
to bind some cations more strongly than others. The ion-selective properties of
polyphosphates have led to their use in water-softening, and the solvent
properties of polyhydroxybutyrate are very similar to those of the polyethers
used in lithium batteries, suggesting that polyhydroxybutryate can be used to
prepare ion-conducting materials. In this research the effects of temperature,
pH and salts on the conductance and selectivity of the
polyhydroxybutryate/polyphosphate ion channel s extracted from E. coli as well
as complexes reconstituted from their components uill be determined. These
complexes will be incorporated into planar lipid bilayers and studied with
voltage clamp techniques. Computer molecular mechanics and molecular dynamics
computations will determine the most likely conformations of the polymers in the
channel complexes and elucidate blocking mechanisms. %%% These studies on these
polymers in channel complexes will provide new insights into the mechanisms of
ion-conduction in biological ion channels and bulk phase polymer electrolytes,
and suggest new applications in material science. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Barbara Zain Barbara Zain @ q S u m m a r
y I n f o r m a t i o n ( * 1 @ @ Ä±o9 @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e l l l l
l l l D 1 # &amp; u T 4 D l D l l l l l l l l 7 Abstract 9507282 Reusch
Polyhydroxybutyrate and polyphosphate are polymers found in all biological
cells, yet their functions are largely unknown. This investigator has isolated
an ion channel from bacterial membranes which is composed of polyhydroxybutyrate
and polyphosphate. The polymers combine to form a calcium-selective ion channel
with many of the same properties as the protein calcium channels found in plant
and animal cell membranes. The capacity of polyhydroxybutryate and polyphosphate
to form ion channels derives from the ability of the polyhydroxybutryate to
dissolve salts, and that of polyphosphate to bind some cations more strongly
than others. The ion-selective properties of polyphosphates have led to their
use in water-softening, and the solvent properties of polyhydroxybutyrate are
very similar to those of the polyethers used in lithium batteries, suggesting
that polyhydroxybutryate can be used to prepare ion-conducting materials. In
this research the effects of temperature, pH and salts on the conductance and
selectivity of the polyhydroxybut