* 9507393
* Regulation of Acinetobacter calcoaceticus benzoate          degradation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Ellen Neidle, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 316,857.00

9507393 Neidle Benzoate degradation by the soil bacterium Acinetobacter
calcoaceticus provides an ideal system for investigating the regulation of
aromatic compound degradation. An understanding of the factors controlling the
degradation of the vast number of aromatic compounds in the environment is
central to the success of bioremediation, since many pollutants are structural
analogs of aromatic compounds that are readily degraded by bacteria. Toxic
pollutants similar in structure to benzoate include chlorinated benzoates,
benzene, toluene, ethyl benzene and xylenes. In nature, bacteria funnel many
substrates through a limited number of catabolic pathways, and, therefore,
generalizations can be drawn from in-depth studies of several representative
pathways. The best-characterized of these representative pathways is the
B-ketoadipate pathway, the route by which benzoate as well as many diverse
aromatic compounds can be degraded by A. calcoaceticus. These studies are
characterizing a novel regulatory circuit governing the expression of at least
14 A. calcoaceticus ben and cat genes needed for the conversion of benzoate to
tricarboxylic acid cycle intermediates. BenM and CatM are both LysR-type
transcriptional activators that respond to the inducer cis,cis-muconate, an
intermediate in the degradation of benzoate. In addition, BenM, but not CatM,
can respond to benzoate as an inducer even though this compound is structurally
unlike muconate. The distinctive aspect of this system is the ability of each
activator to control the expression of two unlinked genes, catA and catB, each
in response to muconate. The BenM/CatM system is unique: there are no other
examples of two homologous LysR-type proteins regulating the same genes in
response to the same inducer. By determining the distinct and interactive roles
of CatM and BenM, the novel features of this system can be used to gain insights
into more general aspects of LysR-type transcriptional activation, one of the
most common and important means o f bacterial gene regulation. The objectives of
this work are to determine how BenM and CatM both control catA and catB
expression, and to test the hypothesis that BenM, but not CatM, regulates the
ben genes in response to benzoate. In order to meet these objectives, the CatM
and BenM proteins will be purified and used in studies of protein-DNA binding
interactions and protein-inducer interactions. Analyses of the ben and cat
transcripts, as well as reporter-gene fusions will be used to characterize
transcriptional controls and to determine inducer specificities. A third
objective is to characterize the simultaneous metabolism of multiple aromatic
compounds. The use of novel Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) techniques, in
collaboration with Dr. George Gaines (Isogenetics inc., Chicago, IL) led to the
discovery that muconate is involved in the preferential degradation of specific
compounds when multiple aromatic carbon sources are present. These NMR
techniques will be used to characterize this phenomenon, and the specific roles
of muconate, CatM and BenM in preferential carbon source utilization will be
clarified. %%% In the environment, where multiple carbon sources are always
present, factors controlling degradative preferences are critical in determining
which compounds will be naturally degraded and which will remain as pollutants.
The regulatory controls of A. calcoaceticus should be representative of those
used by soil bacteria in general. Strains of A. calcoaceticus which can degrade
a wide variety of compounds have been isolated from most natural and polluted
environments. They are closely related to pseudomonads and other Gram-negative
members of the gamma subdivision of the Proteobacteria which are largely
responsible for the aerobic degradation of aromatic compounds. The laboratory
strains to be used in these studies are naturally competent for transformation
by DNA, thereby facilitating genetic investigations. Genetic "tools" have been
well-developed for A. calcoaceticus studies, and these systems have contributed
to a significant amount of information on the biochemistry, physiology and
genetic organization of the B-ketoadipate pathway. Previous studies provide the
necessary background for these investigations of the ben and cat genes which
will contribute both to a better understanding of bacterial regulatory
mechanisms and to a rational approach towards bioremediation. ***