* 9507191
* Interaction of Plant Cell Surface Macromolecules and Controlof Cell Expansion
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Jian-Kang Zhu, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 08/31/1997
* USD 144,040.00

9507191 Zhu The long-term objectives of this research are to determine the
functions of plant cell surface proteins in cell differentiation and plant
morphogenesis, and to study the underlying molecular and cell biological basis
of such functions. Plasma membrane arabinogalactan-proteins (AGPs) are a family
of abundant proteoglycans that are thought to interact with both the
cytoskeleton and cell wall. Arabidopsis plants treated with Beta-D-glucosyl
Yariv antigen (a small ligand that selectively binds AGPs), phenocopy the reb
(root epidermal bulger) mutants which display root epidermal cell bulging,
reduced root growth and sharp root bending. This observation strongly suggests
for the first time a role of cell surface AGPs in the control of direction of
cell expansion and root development, and predicts that the reb mutants contain
defective AGPs in the root. To test this hypothesis, studies will be carried out
to further examine the effect of Yariv antigen treatment on Arabidopsis root
development. AGPs in reb mutants will be analyzed using crossed electrophoresis
and immuno- histochemistry. To understand the underlying mechanisms of AGP
function, several novel approaches will be employed to characterize the
interactions between AGPs and other cell surface macromolecules. Furthermore,
Beta-D-glucosyl Yariv antigen-insensitive Arabidopsis mutants will be isolated
and characterized. The mutants will be useful in identifying loci that control
the interaction between AGPs and their cell surface ligands. This integrated
biochemical, molecular, and genetic approach will enable us to firmly establish
a role for cell surface AGPs in the control of cell expansion and root
development, and allow a better understanding of the underlying molecular and
cell biological mechanisms for such a function.