* 9507490
* Gene Regulation During Heterocyst Development
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Stephanie Curtis, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9507490 Curtis The cyanobacteria are a very ancient and diverse group of
photosynthetic bacteria which have a wide distribution in freshwater, marine,
and terrestrial environments. They are unique among photosynthetic prokaryotes
in their ability to perform an oxygen-evolving, or oxygenic, form of
photosynthesis characteristic of plant chloroplasts. A subset of the
cyanobacteria can respond to nitrogen limitations in the environment by the
production of fixed nitrogen. Nitrogen fixation is catalyzed by the oxygen-
sensitive enzyme nitrogenase and requires large amounts of energy in the form of
ATP and reductant. In cyanobacteria, this energy requirement is met through
photosynthesis, and this presents a dilemma as the oxygen byproduct of
photosynthesis inhibits nitrogenase. In Anabaena sp. strain PCC 7120 (Anabaena
7120), this problem is circumvented by spatial separation of nitrogen fixation
and photosynthesis. In the presence of fixed nitrogen, Anabaena 7120 grows as
filaments of uniform photosynthetic vegetative cells. Starvation for fixed
nitrogen triggers the initiation of a differentiation pathway that culminates in
the production of a new cell specialized for nitrogen fixation. These terminally
differentiated cells, heterocysts, develop from vegetative cells at regular
intervals along the filament. During the thirty to forty hours required for
development, the cells destined to become heterocysts undergo a series of
biochemical and morphological alterations that provide an environment favorable
for nitrogen fixation. Though the genetic mechanisms governing heterocyst
development are largely unknown, there is considerable precedent in other
bacterial systems for control at the level of gene transcription. As in other
developmental systems, heterocyst differentiation involves the sequential
activation and repression of a large number of gene sets. Although the
regulation of gene expression during heterocyst development undoubtedly occurs
at many levels, transcriptional control is believed to play a major role. The
broad goal of this project is to extend our knowledge of how genes are regulated
in Anabaena 7120 with an emphasis on transcriptional control. The work is
focused on three genes, rbcL, gnd, and AD239, that fall into three classes with
regard to regulation of transcript levels during vegetative growth and
heterocyst development. The objectives are to understand how these genes are
regulated: 1) The rbcL gene, which encodes a enzyme of carbon fixation is
abundantly expressed in vegetative cells and turned off heterocysts. Experiments
are proposed to identify cis elements that regulate rbcL expression in
vegetative and heterocyst cells, and to begin identification of trans-acting
factors that interact with these cis elements. 2) The gnd gene, which encodes an
enzyme of carbon metabolism, is expressed at low levels during vegetative
growth, and up-regulated during heterocyst development. Experiments address in
which cell types the multiple gnd promoters are utilized, the relative
contribution of each promoters to gnd expression, and the location of cis
elements required for up-regulation during development. 3) The AD239 gene, of
unknown identity, is not expressed in vegetative cells, and is induced by
nitrogen starvation. Experiments address when, and in which cell types AD239 is
expressed, whether AD239 is required for heterocyst development, and the
location of cis elements required for expression of the gene after nitrogen
starvation. %%% This research will help us understand how photosynthesizing
cells can fix nitrogen from their environment. This process is essential to
plant life, and requires the addition of fertilizers if the cells cannot do it
themselves. ***