* 9507418
* Information Transfer
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Michael Tomasello, Emory University, Yerkes Regional Primate Research Center
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 11/30/1999
* USD 81,638.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY IBN 95-07418 PI: Tomasello Information Transfer In nature,
different groups of chimpanzees behave differently, leading to what some have
called "cultural traditions." Tomasello's research will investigate the social
processes of information transfer that underlie these traditions. In the domain
of tool use, one individual from each of two social groups will be removed and
taught a different way to use the same tool to crack nuts. Each trained animal
will then be returned to its group, and opportunities for the group to observe
the "trainee" and to use the tool themselves will be provided. The subsequent
pattern of tool use in the two groups will then be compared to see if the
different models of tool use made a difference. In the area of gestural
communication, the gestural signals of a group of chimpanzees at the Yerkes
Field Station will be documented. As this is the same group that has been
studied previously, longitudinal comparisons of gestural signals among the
groups will be possible. This will provide experimental data on how the gestures
are learned socially. Concerning cooperation, pairs of chimpanzees will be
presented with tasks in which cooperation is required. This will permit
observations of how the animals communicate about the task or otherwise transmit
information so as to coordinate their actions. Determining precisely how
chimpanzees transfer information socially in these three behavioral domains is
important because it will help to elucidate the nature of the mechanisms by
means of which this species takes advantage of the knowledge of groupmates.