* 9507226
* A Dynamic Phase Behavior Model of Thermal Adaptation in     Biological Membranes of Poikilotherms
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Jeffrey Hazel, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9507226 Hazel The goal of the proposed research is to test the validity of a
newly developed model of thermal adaptation in biological membranes of cold-
blooded or poikilothermic animals that emphasizes the adaptive significance of
conserving the dynamic phase behavior of a membrane, i.e., the ability to
maintain and regulate such dynamic membrane properties as rates of endocytosis
and fusion. Regulation of membrane fusion is a process fundamental to virtually
all types of intracellular membrane traffic. The predictions of this model will
be tested by studying several aspects of membrane structure and function in
isolated plasma membranes of temperature-acclimated aquatic poikilotherms
adapted to both cold (rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss, acclimated to 5 and 20
C) and warm (Tilapia mossambica, an African cichlid, acclimated to 20 and 35 C)
waters and by comparing responses in these poikilotherms with comparable data
collected from the homeothermic rat (body temperature of 37 C). The first
objective of the proposed research is to determine the extent to which lipid
phase boundaries are conserved at different body temperatures. The second
objective is to determine the temperature sensitivity of dynamic membrane
traffic in animals acclimated and adapted to different temperatures.
Specifically, the temperature dependence of rates of both fluid- phase and
receptor-mediated endocytosis, in addition to the rate of cholesterol transport
from its site of synthesis in the ER to the plasma membrane, will be determined
in isolated hepatocytes of trout, Tilapia and rat. The third objective is to
determine the extent to which temperature acclimation/adaptation alters the
fusogenic capacity of hepatic plasma membrane lipids. The significance of the
proposed work lies in providing a better definition of those fundamental
properties of a membrane that must be conserved in order for membrane function
to be maintained at extremes of environmental temperature. ***