* 9507318
* Role of the Mevalonate Biosynthetic Pathway in Cell Cycle   Progression
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Katherine Swenson, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 07/31/1997
* USD 160,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F Mb'&gt; @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e
c t P o o l Mb'&gt; Mb'&gt; 4 @ * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 F Microsoft Word 6.0
Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Abstract Swenson 9507318 A growing body of
evidence indicates that cell cycle progression requires a functioning mevalonate
biosynthetic pathway. Using oocytes and synchronous cultures of early embryos
from the surf clam, a functioning mevalonate biosynthetic pathway has been found
to be required for the passage through discrete stages of the cell cycle. This
pathway is required for activation, when the quiescent oocyte re-enters the cell
division cycle, and for passage through the metaphase/anaphase transition of
meiotically dividing embryos. In these embryos where the mevalonate biosynthetic
pathway is non-functional, cyclin proteolysis, which normally occurs at the end
of metaphase and is required for the exit from metaphase, is blocked. The goals
of the experiments that are proposed fall into two categories. One set of
experiments is focused on determining the specific metabolites from the
mevalonate biosynthetic pathway that regulate cell cycle progression in clams at
the time of activation and for passage through meiotic metaphase. These studies
will be done using cells as well as extracts, which undergo meiosis in vitro.
The second set of experiments are focused on characterizing the contribution of
the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway to specific cellular processes known to be
required for activation (the influx of Ca++ through voltage-gated channels) and
those required for passage through metaphase of the cell cycle in early embryos
(cyclin specific proteolysis). %%% The results of these studies may provide
insights regarding the role of the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway in specific
cellular processes necessary for cell division in all proliferative cells. ***
Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract Barbara Zain Barbara
Zain @ q ?'&gt; @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ) @ q ?'&gt; @ Microsoft
Word 6.0 1 ; e = e l l l l l l l E 1 # ' v T 4 E l E l l l l l l l l 8 Abstract
Swenson 9507318 A growing body of evidence indicates that cell cycle progression
requires a functioning mevalonate biosynthetic pathway. Using oocytes and
synchronous cultures of early embryos from the surf clam, a functioning
mevalonate biosynthetic pathway has been found to be required for the passage
through discrete stages of the cell cycle. This pathway is required for
activation, when the quiescent oocyte re-enters the cell division cycle, and for
passage through the metaphase/anaphase transition of meiotically dividing
embryos. In these embryos where the mevalonate biosynthetic pathway is non-
functional, cyclin proteolysis, which normally occurs at the end of metaphase
and is required for the exit from metaphase, is blocked. The goals of the
experiments that are proposed fall into two categories. One set of experiments
is focused on determining the specific metabolites from the mevalonate
biosynthetic pathway that regulate cell cycle progression in clams at the time
of activation and for passage through meiotic metaphase. These studies will