* 9507803
* Political Organization at Teotihuacan, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* George Cowgill, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 42,525.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. George Cowgill and his colleagues
will analyze the physical remains and associated burial goods of individuals
buried beneath the Feathered Serpent Pyramid at Teotihuacan in the Valley of
Mexico. Occupied during the first millennium AD, Teotihuacan had more than
100,000 occupants and was one of the major urban centers of Mesoamerica. Near
its center was a compound, 400 meters on a side, of great religious and
political significance with palatial room complexes, platforms and 16 stepped
pyramids. The Feathered Serpent is the largest of these. Recent excavation has
uncovered over 130 sacrificial victims and exceptionally rich associated
offerings. Evidence indicates that these were all associated with the
construction of the temple. Dr. Cowgill and his collaborators will analyze these
materials to determine how these individuals fit into the larger society and
what status they held. To accomplish this they will study patterns of dental
filing and inlay, evidence of provenance through stable isotope signatures of
bone and tooth, paleodiet and DNA. Analysis of these as well as non-metric
skeletal and dental traits can furnish evidence about the genetic relatedness of
the victims to other Teotihuacan and non-Teotihuacan groups and studies of
skeletal and dental stress markers provide evidence for social status. The goal
of this research is to understand the political organization of this large
precolumbian city. Archaeologists have generally believed that sacrificial
victims are war captives but analysis to date of associated materials suggests
that these individuals were part of Teotihuacan society. While prehistoric
Middle American peoples had a form of writing and this has revealed much about
the political organization of adjacent Mayan groups, very few inscriptions have
been recovered at Teotihuacan and archaeologists wish to understand how much
power rulers and ruling elites actually held. Preliminary evidence indicates
that the victims were from upper classes and if this is so it implies that these
groups functioned within considerable constraints. This research is important
for several reasons. It will provide new insight into how state level societies
arise and are maintained. It will yield data of interest to many archaeologists
and help to write a poorly understood chapter of New World prehistory.