* 9507991
* RUI: A Proposal to Study the Significance of Fracture-      Induced Anisotropy on Recharge into an Alluvial Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Geoffrey Thyne, California State University Bakersfield Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9507991 Gillespie This study will examine the significance of fracture-directed
flow on recharge patterns in an arid, alluvial aquifer. Alluvial basin aquifers
in the western U.S. are dependent on recharge derived from adjacent mountain
ranges. A significant amount of this recharge may be transported in the
subsurface via fractures within the bedrock aquifers and along basin-bounding
faults. We propose to determine the extent to which fracture systems within the
southern Sierra Nevada Range and the Owens Valley Fault Zone redistribute
recharge from the Sierras into the western part of the Indian Wells Valley
alluvial aquifer. The proposed research is a logical extension of the
investigators' interest in the architecture and hydrogeochemistry of alluvial
aquifers and petroleum reservoirs. It may have a broader significance in the
development of improved conceptual models of recharge patterns in arid alluvial
aquifers and lead to the discovery of ground water resources in areas normally
considered poor candidates for ground water development. Our methods will
include remote sensing, surface and subsurface field studies to determine the
location of phreatic divides, the orientation of fracture patterns, the
hydraulic gradient along the fractures and gradients within the alluvial
aquifer. Chemical and isotopic analyses, including age-dating along the major
flow paths, will be used to delineate flow systems, assess the role of fractures
as barriers or conduits and constrain the relative contribution of fracture-
directed flow versus surface recharge. Finally, geologic and hydrologic data
will be incorporated into existing numerical flow models and the amount and
distribution of subsurface recharge to the alluvial aquifer quantified. The
investigators will employ undergraduate and graduate students and provide
training in the qualitative and quantitative techniques of classis field
geology, hydrogeology and hydrochemistry. The students will play an ac tive role
in the dissemination of the information via abstracts, poster sessions,
presentations and travel to regional professional society meetings.