* 9507921
* Attention, Memory, and Social Perception in a Multicultural Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Michael Zarate, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/1998
* USD 115,663.00

This program of research investigates the cognitive processes involved in social
perception, focusing on how memory and attention influence social categorization
and stereotyping processes. The research is grounded in the Smith-Zarate
exemplar model of perception which holds that social judgments are based on a
target's similarity to past specific memory traces of persons rather than on the
target's similarity to abstract prototypes or group stereotypes. Eight studies
will test this model within an inter-ethnic context on an international border,
investigating how past experiences with individuals from various social groups
influence the application of social stereotypes. Questions addressed include how
minorities are perceived, how the passage of time influences specific memory
traces about people, how people learn about new groups, and how a perceiver's
own gender and ethnicity influence social perception processes. The consequences
of targets' multiple category membership (e.g., ethnicity and gender) on social
judgments are examined in this work which, by using photographs rather than
linguistic labels, provides more ecological validity than much of the existing
research on stereotyping. Another significant strength of the project is the use
of an ethnically diverse subject population, which will provide meaningrful
answers to the question of how target and perceiver attributes influence
intergroup categorization processes. Finally, the project will advance the
theoretical development of exemplar theories of memory and categorization,
incorporating modeels of steroetyping into other domains of decision making.
This research addresses how and why humans categorize others into groups, the
mediating processes predicting categorization, and the consequences of
categorizations for stereotype formation and change. The fact that any
individual can be categorized in multiple ways (e.g., by gender, ethnicity,
occupation) is explored in investigations of how categorization of people is
influen ced by the social context in which they appear as well as by the
perceiver's own attributes. Thus, for example, one study will test the
hypothesis that people will be categorized according to whichever of their
attributes is most salient (e.g., most unique) in the social context in which
they appear, and that such contextually induced categorization can produce later
stereotyping even by judges who were not intially so disposed. This research
employs a population of Hispanic students that is underrepresented in basic
research on stereotyping and it has the unique advantage of advancing
theoretically relevant steroetyping research in an envrionment where a
disadvantaged minority (Hispanics) are the local majority. The subject
population make these studies ideally suited to providing meaningrful answers to
the theoretically important question of how target and perceiver attributes
influence intergroup categorization processes. This work is highly relevant to
the goals of the NSF Human Capital research agenda in the domain of
'disadvantage in a diverse society', since it will contribute to the
understanding of basic cognitive processes that foster stereotyping and
discrimination as well as how these effects can be exacerbated or ameliorated by
different social contexts.