* 9507751
* Polymer Solutions,  Coil-Globule and Other Phase            Transitions, US-Turkey Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Frank Karasz, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 06/30/1998
* USD 43,275.00

Description: This project supports collaboration by Dr. Frank Karasz, Professor
of Polymer Science and Engineering at the University of Massachusetts, and two
Turkish scientists: Dr. Bahattin Baysal, Director, Research Institute of Basic
Sciences at the Marmara Research Centre (MRC), Gebze, Turkey and Dr. E. Elif
Hamurcu, a Reserach Assistant at Bogazici University in Istanbul and also a
Research Specialist in the Polymer Research Project at the MRC. The research
deals with the transition of a polymer chain in dilute solution from an expanded
coil in a good solvent to a collapsed, compact globular structure in a poor
solvent. A comprehensive and quantitative understanding of chain collapse has
not yet been achieved through experimental or theoretical means. The phenomena
is intimately related to certain biological processes, including DNA folding and
protein denaturation and tertiary structure formation. In this project the two
scientists will use experimental techniques, including dynamic light scattering
and viscometry, in detailed studies of coil collapse in near theta conditions
for polar macromolecules in binary and ternary systems. Volume-phase transitions
in network systems will also be investigated. Scope: This project brings
together two scientists with excellent experiences and strong capabilities in
research in the field of polymers. Dr. Karasz has investigated the helix-coil
transition of polypeptides with calorimetric and scattering methods, and the
conformational variation of linear and star, flexible and semiflexible
macromolecules in solution as functions of molecular weight, concentration,
architecture, ionic strength and confining geometry. Dr. Baysal has studied
chain characteristics in dilute solution including coil-to-globule transition
with theoretical analysis and viscometric and dielectric experiments. These
complementary expertise provide for a logical combination of their research
interests. A postdoctorate from MRC also will participate in the research at the
U. of Massachusetts. The project meets the objectives of the Division of
International Programs.