* 9507628
* Hierarchical versus Simple Persuasive Messages
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* Diane Mackie, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/2000
* USD 201,991.00

Hierarchical persuasive messages advocate two strategies for coping with a
stated problem, the primary recommendation touted as the best strategy and a
secondary recommendation advocated as a contingency ("Don't have sex -- but if
you do, use a condom"). Despite their increasing popularity in public health
campaigns, little is known of the actual persuasive or behavioral impact of
hierarchical messages. The specific aims of the proposed experiments are to
assess the shortterm and longterm processing, persuasive, judgmental, and
behavioral intention consequences of hierarchical compared to simple (containing
only one recommendation) persuasive messages. The impact of receiving
hierarchical and simple messages will be assessed as regards the general issue
(for example, preventing sun-induced skin cancer), as well as the primary and
secondary recommendations made, with particular concern for whether heirarchical
messages strengthen or weaken the persuasive effetciveness of the primary (most
effective) recommendation. The spiraling cost of health care in this country is
an issue of both social and economic concern. One simple fact is widely agreed
upon: preventive behavioral change (changes that people make to increase the
healthiness of their lifestyles) probably constitutes the most effective cost-
cutting measure available. Behavioral scientists contribute to increases in
preventive care by evaluating the effectiveness of health-related persuasive
techniques designed to improve the general population's mental and physical
health. This program of research evaluates the effectiveness of hierarchical
persuasive messages, which advocate two strategies for coping with a stated
problem, the primary recommendation (touted as the best strategy) and a
secondary recommendation (advocated as a contingency if the best strategy can't
be achieved. For example, the hierarchical message "The best way to prevent skin
cancer is to avoid exposing your skin to the sun. If you must go out in the s
un, use sunblock" offers two solutions to avoidng skin cancer. Despite their
increasing popularity in public health campaigns, little is known of the actual
persuasive or behavioral effectiveness of hierarchical messages. The specific
aims of the proposed experiments are to assess the shortterm and longterm
persuasive impact of hierarchical messages on health-related attitudes and
behavior, with particular concern for whether heirarchical messages strengthen
or weaken the persuasive effectiveness of the primary (most effective)
recommendation and thus unwittingly undermine public health.