* 9507320
* Fecundity in Populations with Different Progesterone        Profiles
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Gillian Bentley, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 08/31/1998
* USD 156,313.00

Recently published data demonstrate that different populations have varying
levels of salivary progesterone (P), but researchers are uncertain as to its
significance. Among less well-nourished and more stressed populations, P levels
are chronically lower than among healthy Western controls. Some reproductive
ecologists have suggested that this variability represents different levels of
ovarian function, but other demographers counter that women living in such
marginal conditions exhibit high fertility and hence must remain fecund. There
has been no direct measures of the relationship between interpopulational
differences in fecundity (the capacity to conceive) and interpopulational
variability in such reproductive steroids that would clearly support either of
these assertions. Resolving this dispute is essential before considering either
the implications or causes of interpopulaitonal variability in salivary P. This
research project by two younger women researchers proposes to examine the
following related three hypotheses: 1) there are significant interpopulational
differences in chronic levels of P; 2) women in more stressful environments have
lower levels of P than women living in better conditions; and 3) these
interpopulational differences do not translate into differences in fecundity and
fertility. To test these hypotheses, the investigators have chosen for study a
traditional Quechua-speaking population in rural Norte de Potosi, Bolivia, who
live in dispersed communities and rely almost exclusively upon agriculture and
herding for subsistence. They do not attempt to limit the number of births and
venereal diseases are not common. Women will be sampled longitudinally for
levels of salivary P, and concurrent conceptions will be detected using urinary
indicators of human chorionic gonadotropin. Demographic information will also be
collected related to fertility determinants. The study is expected to help
resolve the outstanding and much-debated issue between demographers and
reproductive ecologists described above - specifically, whether recorded
physiological indicators of variable ovarian function reflect differences in
fecundity and fertility.