* 9507485
* RUI: Control of DNA Replication and Mitotic Checkpoint      Function by the Aspergillus nidulans nim0 Gene
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Steven James, Gettysburg College
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 06/30/2001
* USD 229,783.00

9507485 James The goal of this project is to define the function of the
Aspergillus nidulans cell cycle regulator nimO. In particular, the experiments
will address the role of nimO in controlling the initiation of DNA replication
and in establishing the checkpoint that prevents mitosis from occurring until
DNA has been replicated. The specific aims of the research are as follows: I.
nimO function will be defined through a combination of molecular and phenotypic
analyses, with the following specific objectives: (a) Define precisely when nimO
function is required during the cell cycle using in vivo DNA labelling and
double reciprocal shift experiments. (b) Determine the consequences for cell
growth and cell cycle progression of a disruption of the nimO gene. (c) Map
functional domains of the nimO gene by site-directed mutagenesis and
overexpression of mutant nimO alleles. In particular, analyze the function of
the novel Cys2-His2 zinc finger domain collaboration . (d) Characterize the
abnormal mitotic induction of nimO18 mutants using immunocytological methods.
(e) Determine the temporal expression of the nimO gene during the cell cycle by
Northern blot analysis. II. Identify genes whose products interact with the nimO
protein in order to mediate cell cycle control. A genetic approach will be used
to isolate extragenic suppressors of the nimO18 mutation. Alternatively, a two-
hybrid approach may be used to identify nimO-interacting proteins. %%% Control
of the eukaryotic cell cycle, the carefully orchestrated series of events in
which the chromosomes are replicated and then segregated into identical daughter
nuclei, is an issue of fundamental importance in cell biology.The proposed
molecular and genetic analyses of the nimO gene of the fungus Aspergillus
nidulans will enhance the understanding of eukaryotic cell cycle regulation by
characterizing functionally important regions of the protein and by delineating
the role of this gene in cell cycle progression and mitotic checkpoint functi
on. Given the scientific excellence of this project and the investigator's deep
commitment to involving undergraduates in it, this project is an example of the
type which will raise the scientific literacy of the population. ***