* 9507217
* "FLYBRAIN," The First in a Federation of Databases for      Insect Neurobiology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Kim Kaiser, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Gilna
* 07/31/1998
* USD 440,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 23 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l $^ 23 $^ 23 0 ! " # $ % &amp; ' ( ) * + , - . / 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; &lt;
= &gt; ? @ A B C D E F G H I J K L M F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; e = e E E j j j j j j j &amp; 1 W T - &amp; j &amp; j j j j ~
j j j j ^ This award will support the development of Flybrain - a database that
will assemble current data about the neurobiology of the fruit fly (Drosophila).
Drosophila is an important research organism for the study of molecular genetics
of neuronal development and the neuronal basis of behavior. Among complex
nervous systems, that of the insect ranks as one of the most accessible
experimentally. Defined and quantifiable behaviors can be related to subsets of
uniquely identified receptor, central, and efferent neurons, whose combined
actions can be considered in the context of animal behavior. Biomedical interest
in this relationship derives from the recognition that many regions of the
insect nervous system have architectures similar to brain areas of higher
vertebrates, and that sensory neuropils in both share common computational
properties. Comprehensive understanding of how cooperative activity between
layers of identifiable neurons leads to complex behavioral repertoires requires
that neural data derived by many different researchers be made available through
a database. ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT This award will support the development of
Flybrain - a database that will assemble current data about the neurbiology of
the fruit fly (Drosophila). Drosophila is an important research orgranism for
the study of molecular genetics of neuronal develo John H. Porter Robin Warren @
3GU / @ 13 @ 23 @ ^ Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; E V c c E ! K @ Normal a " A@ "
Default Paragraph Font E E E E ^ John H.
Porter#\\CLM2\BIRWORK\JPORTER\STRAUABS.DOC Robin Warren
\\CLM2\BIRWORK\STRAUSFE.ASC @ D D = = D D 1 Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial "
h I * % * % $ - This award will support the development of Flybrain - a database
that will assemble current data about the neurbiology of the fruit fly
(Drosophila). Drosophila is an important research orgranism for the study of
molecular genetics of neuronal develo John H. Porter Robin Warren ; ;