* 9507745
* The Role of 54CP in Chloroplast Protein Targeting
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Neil Hoffman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/1997
* USD 140,000.00

MCB-9507745 Hoffman One of the major unresolved problems of chloroplast protein
transport is the mechanism by which proteins are integrated into chloroplast
membranes. As most of the proteins that function in the light reactions of
photosynthesis are embedded in the thylakoid membrane, the process by which
proteins are inserted into this membrane is of great importance. The
investigators have recently discovered that a chloroplast protein, 54CP,is
essential for the integration of the major light harvesting protein (LHCP) into
thylakoid membranes in vitro. The main objective of the present proposal is to
test the hypothesis that 54CP plays a fundamental role in intrachloroplast
protein targeting by examining the function of the protein in vivo. To
accomplish this objective, plants are being created that are reduced in 54CP
content or that express mutant forms of 54CP that confer a dominant negative
phenotype. Such plants will allow the investigators to study the role of 54CP in
protein targeting in vivo. Defects in protein targeting will be assessed by
measuring leaf chlorophyll content, analyzing the polypeptide composition of the
chloroplast membranes, determining the expression of chloroplast heat shock
proteins, and by conducting a sensitive transport assay. Leaves will be in vivo
labelled with 35S -Met and the distribution of specific thylakoid proteins in
soluble and membrane fractions will be determined by immunoprecipitation. These
experiments should reveal whether the targeting of LHCP is strictly dependent on
a 54CP pathway and whether other chloroplast proteins require 54CP for
targeting. These experiments might also reveal whether alternate transport
pathways can compensate for defects in the 54CP pathway. A second objective is
to elucidate details of the GTP hydrolysis cycle required for 54CP function.
Several types of experiments are planned in this regard. First, mature 54CP and
forms mutated in the guanine nucleotide binding domain will be purified and the
nucleotide binding and hydrolysis activities measured. Second, these proteins
will be preloaded into isolated chloroplasts and used to study LHCP trafficking
in organello. If the proteins inhibit transport, further biochemical studies
will be conducted to ascertain the site of action. The mutant forms of the
protein might form stable complexes with other components of the 54CP dependent
targeting pathway and facilitate their isolation. The proposed studies should
advance our knowledge of the biogenesis of thylakoid membranes. A protein
related to 54CP is found in the cytoplasm of all eukaryotes and plays a role in
directing proteins to the secretory system. Similar proteins have also been
found in prokaryotes though a function has not been clearly established. Thus
the proposed studies should reveal insight into the ways in which 54p has
evolved and functions in different organisms and organelles. %%% Plants contain
chloroplasts, a highly compartmentalized organelle having an internal membrane
called the thylakoid which converts the energy of sunlight into the chemical
energy stored in our foodstuffs. Most of the proteins that function in the light
reactions of photosynthesis are embedded in this membrane. One of the major
unresolved problems of chloroplast protein transport is the mechanism by which
proteins are integrated into the thylakoid membrane. The investigators have
recently obtained evidence from a cell free system that a chloroplast protein,
54CP, is essential for the integration of the major light harvesting protein
(LHCP) into thylakoid membranes. The investigators now propose to test the
hypothesis that 54CP plays a fundamental role in intrachloroplast protein
targeting by examining the function of the protein in vivo. To accomplish this
objective, transgenic plants are being created that are reduced in 54CP content
or express mutant forms of the protein that will interfere with endogenous 54CP
function. Such plants will allow the investigators to study the role of 54CP in
protein targeting in vivo. These experiments should reveal whether the targeting
of LHCP is strictly dependent on a 54CP pathway and whether other chloroplast
proteins require 54CP for targeting. These experiments might also reveal whether
alternate transport pathways can compensate for defects in the 54CP pathway. The
proposed studies should advance our knowledge of the biogenesis of thylakoid
membranes. A protein related to 54CP is found in the cytoplasm of all eukaryotes
and plays a role in directing proteins to the secretory system. Similar proteins
have also been found in prokaryotes though a function has not been clearly
established.. Thus the proposed studies should reveal insight into the ways in
which 54p fits into the accurate and efficient mechanisms which have evolved for
delivering proteins to specific intracellular destinations. Protein sorting is
an essential process; abnormalities lead to cell death. In addition to the
fundamental importance of protein targeting in sustaining life, a basic
understanding of the process has relevant practical applications. For example,
it is now possible to introduce foreign genes into many organisms. By
understanding how organisms control protein sorting, it will be possible to
control the precise localization of the proteins expressed from these foreign
genes. In plants, such applications include the production of gene products that
confer increased resistance to disease or stress, lead to improvements in
productivity and nutritional characteristics, or enable the synthesis of
bioproducts such as pharmaceuticals and raw materials f or the chemical
industry. ***