* 9507749
* Preservation of Mixed Media Photographic Collections at the Peabody Museum, Harvard
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* David Pilbeam, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/1997
* USD 194,877.00

With National Science Foundation support, the Peabody Museum of Harvard
University will curate the approximately half a million photographic images in
its collections. It will install environmental controls in a room dedicated to
this purpose. Included is an air filtration system. Custom-fitted powder coated
steel shelving units with proper storage enclosures will be installed and these
will provide a cost effective means of long-term preservation of sensitive
historical photographic materials. A computerized shelf inventory will assist
researchers. Although color slides in the Peabody Museum holdings have been
conserved and placed in proper storage, the remainder of this invaluable
collection is subject to deterioration given current storage conditions. These
materials constitute an extremely important body of scientific data and some are
over 130 years of age. Together these photographs span the range of archaeology,
cultural and physical anthropology and document sites, people and cultures which
no longer exist. Photographs constitute an important scientific resource and the
collections at Peabody Museum are widely used for research purposes. This award
will assure the survival of these materials and increase their accessibility to
the scientific community.