* 9507111
* Regulation of Cell Phospholipid Metabolism by               Phospholipase A2
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Suzanne Barbour, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 07/31/2000
* USD 304,125.00

; R o o t E n t r y F VL @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t G O b j e c
t P o o l VL VL 4 @ . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9507111 Barbour. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is a family
of enzymes which catalyze the release of fatty acid from phospholipids in cell
membranes. Mammalian cells express several structurally diverse isoforms of
PLA2. As these enzymes catalyze the same reaction, one must question the purpose
of this redundancy. Furthermore, although many studies have provided indirect
evidence that PLA2s are important for cell phospholipid metabolism, a lack of
specific inhibitors has hampered confirmation of these studies. The goals of
this research effort are to provide direct evidence for the roles of the PLA2s
in cell phospholipid metabolism and function, and to determine which isoforms of
the enzyme are involved in these processes. Antisense RNA will be used to block
the expression of each of the three isoforms of PLA2 expressed by the
macrophage-like cell line P388D1. Phospholipid composition and phospholipid
metabolism will be compared in control cells and cells lacking each of the
PLA2s. Functional assays will be performed to determine whether cells that lack
the PLA2s retain the capacity to function as m acrophages. Together, these
experiments will directly assess the role of PLA2 in phospholipid metabolism and
cell function, and provide insight into the need for diverse isoforms of the
enzyme. %%% Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is a family of enzymes which break down a
specific group of fats called phospholipids. The goal of this research is to
distinguish the function of the various forms of this enzyme in the physiology
of cells. This research project involves preparing cells which lack specific
forms of PLA2. A mouse cell line, P388D1, was chosen for the experiments because
these cells express three types of PHA2. Antisense RNA technology will be used
to block the synthesis of each of the PHA2s in P388D1 cells. The antisense cells
will be used to distinguish the physiological roles of different forms of PLA2s.
*** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( -
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Panel Summary Shelley A. Graves Shelley A. Graves
@ o @ @ UL @ # VL @ d Microsoft Word 6.0 6 ; ; e = e G l l l l l l l 1 # A a T C
l l l l l l l l l r 9507111 Barbour. Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is a family of
enzymes which catalyze the release of fatty acid from phospholipids in cell
membranes. Mammalian cells express several structurally diverse isoforms of
PLA2. As these enzymes catalyze the same reaction, one must question the purpose
of this redundancy. Furthermore, although many studies have provided indirect
evidence that PLA2s are important for cell phospholipid metabolism, a lack of
specific inhibitors has hampered confirmation of these studies. The goals of
this research effort are to provide direct evid