* 9507329
* Plastid RNA Polymerase Sigma Factors
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Robert Troxler, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9507329 Troxler RNA polymerase is a key component of the transcriptional
apparatus in plastids and is responsible for expression of about 130 genes for
rRNAs, tRNAs and proteins required for transcription, translation and
photosynthesis. Genes for 4 RNA polymerase subunits have significant homology to
genes coding for the core subunits of RNA polymerase in bacteria. Plastid
genomes do not contain genes for proteins with recognizable homology to RNA
polymerase sigma factors in bacteria. This is surprising because many plastid
genes contain promoter-like elements that resemble the -10 (TATAAT) and -35
(TTGACA) consensus promoters in genes recognized by sigma 70 -type sigma factors
I RNA polymerase holoenzymes from bacteria. Lack of knowledge of sigma factor
components in plastid RNA polymerase is a major gap in understanding how
plastids recognize their genes. The investigator has isolate the gene for a
sigma factor from the unicellular rhodophyte, Cyanidium caldarium, by screening
a genomic sublibrary with a degenerate oligonucleotide coding for a highly
conserved region called the "rpoD box" in sigma 70 of Escherichia coli and sigma
43 of Bacillus subtilis. The deduced amino acid sequence of the putative sigma
factor contains highly conserved domains for promoter recognition, DNA melting
and core binding found in sigma factors from bacteria. The mRNa for the putative
sigma factor is a 2.2 kb polyadenylated transcript expressed only in illuminated
cells suggesting that this protein is encoded in a nuclear photogene. Genomic
DNA digested with restriction enzymes contained 4-5 restriction fragments that
hybridized to the rpoD box oligonucleotide suggesting that there is a family of
plastid RNA polymerase sigma factors in C. caldarium. These studies are the
first to identify a plastid RNA polymerase sigma factor in a photosynthetic
eukaryote and provide the "missing link" for investigating mechanisms of plastid
gene recognition. The specific aims of its project are to (1) isolate and c
haracterize clones for the two principal sigma factors in plastid RNA polymerase
from C. caldarium, and (2) examine the expression patterns of sigma factor mRNAs
and proteins in dark and light. %%% RNA polymerase is a key component of the
transcriptional apparatus in plastid intracellular organelles such as
chloroplasts and is responsible for expression of about 130 genes. The
investigator has recently reported the first identification of a gene for the
plastid polymerase subunit which confess upon the enzyme specificity for
different classes of genes. Such specificity enables cells to tailor their
metabolism to changes in their environments. The investigator's study of this
subunit should help fill a major gap in the understanding of plastid biology.
***