* 9507695
* Cosmology, Theoretical and Computational Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* William Press, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/2001
* USD 790,866.00

A research program in computational astrophysics will be carried out by Prof.
William Press and his group. Topics to be investigated will include the
following: (1) Continued development of a new class of fast statistical methods
(discovered by Rybicki and Press) that reduce some formerly intractable problems
in signal and data processing to computationally fast problems. (2) Application
of these methods to the study of galaxies at moderate to high redshifts, where
new cosmological information can be discerned. (3) Several tests on the reality
of large scale cosmological flows, including the use of Type Ia supernovae. (4)
A systematic investigation of new and unified methods for measuring the galaxy
correlation function (or power spectrum) on the very largest scales accessible
to observation. (5) The possible role of cataclysmic variable stars as an
indicator of the early history of evolution of our Galaxy. (6) Measurement of
mass-to-light ratios on large cosmological scales. (7) A study of parallel
computational algorithms and "idioms" with application to scientific computing
generally. (8) Possibly, the development of large scale computer codes in the
areas of hydrodynamics in wavelet basis, and/or classical three- dimensional
field theory calculations. Prof. Press and his group work on a variety of topics
in cosmology, theoretical astrophysics, and computational physics and
astrophysics. Behind this diversity of topics, lies the central focus of
interest: Given the hot big bang, did the structure in the Universe today form
gravitationally? And, if so, how, when, and with what implications regarding the
Universe's initial conditions? The group has a major interest not only in
developing new, testable, theoretical ideas that bear on this question, but also
in developing new analytical, statistical, and computational techniques that are
capable of extending the power and relevance of existing and future
observational data sets. Towards this end, P ress and his co-members have a
continuing interest in fast computational methods, parallel computing, and the
development of new algorithms. Often these have application not only to
gravitational physics and astrophysics, but also to science and engineering more
broadly.