* 9507494
* The Role of Rab GTPases and V-H+ ATPases in Membrane Traffic
* BIO,MCB
* 10/15/1995,09/30/1997
* James Cardelli, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 09/30/1997
* USD 179,610.00

9507494 Cardelli The long term goal of the project is to define the molecular
mechanisms which regulate the biosynthesis and function of lysosomes, organelles
that function to degrade extracellular and intracellular material and that play
an important role in cellular metabolism. In previous studies the biosynthesis,
processing and targeting mechanisms for lysosomal hydrolases have been
characterized in the simple eukaryote, Dictyostelium discoideum, an organism
well suited for these studies because of the ease in which it can be manipulated
genetically and biochemically. As part of the aims of this proposal, some of the
proteins that are enriched in lysosomes will be characterized. One of the
identified proteins is a subunit of an enzyme (V-H+-ATPase) responsible for
acidifying the lumens of lysosomes and endosomes. The other protein, Rab4, is a
member of a large family of small GTPases involved in vesicular trafficking.
Rab4 and the proton pump are also highly enriched in the contractile vacuole
(CV) complex and preliminary data suggest that these proteins regulate the
function of this organelle and the endosomal pathway. In the present
application, molecular genetic techniques will be used (gene disruption,
overexpression and antisense RNA expression) to create cell lines that either do
not express these proteins or express mutant versions of these proteins. These
cell lines will be analyzed biochemically to determine how the
lysosomal/endosomal and CV system functions under conditions where acidification
is suppressed and vesicular trafficking may be altered. Our functional tests
will include measuring; 1) the rate of processing and transport of lysosomal
hydrolases, 2) the percentage of newly synthesized precursors that are
appropriately targeted, 3) the rate of endocytosis, phagocytosis, and secretion
and 4) if the CV is altered in function. Together these approaches will provide
relevant new information on the regulation of endosomal/lysosomal and CV
function. %%% This is a project dealing with the definition of the molecular
mechanisms regulating the formation of endosomes and lysosomes; organelles that
function to degrade extracellular and intracellular biological material. Very
little is now known concerning how lysosomes are formed and much remains to be
learned concerning how they function to regulate a wide variety of cellular
processes. These studies are conducted in a simple eukaryotic system,
Dictyostelium discoideum, because sophisticated genetic and biochemical
approaches can be applied. In earlier studies, two proteins have been identified
that are associated with lysosomes and endosomes; these proteins may play an
important role in the structure and function of these organelles. One of the
proteins, Rab4, functions in mammalian cells to regulate the trafficking of
membranes along the endosomal pathway (the route extracellular material takes to
reach lysosomes) while the other protein, the proton pump ATPase, functions to
acidify lysosomes and endosomes. Interestingly, in this organism, both of these
proteins are also associated with the membrane system termed the contractile
vacuole. This organelle is responsible for pumping out water and functions at
the cellular level much like a kidney functions in humans. This is a proposal to
use genetic and biochemical approaches to define the role of the proton pump and
Rab4 in the assembly and function of endo-lysosomes and the contractile vacuole.
Together, these approaches using this simple eukaryotic cell will provide
relevant new and important information on the regulation of cellular organelles
critical for normal cell function. ***