* 9507924
* Specialization of the Right and Left Cerebral Hemispheres
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Joseph Hellige, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/1999
* USD 223,871.00

9507924 HELLIGE The goal of cognitive neuroscience is to understand how it is
that our brains produce our thoughts, our emotions and our actions. A pervasive
characteristic of the human brain is what has been termed cerebral hemisphere
asymmetry. The cerebral cortex (or outside surface) of the brain is divided into
two hemispheres, the right and the left. Although their gross appearance is very
similar, there are subtle differences in the anatomical structure of the two
hemispheres and in their information processing abilities and propensities. This
research will investigate the consequences of this hemispheric specialization
for information processing in neurologically normal individuals in several
specific areas of functioning. One set of studies will increase our
understanding of hemispheric specialization for processing spatial relationships
by investigating visual mechanisms that underlie the tendency of the two
hemispheres to make different contributions to processing what have been called
categorical (e.g., above/ below, left/right, etc.) and coordinate (e.g.,
distance between two objects) aspects of spatial location. A second set of
studies will determine the extent to which the same visual mechanisms also
contribute to hemispheric differences in the identification of visual stimuli,
including letters, words and other multipart objects (e.g., an airplane). In
order to understand how it is that the two hemispheres make complementary
contributions to perception, cognition and action, it is important to understand
the ways in which the two hemispheres interact with each other to coordinate
their activities and produce unified effects on behavior. For this reason, a
third set of studies will examine interhemispheric interaction for the
processing of both verbal and nonverbal information, with an emphasis on tasks
that are known to be performed in qualitatively different ways by the left and
right hemispheres. It is also impossible to understand the role that hemispheric
asymmetry plays in normal cognitive processing without understanding the role
that such asymmetry plays in individual variation. With this in mind, a fourth
set of studies will focus on differences from person to person in the pattern of
hemispheric asymmetry and in the nature and efficiency of interhemispheric
interaction. Some of these studies will also determine the relationship between
various functional or behavioral asymmetries and anatomical/structural brain
asymmetries as determined by brain imaging procedures. Each set of studies will
address basic issues in cognitive neuroscience. At the same time, the outcomes
will have implications for a variety of more applied questions. For example, it
has been hypothesized that a variety of disorders (e.g., dyslexia,) result from
unusual patterns of hemispheric asymmetry or from difficulty in coordinating the
activities of the two hemispheres. Testing such hypotheses requires detailed
information about the normal patterns of operation of the two hemispheres,
separately and in concert. ***