* 9507374
* Biological Characterization of an Amphibian Melanization    Inhibiting Factor (MIF)
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Joseph Bagnara, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 07/31/1999
* USD 199,563.00

9507374 Bagnara The proposed research is directed toward understanding the
cellular and molecular basis for pigmentation patterns (e.g. dorsal, ventral,
spots, stripes, mottling, etc.) of vertebrates of all classes. It is based upon
the premise that local pigmentary patterns are expressed under the localized
influence of trophic or inhibitory factors (molecules) that are found in the
skin manifesting the circumscribed pigmentary pattern. Thus, the common
dorsal/ventral pattern would result from the enhanced expression of melanophores
(-cytes) dorsally under the influence of a localized melanization stimulating
factor (MSF) while the pale ventral surface would result from the inhibition of
melanophore (-cyte) expression by a ventrally located melanization inhibiting
factor (MIF). Presumably, localized action of MSF leads to a localized
expression of dark pigmentation while the opposite holds for MIF. MIF has just
been purified from leopard frog skin (Rana forreri) and a monoclonal antibody
has been raised against it. The monoclonal antibody against MIF is being used as
a probe to both further purify MIF and to detect its localization in the skin.
In fact, MIF has been essentially purified and characterized biochemically. It
is Dr. Bagnara's primary objective to clone and sequence the gene for MIF with
an eye toward comparing it with the protein product of the agouti gene. The
latter is responsible for the agouti pigmentation pattern of mammals. In
addition, he proposes to examine the mechanism of action of MIF on the process
of melanin synthesis. In particular, he wishes to test the effects of MIF on the
specific enzymes responsible for the synthesis of the black pigment of the skin,
hair, and feathers. ***