* 9507263
* Mechanisms of Fungal Pathogenesis: Analysis of a Meiotically Unstable, Dispensable Chromosome
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Sarah Covert, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 101,579.00

9507263 Covert Certain isolates of Nectria haematococca, a fungal pathogen of
plants, contain a chromosome that is often rearranged, partially deleted or
completely lost during meiosis. Changes in the structure of the chromosome can
be visualized, and the sizes of the resulting chromosome derivatives measured on
pulsed field gels. The pattern of chromosomal alterations suggests that this
chromosome contains sites that are particularly susceptible to breakage and
reunion. The first goal of this proposal is to determine if this chromosome
contains hotspots for meiotic breakage and reunion, and if so, to map the
position of these sites on the chromosome. The unstable chromosome in N.
haematococca is of further interest because it contains a gene, Makl, believed
to be essential for pathogenicity on chickpea. The product of Makl detoxifies an
antimicrobial compound produced by chickpea in response to infection. Genetic
analysis of Makl indicated that it is either linked to genes for, or is itself
responsible for high virulence on chickpea. Makl has been cloned and sequenced.
The second goal of this research proposal is to directly test the importance of
Makl in pathogenicity by disrupting it and assaying the resulting mutants for
their ability to cause disease symptoms on chickpea. If the gene disruption
experiment indicates that Makl is not essential for high virulence on chickpea,
it will imply that additional genes involved in chickpea pathogenicity are on
the same chromosome as Makl. In this case, the third goal of this proposal,
mapping novel genes for chickpea pathogenicity on the 1.6 Meg abase Makl
chromosome, will be pursued. %%% This research proposal focuses on a fungal
pathogen of plants, Nectria haematococca. Two aspects of N. haematococca's
biology are particularly interesting: (1) it has an unusual chromosome that is
unstable during meiosis as well as dispensable for saprophytic growth, and (2)
according to genetic evidence, genes on this chromosome are responsible for high
virulenc e of N. haematococca on chickpea (Cicer arietinum). Because the
unstable chromosome is present in field populations, it appears to confer a
significant adaptive advantage to the isolates that contain it. Its instability
may be a mechanism for shedding it in habitats in which it is extraneous. This
research into chromosomal instability and plant pathogenicity will contribute to
scientific knowledge on a number of fronts. The role of unstable, dispensable
chromosomes in fungal-plant interactions will be clarified, the genetic
machinery underlying pathogenicity in a model fungus will be characterized
further, and perhaps most significantly, scholarship on the general mechanisms
of chromosome instability will be advanced. ***