* 9507653
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Microstructural Develop- ment and Characterization of Cyclic Fatique Crack Behavior  of In Situ Toughened Monolithic SiC Ceramics
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Robert Ritchie, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 02/29/2000
* USD 37,060.00

9507653 Ritchie This award provides funds to permit Dr. Robert O. Ritchie,
Department of Materials Science and Mineral Engineering, University of
California, Berkeley, to pursue with Dr. Do Kyung Kim, Department of Ceramic
Science and Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
(KAIST), for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on microstructural
development and characterization of cyclic fatigue crack behavior of in situ
toughened monolithic silicon carbide (SiC) ceramics. The joint research will
focus on the microstructural development of SiC ceramics sintered with oxide
additives in order to promote optimal mechanical properties, especially, fatigue
crack-growth behavior at elevated temperatures. The Korean collaborator will
work primarily on the processing of recently developed in situ toughened SiC
(including microstructural control), characterization of the microstructure, and
determination of the role of additives on sintering behavior and mechanical
properties, including toughness and flexural strength. SiC materials prepared at
KAIST will be sent to the PI's laboratory where cyclic fatigue behavior will be
characterized. Fatigue-crack propagation behavior will be evaluated over
temperatures ranging from ambient to 1,800 C. This phase of the work will
involve both macroscopic growth-rate measurements and characterization of
microstructural damage mechanisms. Monolithic SiC-based ceramics are promising
candidate materials for ultra-high temperature structural components in heat
engines, heat exchangers, and many other devices because of their excellent
oxidation resistance, strength retention at high temperatures, high wear
resistance, good thermal conductivity, and relatively low coefficient of thermal
expansion. Considerable expertise has been developed at KAIST in the production
of these monolithic ceramics with improved microstructures. The PI's research
group has developed considerable expertise in the characteriza tion of such
ceramics at ambient and elevated temperatures. The PI and his Korean
collaborator are highly respected researchers in the field of this proposal.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit.
This project is related to the PI's research supported under NSF Grant No. DMR-
9123279 and provides an international research experience for a U.S. graduate
student. ***