* 9507687
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Mechanisms of Pluton       Emplacement; Study of East China and North America          Batholiths
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Christian Teyssier, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 07/31/2000
* USD 28,625.00

9507687 Teyssier This award supports collaboration between Christian Teyssier,
University of Minnesota, and Wen TianFang, China University of Geosciences on
Mechanisms of pluton emplacement. The PI's core research is focused on testing
the hypothesis that granitoid plutons are emplaced in the upper crust in
tensional bridges between crustal-scale fractures. This research is presently
being conducted in the Sierra Nevada batholith, a major continental arc in the
Circum-Pacific. The aim of the proposed project is to extend the analysis of
pluton-emplacement mechanism to East China in areas that underwent similar
tectonic processes as the Sierra Nevada. The methods used in the Sierra Nevada
involve structural analysis in the field and in the laboratory, and the analysis
of anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility of granitoid rocks in order to retrieve
information about magma flow during emplacement. In East China, it will be
possible to add a new component to this project, the gravity-anomaly analysis of
plutons, in order to define their three-dimensional shape. This technique is
difficult to apply successfully within the Sierra Nevada because the rugged
topography induces large errors. In contrast, the plutons of East China are
exposed in areas of smooth topography, ensuring that this analysis will provide
a useful signal above the background noise. Defining the three-dimensional shape
of plutons, and particularly the root zones of plutons, is a key element in the
hypothesis to be tested. The Chinese group, led by Professor Wan, has
corresponded with the PI regularly in the past two years on the methods of
pluton emplacement analysis. The two study areas in Eastern China were carefully
chosen - in terms of tectonic similarity to the Sierra Nevada, good field
exposure, and gentle topography - to insure meaningful results from the analyses
and thereby test different models of granitoid emplacement effectively. The
Chinese group brings their knowledge of the regional geology and their
experience in the field. The American group brings techniques of rock magnetism
and gravimetry applied to plutons. All stages of the work, from field analysis
to laboratory measurements, will be conducted jointly, and the results will be
written collaboratively.