* 9507003
* Role of Cellular Titin in Cytoskeletal Function
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Thomas Keller, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/2000
* USD 309,999.00

MCB9507003 Thomas Keller III The interaction of myosin II and actin filaments in
cells produces force for important cell processes including cytokinesis. The
mechanism by which myosin II is restricted to interacting with only subsets of
actin filaments such as those in certain regions of cells or in structures such
as stress fibers and cleavage furrows remains poorly understood. In vertebrate
striated muscle, myosin II filaments are tethered to the sarcomere structure by
interaction with muscle titin. Besides a structural role, muscle titins may also
play regulatory roles in sarcomere assembly and contraction through activity of
a kinase domain found in vertebrate muscle titins and invertebrate muscle
minititins. The PI's discovery of c-titin, a cellular isoform of titin that is
colocalized with cellular myosin II in the intestinal epithelial cell brush
border cytoskeleton and in stress fibers and cleavage furrows of other cells,
raised the possibility that c-titin plays a role in localizing and organizing
cellular myosin II. Additional support comes from the demonstrations that
c-titin can organize cellular myosin II filaments into highly ordered arrays in
vitro and that smooth muscle alpha-actinin and actin incorporate into the
c-titin-myosin II structures to yield assemblies that resemble stress fibers.
Assembly of the actin-myosin system depends on a direct interaction between
a-actinin, an actin-associated protein, and c-titin, a myosin II-associated
protein. The objective of the research is to further investigate properties of
c-titin that could contribute to its function. The first specific aim is to use
purified proteins in in vitro reassembly assays to reinvestigate the interaction
of alpha-actinin with c-titin using a cellular isoform of alpha-actinin for
which interaction with actin is Ca2+-sensitive. This investigation will reveal
whether the interaction between cellular a-actinin and c-titin also is
Ca2+-sensitive thus elucidating how Ca2+ might regulate stability and integra
tion of actin-myosin II cytoskeletal structures. The second specific aim is to
determine whether c-titin has kinase activity that regulates the activity of
c-titin or other proteins. The ability of c-titin to autophosphorylate would
suggest that it has an enzymatic mechanism and means of activity regulation
similar to those of other well-characterized kinases, including CaM kinase II.
Several other proteins also will be tested as possible substrates for c-titin
kinase activity, including myosin heavy and light chains. Demonstrating c-titin
kinase activity and identifying possible substrates will support the possibility
that c-titin plays more than a structural role in cytoskeletons. The third
specific aim will address whether c-titin is a substrate for and thereby
regulated by other kinases, including cAMP-dependent protein kinase and protein
kinase C. In vitro phosphorylation by various kinases will be tested for effect
on c-titin activity in organizing myosin filaments in vitro. These three
biochemical characterizations should elucidate key properties of an important
new cytoskeletal organizing component of cells. %%% Cells use the protein myosin
to produce force for important cellular functions such as cell division. What
controls the localization of myosin and thus where force can be produced in
cells remains a mystery. Investigation of the activity of c-titin, a newly
identified myosin associated protein, should elucidate key aspects of cellular
regulation of myosin activity. ***