* 9507218
* Genetic Analysis of the Photoperodic Induction of Flowering in Arabidopsis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Douglas Meeks-Wagner, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 08/31/1998
* USD 384,000.00

9507218 Meeks-Wagner The long term goal of this research is to understand the
molecular mechanisms that regulate the initiation of flowering in response to
changes in daylength. As a first step toward reaching this goal, the
photoperiod-sensitive genetic pathway(s) controlling inflorescence initiation
and development in Arabidopsis thaliana will be investigated. A mutation, Early
Flowering 3 , (ELF3) has been isolated and results suggest that it may function
as a key component of circadian rhythm regulation, as well as a regulator of
inflorescence and floral meristem identity . We will: 1. Define the role of ELF3
gene in the circadian regulation of gene expression and developmental processes.
2. Isolate a molecular clone of ELF 3 and complete the basic characterization of
the gene. 3. Define the genetic pathways related to ELF3 gene function that
regulate floral initiation and floral meristem identity in Arabidopsis. %%% The
research to be done is directed toward testing the hypothesis that the ELF 3
gene product plays a critical role in regulating photoperiodism by "linking" the
biological clock (s) to the genetic pathways that control floral initiation and
flower meristem development. The gene will be cloned and characterized and the
function of its product studied. Completion of these aims should provide
valuable information on the genetic regulation of circadian responses and the
photoperiodic induction of flowering. The results will enhance our basic
knowledge as well l as provide information which could have possible economic
ramifications. ***