* 9507266
* Molecular Aspects of B-Glucan Biosynthesis in Higher Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Bruce Wasserman, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 312,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F Z?lqZ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l Z?lqZ Z?lqZ 4 @ C D E F G H I J K L M F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9507266 Wasserman The biosynthesis of callose
(1,3)-(-linked glucan) in higher plants is catalyzed by the plasma membrane-
bound glycosyl transferase callose synthase (UDP-Glc: (1,3)-(-glucan synthase).
Callose synthase activity is ubiquitous in isolated membrane fractions from a
variety of plants, and has been hypothesized to be a deregulated form of
cellulose synthase. Therefore, to understand the biochemical basis for the
regulation of cell wall polysaccharide biogenesis and wound healing, it is
necessary to identify and characterize the polypeptide subunits of
polysaccharide synthases, like callose synthase, and the genes which encode
them. Red beet (Beta vulgaris L.) storage tissue contains an abundant and stable
callose synthase. Purified callose synthase contains 31, 29, and 27 kDa
polypeptides and a weakly-staining 57 kDa protein. Strongly hydrophobic 31 and
27 kDa polypeptides are plasma membrane-localized members of the major intrinsic
protein (MIP) family. The hypothesis of this project is that callose synthase is
a multimeric complex containing a catalytic subunit closely associated with
transmembrane proteins, forming a channel through which nascent glucans are
translocated. The idea will be tested using three approaches. Immunological and
biochemical experiments will pinpoint callose synthase complex components
responsible for glycosyl transferase activity and polymer translocation.
Genetically, these polypeptides will be cloned and sequenced to determine their
primary structure, orientation within the plasma membrane, and to identify
factors regulating gene expression. Functionally, reconstitution experiments
will correlate specific enzymological and transport properties with individual
polypeptides. Collectively, these studies will integrate the processes of
glycosyl transfer and polymer translocation into a single structural model. %%%
Cellulosic polymers are among the world s most abundant naturally-occurring,
renewable biomolecules. Physiologically, cellulose polymers from plant cell
walls provide structural integrity and protection against invading plant
pathogens. Industrially, wood-containing products are ubiquitous, and
cellulosics are components for the production of paper, textiles, foods, feeds,
fuels, and pharmaceuticals. Despite the economic importance of these materials,
the biochemical and genetic mechanisms are unclear which form plant cellulose
polymers. The objective of this work is to isolate the genes and proteins
responsible for the production of cellulosic biopolymers, also called (-glucans
in higher plants. (-Glucan synthetic complexes will be extracted from the outer
membrane of plant cells and purified. With this information, immunological and
genetic probes will be made to isolate and sequence genes encoding protein
subunits of (-glucan synthases. Evidence indicates that the complex consists of
one class of subunits which elongate polymer chains, and a second class which
serve as membrane pores. These pores provide a conduit, or aperture, for entry
of the polymers into the cell wall. To elucidate the biochemical functions of
these membrane channels, expression studies will be done with recombinant DNA
techniques. This system will provide understanding of plant growth and
development. *** Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Wasserman,
Bruce P. Robert Uffen Shelley A. Graves @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (
B K @ @ ZqZ @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e j j j j j j j 1 # % % % % J