* 9507240
* RUI: Quantitative Relationships for Water and Solute        Transport in Plant Tissue
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Joseph K. Ortega, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1997
* USD 55,000.00

9507240 Ortega The overall goal of Dr. Ortega's previous theoretical and
experimental research was the development of quantitative relationships that
describe growth (enlargement) and water uptake of single fungal and plant cells.
These inestigations have produced three simultaneous and interrelated governing
equations (Augmented Growth Equations) that describe the behavior of cell wall
extension, water uptake, and turgor pressure. The overall objective of the
proposed research is to extend (modify, adapt, and/or augment) the previously
established Augmented Growth Equations to study cell wall extension, water
transport, and solute transport in plant tissue. Some long-term objectives are
(a) to establish governing equations that describe wall extension behavior,
water transport behavior, and solute transport behavior for growing plant
tissue, plant organs, and whole plants, (b) to determine the magnitude and
behvior of the inclusive biomechanical and biophysical parameters, and (c) to
elucidate the biological mechanisms used to control the magnitude and behavior
of these parameters. The volumetric elastic modulus, E, is an important
biomechanical parameter that controls the amount of elastic cell wall extension
that occurs when the turgor pressure changes, and participates in the regulation
of water transport in plant cells and plant tissue during dynamic conditions
such as growth, day/night cycles (diel patterns), and periods of water stress.
Importantly, E is a function of the turgor pressure, E(P). It follows that
comprehensive models of water trnasport, growth, and plant responses to diel
patterns and water deficits, must employ accurate values for E and account for
its dependence on turgor pressure. It has been difficult to obtain accurate
extimates of Estat, and to determine its dependence on pressure, using the
pressure chamber because the pressure is not measured directly by the pressure
chamber method. Recently, Dr. Ortega has developed a new pressure probe method
(whi ch measures the turgor pressure directly) to determine Estat and its
dependence on turgor pressure, Estat(P). Investigations are proposed to use this
new pressure probe method to measure Estat(P) for dehydrating and rehydrating
pea stems (Pisum sativum L.). The results obtained from dehydration and
rehydration experiments will be compared to determine whether there is
significant hysteresis in the pressure-volume relation for cells in pea stem
tissue. Also, it is not known how Estat(P) compares with Einst(P).
Investigations are proposed to determine Estat(P) and Einst(P) for the same
cells and tissue, to elucidate the relationship between the two values.