* 9507366
* Passive and Active Dynamics of Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Philip Nelson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 216,000.00

9507366 Nelson This is a theoretical research grant jointly funded by the
Divisions of Materials Research, Physics and Molecular and Cellular Biology. The
research focuses on the physics of bilayer membranes. Such membranes are of
great interest because they model the real biomembranes surrounding cells and
their constituent organelles. They also have a host of technological
applications to microencapsulation, drug delivery, biosensors, and as the
foundation for novel materials with desirable optoelectronic, transport and
biocompatibility properties. While the equilibrium conformations of artificial,
one- component membranes are well studied and developed, the dynamics of
membranes is less well developed. The following topics will be studied on the
current grant: shapes of monolayer domains; response of artificial membranes to
perturbation, and in particular newly emerging laser tweezer technology for
creating fast, precise, delicate disturbances; dynamics of more realistic
membranes containing active pumps, budding proteins, and other simplified
machines; and, the formation of patterns both within one membrane and in
aggregates of active membranes, in particular in aggregates of biological cells.
%%% This is a theoretical research grant jointly funded by the Divisions of
Materials Research, Physics and Molecular and Cellular Biology. The research
focuses on the physics of bilayer membranes. Such membranes are of great
interest because they model the real biomembranes surrounding cells and their
constituent organelles. They also have a host of technological applications to
microencapsulation, drug delivery, biosensors, and as the foundation for novel
materials with desirable optoelectronic, transport and biocompatibility
properties. ***