* 9507204
* Archaeological Reconnaissance at Chau Hiix:  Agricultural,  Settlement and Political Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* K. Anne Pyburn, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1999
* USD 161,850.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Anne Pyburn will conduct three
seasons of archaeological fieldwork at the Mayan site of Chau Hiix located in
Belize. The site was discovered in 1990 and is of special interest because it is
located between the well documented sites of Lamanai and Altun Ha, themselves
only 40 km apart. Chau Hiix contains about 25 large structures located on and
around its central platform, the largest of which is 20 meters in height. The
outlying settlement area contains a continuous scatter of platform groups and
small mounds interrupted in at least 4 places by clusters of larger buildings on
platforms. Dr. Pyburn and her collaborators will map the distribution of ancient
features in and around Chau Hiix during three seasons combining mapping and test
excavation of the settlement area with excavation in the central precinct. The
methodology is designed to investigate: 1. Chau Hiix's sustaining area and
satellite populations; 2. agricultural features; 3. late period settlement and
civic center. Settlement data will be collected by mapping, testpitting, and
surface collection. A contour map of the settlement will be constructed. and a
sample of 10 to 20% of the structures in the settlement area will be excavated.
Throughout the project excavators will recover pollen samples, human and non-
human bone, carbon, soil, flotation samples and lithic debitage. The ecofacts
will permit reconstruction of the prehistoric environment and provide insight
into Mayan use of it. Archaeologists have focused on the prehistory of the Mayan
peoples because these groups, spread over large portions of lowland tropical
Middle America, created a civilization which supported and incorporated large
numbers of individuals in regions which are today inhabited only by small
numbers of people. Evidence indicates that following a high point during the
Classic period, levels of population density and social integration declined
rapidly and that writing ceased and no new monumental architecture was
constructed. Chau Hiix was occupied during both the Mayan climax and following
decline and through careful examination, Dr. Pyburn will gain insight into both
aspects of this process. She hypothesizes that Mayan farmers were organized into
smallholder groups which were effective productive units and that state
interference with them provided the impetus for the disintegration of Mayan
society. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light into human - environment
interaction in tropical lowland regions and into the rise and decline of complex
societies.