* 9507040
* Functional Group Interactions in DNA-Protein Recognition
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Larry McLaughlin, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9507040 McLaughlin Recognition events involving enzymes, proteins or even simple
ligands and sequences of single or double-stranded DNA are, in the simplest
analysis, the result of specific ionic, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic
interactions present at the macromolecular interface. In order to determine the
nature and the contribution of such intermolecular interactions to the observed
high-affinity binding in such complexes, we will probe individual functional
group contacts. To accomplish this study, incremental changes will be made in
the functional group character (or array) present in a given nucleic acid
recognition site; the effects of such incremental changes upon binding affinity,
catalytic activity or simple structural parameters will be determined. Isosteric
nucleoside analogues will be employed to introduce the incremental changes, by
what amounts to "atomic mutagenesis" in functional group character. The simplest
analogues involve the "deletion modification" of a native nucleoside in which a
specific functional group- amino, carbonyl, imino or methyl - is excised and
replaced with a hydrogen atom. The most useful analogues are those which do not
otherwise alter native inter-strand hydrogen bonding or other helix-stabilizing
effects. We will expand the current repertoire of analogues available to probe
macromolecular recognition processes by developing analogues to probe contacts
to functional groups present in the minor groove of a B-form DNA duplex as well
as those to the internucleotide phosphodiester residues. These analogues will
also permit the study of critical structural parameters such as the importance
of the minor groove spine of hydration for the stability of B-form DNA duplexes,
and the relation of this spine of hydration to the DNA curvature effect present
in oligo A-T sequence. Three sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid complexes
will be examined during the course of this project: the trp repressor-operator
complex, the pre-initiation TBP-TATA box complex that is critically important
for eukaryotic transcription, and the Gene-4 proteins responsible for the RNA
primase activity in bacteriophage T7. These studies will help to further the
understanding of DNA structure as well as sequence-specific protein-nucleic acid
and ligand-nucleic acid interactions by elucidating the location and relative
importance of functional group interactions that contribute to overall
specificity and affinity in such complexes. %%% Recognition events involving
enzymes, proteins or even simple ligands and sequences of single or double-
stranded DNA are, in the simplest analysis, the result of specific ionic,
hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interactions present at the macromolecular
interface. In order to determine the nature and the contribution of such
intermolecular interactions to the observed high-affinity binding in such
complexes, we will probe individual functional group contacts. These studies
will help to further the understanding of DNA structure as well as sequence-
specific protein-nucleic acid and ligand-nucleic acid interactions by
elucidating the location and relative importance of functional group
interactions that contribute to overall specificity and affinity in such
complexes. ***