* 9507978
* Career:  Heterogeneity and the Macroeconomy:  Research and  Teaching in the Intersection of Industrial Organization and Macroeconomics
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Michael T Horvath, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1999
* USD 95,604.00

9507978 Horvath The objective of this CAREER grant is to strengthen the link
between two strands of economics: industrial organization and macroeconomics.
The field of industrial organization has recently been successful in
illuminating several key behavioral characteristics of firms. For example,
almost regardless of industry definition, small and young firms have been shown
to have much more variable growth rates and higher rates of failure than large
and old firms. Little attempt has been made to determine the implications of
these findings for the behavior of the macroeconomy, nor has much emphasis been
placed on macroeconomic forces that may be shaping these findings at the
industry level. This research project would explore the interrelation between
the microeconomic decision-making at the firm level and the macroeconomy. The
emphasis will be on understanding how macroeconomic forces such as fiscal and
monetary policy, as well as aggregate demand and supply shocks affect the
distribution of operating firm types in a broad selection of industries, and how
the changing distribution of firm types influences fluctuations in aggregate
variables such as productivity, job creation, employment, and output. The
education plan entails the development of course sequences for undergraduate and
graduate student son desegregated aspects of the macroeconomy. The discipline of
economias has tended to overemphasize the division between micro and
macroeconomics to the point where students feel it necessary to choose early in
their studies which subfield to embrace. This often works to the detriment of
both the students and the entire field. The merit of the research proposal
hinges on the ability of microeconomic, firm-level behavior to indicate
something meaningful about macroeconomic behavior and vice-versa. Clearly, if
the results provide insightful, then the distinction between microeconomics and
macroeconomics from the perspective of how these subfields are taught is perhaps
needlessl y stringent. The proposed courses would detail the results of the
proposed research but would also explore other topics.