* 9507486
* The Democratic Parliaments of Central Europe:  Collection   and Dissemination of Documents
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* David Olson, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2001
* USD 145,000.00

9507486 Olson With partial funding from the National Science Foundation, the
University of North Carolina, Greensboro, will establish a Central European
Parliamentary Documents Center that will work with institutional counterparts
and legislative scholars in eleven countries of Central and Eastern Europe to
create a repository of archival materials issued by the newly democratized
parliaments of these countries. This effort will be headed by Dr. David Olson
along with co-investigators, Dr. William Crowther and Dr. Maurice Simon. The
rationale for creating this Center is based on the premise that: 1) Such
parliaments can serve as valuable cases for studying cross-national processes of
democratization and 2) the essential documentary records of these institutions
are resources that otherwise may not be preserved, even by the parliaments that
publish them. The Greensboro Center's total collection will be made available
for future use by researchers and scholars interested in the post-Communist era
of legislative institution building in Central and Eastern Europe. The materials
to be collected at the Center feature membership directories, sessional
statistical reports, roll call reports, election statistical reports, and
related private publications and newspaper articles. By drawing upon well
established contacts in each country, the Center will continue its collection
and archiving of new working documents as they are issued. Overall, the Center's
collection is expected to serve as a key national resource for research on newly
democratized parliaments, their institutionalization, and other relevant aspects
of the transition processes they affect. Creation of this repository for
archival data at the University of North Carolina, Greensboro, complements the
program objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts
in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine talents and pool research
resources in area of strong mutual interest a nd competence. ***