* 9507909
* Collaborative Research:  Beyond the Water's Edge:           Individual Preferences, Domestic Institutions, System       Structure and Foreign Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Glenn Palmer, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/1997
* USD 70,615.00

9507909 Palmer A great deal of recent research in international relations has
focused on the relationship between democracy and foreign policy. One strain on
this literature, originating from works dealing with issues of war and peace,
has addressed the question of whether democracies are less war prone than non-
democracies. A second and older strain, some of it originating from the study of
comparative foreign policy has expanded our horizons into other areas, including
alliance behavior, defense expenditures and policy, and reliance on
international organizations. These two approaches have produced a number of
empirical regularities indicating that democracies do behave somewhat
differently than do non-democracies with the best know being that although
democracies tend to fight, and even initiate, wars as often as other states do,
they rarely, if ever, fight one another. Explanations for these observations
have centered around two main approaches--the norms approach, holding that
democratic leaders' behaviors are guided by the norms regarding conflict
behavior that they are socialized to accept, and the structural approach,
holding that democratic institutions make it easier for a leader's opponents to
block policies (such as war) they disapprove. Attempts to construct critical
tests for determining the better approach have proven inconclusive, largely
because there is so much overlap between the two arguments and because
democratic norms and democratic institutions often coexist. The above suggests
that a reevaluation of the research is in order and a new theory is needed. This
investigation articulates and tests a general theory of foreign policy. The
theory specifies how individual preferences, domestic political structures, and
the international environment interact to produce foreign policies. The theory
also integrates the work on conflict behavior with other types of foreign policy
such as alliance formation, defense spending, and events inte raction. The
theory is formalized and is used to deduce hypotheses systematically. The
methods appropriately employed use a variety of extant data sets to test
relevant hypotheses. This research investigation should substantially enhance
our understanding of the topic. ***