* 9507292
* Similarities and Differences Between the Acyl-CoA           Dehydrogenase and Acyl-CoA Oxidase Catalyzed Reactions:     Kinetic and Structural-Functional Investigations
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* D. Srivastava, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 'qRp: C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t ! O b j e c
t P o o l 'qRp: 'qRp: 4 @ A B C D E F G H I J F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Esc to end Archive folder: Bulletin Board: Folder:
Message cannot be read. Message Contents From: Forwarded by: To mailing list:
Receipt Requested To bulletin board: cc: cc mailing list: bcc: To folder: To:
Subject: Subject: Unknown recip9507292 Srivastava The similarities and
differences between the acyl CoA dehydrogenase and acyl CoA oxidase catalyzed
reactions will be studied. Although these enzymes appear to be structurally
different, they are known to catalyze the same chemical transformation reaction,
albeit by utilizing (physiologically) different types of electron acceptors
(i.e., electron transferring flavoprotein, ETF, versus O2. How similar and/or
different are these enzymes as regards to their overall catalytic mechanisms?
The P.I. will to undertake a comparative mechanistic and structural functional
studies of these enzymes by employing kinetic and other physical techniques. (1)
By utilizing a variety of chromogenic/chromophoric substrate/product pairs, they
will ascertain the influence of the enzyme site environments on the electronic
structures of these species during the ligand binding and/or catalysis. They
will examine the molecular basis of the diverse spectral changes of both FAD and
chromophoric enoyl CoA's within the enzyme enoyl CoA complexes. (2) They will
investigate whether the changes in the bond structure s of these substrates
and/or products are directly coupled to the changes in the protein structures of
these enzymes. The extent to which the protein conformational changes influence
the ligand binding and/or catalysis will be ascertained. (3) They will undertake
a detailed comparative investigation of the "reductive" and "oxidative" half
reactions of these enzymes under a variety of experimental conditions.
Particular emphasis will be made to discern whether the acyl CoA oxidase
catalyzed "reductive" half reaction also involves formation of a metastable
intermediary species? How different are the microscopic pathways of the
oxidative half reactions of these enzymes? (4) The influence of pH and deuterium
isotopes on the transient and steady state kinetic profiles of these enzymes
will be examined. Based on these experiments, the nature of the transition
states during the conversion of acyl CoA's to the corresponding enoyl CoA's by
these enzymes will be deduced. The experimental results derived from these
studies will be rationalized in the light of the known three dimensional
structure of medium chain fatty acyl CoA dehydrogenase and by computer graphic
model building studies. %%% This is an investigation of the similarity and
differences between the acyl CoA dehydrogenase and acyl CoA oxidase catalyzed
reactions. Although these enzymes appear to be structurally different, they are
known to catalyze the same chemical transformation reaction, albeit by utilizing
(physiologically) different types of electron acceptors (i.e., electron
transferring flavoprotein, ETF, versus O2) How similar and/or different are
these enzymes as regards to their overall catalytic mechanisms? A comparative
mechanistic and structural-functional studies of these enzymes will be performed
using kinetic and other physical techniques The experimental results derived
from these studies will be rationalized in the light of the known three
dimensional structure of medium chain fatty acyl CoA dehydrogenase and by the
computer graphic model building studies. *** @ @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i
o n ( @ Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg Rhonda
Young @ U 9 @ @ 'qRp: @ J 6 Microsoft Word 6.0 4 e = e p ! p j j j j j j j l 1 .