* 9507280
* Early Events in Protein Folding
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Anthony Fink, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1999
* USD 269,432.00

9507280 Fink The goal of this research is to measure the rate at which an
unfolded protein becomes compact, when placed under native conditions, and by
comparison with the rates of secondary and tertiary structure formation, to
develop a more complete picture of the folding process. Protein folding is
currently believed to be a process in which the unfolded protein initially
collapses rapidly to a species with unstable secondary structure, followed by
transformation into intermediates with stable secondary structure and ultimately
the tightly-packed native state. The specific questions we plan to answer are:
How fast does the unfolded protein initially become compact, and how does the
compactness change as folding progresses from the initial intermediates to the
native state? We will measure the rate at which an unfolded protein becomes
compact during the refolding process using two techniques: small-angle x-ray
scattering and fluorescence energy transfer; these are among the few techniques
available for the measurement of the size of proteins in solution. Recent
technical improvements in small-angle X-ray scattering instrumentatimn have now
made it feasible to carry out the proposed experiments. The proteins to be
investigated initially are cytochrome c, staphylococcal nuclease and DnaK.
Clearly, knowledge of the rate at which the protein collapses is very important
and will help distinguish competing models for folding, and should significantly
increase our understanding of the process of protein folding and thus benefit
many fields involving proteins. %%% The question of now proteins fold into their
native three-dimensional structures is an important one from may perspectives.
This research is aimed at answering one aspect of the overall protein folding
problem, namely, how fast does the protein become compact, and how does the rate
of collapse compare to the other structural events occurring? We propose to use
small-angle X-ray scattering and fluorescence energy transfer to mo nitor the
size of a folding protein as a function of time using stopped-flow rapid mixing.
Small-angle X-ray scattering provides information about the overall size and
shape of the molecule; in particular, we will use mostly the radius of gyration
to monitor the size changes. The fluorescence energy transfer will involve donor
and acceptor groups in distant regions of the protein sequence, so that in the
unfolded sate they are far apart and little energy transfer occurs, whereas as
the molecule becomes more compact during folding, they become closer together
and the fluorescence energy transfer efficiency increases. The proteins to be
investigated initially are cytochrome c, staphylococcal nuclease and DnaK. ***