* 9507805
* Workshop on the Limits of Syntax, Columbus, Ohio, Fall 1995
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Louise McNally, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 15,288.00

SBR-9507805 CULICOVER ABSTRACT Over the past thirty-five years, generative
grammarians have made a great deal of progress in understanding human language
by characterizing a very wide range of linguistic phenomena in syntactic terms.
This inquiry has focused on developing theories that illuminate speaker
competence and it has led to many interesting and successful predictions about
cross-linguistic similarities and differences. However, as this reqearch has
grown to incorporate a greater variety of within-language and cross-linguistic
data, it has become increasingly clear that certain phenomena that have been
given widely accepted syntactic explanations (for instance, constraints on
question formation or the distribution of pronouns) quite possibly cannot be
analyzed in exclusively syntactic terms without an undesirable impact on the
explanatory value of the syntactic theories themselves. Consequently, it is
essential to explore seriously the question of how the greater incorporation of
nonsyntactic explanations into linguistic research could deepen our
understanding of problematic linguistic phenomena and, at the same time,
strengthen syntactic theory. We will hold a workshop as a forum for such an
exploration, with the following overarching goals: identifying clear and
convincing arguments that some or all aspects of a given linguistic phenomenon
must or cannot be analyzed syntactically; identifying and evaluating specific
proposals for nonsyntactic analyses of natural language phenomena; exploring the
implications of candidate nonsyntactic analyses for syntactic theory; and
exploring whether and how nonsyntactic analyses of linguistic phenomena can be
expressed in a "parameterizable" theory that can cover typologically diverse
languages. Among the topics to be explored in the workshop will be: constraints
on extraction, bound variable anaphora, and th e "triggering" of movement. These
examples all share the potential of being illuminated by a theory or theories of
the informational import of sentences -particularly their presuppositional
properties and informational articulation.