* 9507271
* Dissertation Research: A Case Study of Infrastructures for  Sharing Geographic Information Among Environmental Agencies
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Joseph Ferreira, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 11/30/1996
* USD 9,900.00

Ferriera John D. Evans MIT, Department of Urban Studies and Planning
Dissertation Improvement Research: A Case Study of Infrastructures for Sharing
Geographic Information Among Environmental Agencies This project seeks to
determine why so few environmental agencies, not in the business of providing
environmental data, share geographic information, despite the need to
collaborate in protecting shared natural resources and the recent growth of
networked information facilities. Initial studies suggest the reasons are a
still-unclear combination of both technical and non- technical factors. An in-
depth case study will analyze and compare four `coalitions` of government
agencies in the U.S. that are building `sharing infrastructures` to exchange
environmental data and use it meaningfully. The study will search for impacts of
networked-shared information on the work of environmental managers, then
determine and compare the intent, design, and architecture of the `sharing
infrastructures,` and the quality and quantity of shared information that has
resulted. The study will focus t he development of technical solutions to
information sharing, evaluate present-day networks for information sharing, and
highlight effective organizational strategies and technological growth paths for
information-based collaboration.