* 9507686
* Studies in Gravitational Waves and Neutron                  Star Ocean Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Jorge Pullin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 07/31/1998
* USD 67,800.00

Of the several gravitational wave sources that could potentially be seen by LIGO
and VIRGO, the most promising candidate appears to be mergers of neutron stars
or black holes in tight binaries. For the so-called `Advanced' versions of these
detectors, anticipated event rates from mergers are ~102/yr. Naturally, one will
want to glean as much astronomical information as possible from these
detections: one will want to determine the angular position and distance to the
binary, whether the bodies are neutron stars or black holes, the masses of the
two bodies, et cetera. Prof. Cutler will initiate a program of research to
determine how accurately LIGO/VIRGO can measure these quantities. In extracting
this information from the gravitational wave signal, there are two kinds of
errors: measurement errors due to detector noise, and theoretical errors due to
limitations on the ability of relativists to accurately calculate the inspiral
waveform for a given set of binary parameters. Cutler is investigating both
kinds of error, using a mixture of Monte Carlo and analytic techniques. The
analysis is made difficult by the fact that much of the interesting information
is encoded in small, post-Newtonian pieces of the waveform. There are three
principal motivations for the above research. First, it provides guidance to
experimentalists as to which elements of the detector design are most crucial
for doing astronomy. Second, it provides theorists a guide to the level of
accuracy they must `shoot for' in solving the two-body problem. Third, the
results allow one to judge the feasibility of potential astronomical
applications of binary coalescences, such as using them as standard candles to
determine the Hubble constant.