* 9507673
* Emergence of the Tarascan State:  The Urichu, Xaracuaro and Pareo Polities
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Helen Pollard, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1998
* USD 143,977.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Helen Pollard will conduct two
field seasons of archaeological research in the Lake Patzcuaro basin in the
west-central highlands of Mexico. This project follows on previous work designed
to document the rise and nature of the Tarascan state which emerged during the
Postclassic period (AD 900-1520). Despite the fact that the Tarascan Empire was
the second largest and most powerful state at the time of European contact,
extremely little archaeological data is available and most of what is currently
known falls within the realm of legend. Dr.Pollard will focus attention on the
role of elites in state emergence and will determine the demographic, economic
and political resources available to this group during the period of political
and economic transformation associated with the emergence of the state. To
accomplish these goals the project will: conduct a 100% surface survey of the
region, including agriculturally related areas; conduct limited test excavations
at larger centers; produce detailed maps; conduct field laboratory analysis of
all archaeological material within the survey region. On this basis it should be
possible to: determine changes in population size and the nature of settlements;
determine the location and potential significance in the use of agrarian
resources; determine changes in elite social identification within different
centers and changes in social boundaries over time. The Tarascan state is marked
by the incorporation of three distinct political entities into a single group.
Dr. Pollard has hypothesized that the reason for this rests with environmental
changes which resulted in drought and increased pressure on available
agricultural lands. She thus wishes to examine the process of climate change and
human response. Archaeological evidence indicates that the emergence of elite
social groups is closely tied to the development of complex societies and the
Tarascan case offers the opportunity to study elite behavior before during and
after this period of environmental fluxuation and incorporation into the larger
state. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
interest to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of the
relationship between environmental change and the development of social
complexity and provide training for the students who will participate in the
project.