* 9507551
* Group Travel to attend the Second ISHMT-ASME Heat and Mass  Transfer Conference and to Generate Cooperative Research    Projects, December 1995, India
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Yogesh Jaluria, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 08/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9507551 Jaluria Description: This proposal requests travel support for US
participation at the Second Conference of the Indian Society for Heat and Mass
Transfer (ISHMT) to be held December, 1995 in Mangalore, India. ISHMT is the
nodal agency in India for stimulating research in this area of thermal sciences.
Heat and mass transfer play a very important role in manufacturing industries
and in industrial processes. Understanding of the phenomena that underlie
industrial processes is essential for the optimal design of equipment,
components, and efficiency of processes. The objectives of the conference are to
promote the exchange of technical information in this rapidly evolving field, to
identify areas of cooperation between industry and research institutions, and to
further enhance the existing level of US-Indo collaborations. Participants will
have the opportunity to discuss the state-of-the-art in areas of prime interest
in both countries and to visit India's leading research centers such as the
IITs, the Indian Institute of Science and the National Aeronautical Laboratory,
Bangalore. Scope: Thermal sciences are expected to play an important role in the
development of national critical technologies in the next decade. In addition to
the national effort, there is considerable effort to internationalize research
and technology development in thermal sciences, particularly in the area of heat
and mass transfer. India is one of the leading countries in Asia that conduct
significant research in heat and mass transfer. The conference is organized to
allow for dialogue among potential collaborators and the development of focused
research proposals. US-Indo collaboration is currently well below its potential
considering the level of activity in the field in each country. ***