* 9507357
* Recognition and Regulation of Protein Phosphatase
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* David Brautigan, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1998
* USD 270,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F y J @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l w J w J 4 @ ? @ A B C D E F G H F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9507357 Brautigan The overall goal of this research is to
understand the molecular basis for the high affinity binding and the modulation
of substrate specificity of type 1 protein phosphatase (PP1) by its glycogen
binding regulatory subunit called RG. Anchor proteins bind cAMP dependent
protein kinase with nanomolar affinity by a relatively short sequence with a
helical structure. This project will test the hypothesis that in a similar way a
helical segment in RG is the recognition site for PP1. Extremely well conserved
among all eukaryotes, from yeasts to humans, PP1 has been shown to play an
essential role in mitosis, as well as in regulating intermediary metabolism and
maintaining integrity of the cytoskeleton. It is thought that the catalytic
subunit of PP1 can carry out these diverse biological missions by forming
distinctive heterodimers with regulatory subunits that, like RG, target the PP1
to intracellular locales, alter its substrate specificity, and become
phosphorylated as a means of modulating these functions. The objectives of this
research plan are to: 1. generate, express, and purify a bacterial fusion
protein containing the functional N terminal 40 kDa domain of RG linked to
glutathione S transferase (GST). Show the correct folding of the recombinant
protein by circular dichroic spectra and by limited digestion with proteases; 2.
establish assays for the binding of PP1 catalytic subunit to this GST RG -fusion
protein, and to the RG domain cleaved from GST after purification, using solid
phase adsorption; 3. produce truncated versions of the RG domain as fusion
proteins and analyze them for their ability to bind PP1. Make single amino acid
substitutions in putative helices in the RG domain by site directed mutagenesis
to precisely map the interaction site with PP1. These experiments will test the
specific hypothesis that one of four putative helices in RG is the primary
binding site for PP1. The results will provide new information by identifying
the protein structures that bind PP1, and the portion of RG that can modify PP1
specificity, representing a fundamental advance in our understanding of the
operation of this essential enzyme. The details of these protein protein
interactions could prove valuable in designing reagents to immobilize PP1 or
other enzymes used in manufacturing processes. Solid phase, active PP1 could be
used as a way to detect toxins in water or other samples, because several
classes of fresh water and marine toxins are potent inhibitors. %%% The goal of
this research is to understand the molecular basis for the function of a
regulatory subunit of protein phosphatase type 1 (PP1), all essential enzyme
highly conserved among all eukaryotes. Different regulatory subunits target PP1
to specific intracellular sites such as glycogen, myosin, or chromosomes. This
research will provide new fundamental information about the molecular structure
of a protein protein interface that immobilizes an active form of an important
regulatory enzyme. *** @ @ ; Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (
&gt; D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg Sharon Alston @ k : @ @
i J @ q Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e j j j j j j j L &amp; 9