* 9507993
* CAREER:  A Simulation Study of Reconnection Layers in the   Magnetotail
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2001
* Yu Lin, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Robinson
* 07/31/2001
* USD 209,483.00

The objective of this proposal is to develop a full, balanced academic career
which involves both research and education activities, as emphasized by the NSF
CAREER Program. A brief summary of the research and education plans follows. (A)
Research Plan: Magnetic reconnection plays a very important role in the transfer
of the solar wind mass, momentum, and energy into the earth's magnetosphere
through the magnetospause and in the development of geomagnetic substorms and
energy release in the magnetotail. In the reconnection process, a layered
structure which contains several magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) discontinuities and
waves can be formed in the outflow region. The energy conversion in the magnetic
reconnection is mainly through the discontinuities and waves in this
reconnection layer. The purpose of the research plan is to systematically study
the formation and structure of reconnection layers in the magnetotail. The
primary research tools of the study are one-dimensional )1-D) and two
dimensional (2-D) hybrid simulations, guided by MHD theories and simulations of
the reconnection layer. Specifically, this proposal is to: (1) Determine the
structure of the distant-tail reconnection layer and associated discontinuities
in quasi-steady reconnection during quiet time; (2) Study the structure and
evolution of the near-tail reconnection layer during transient stages of
magnetic reconnection in a substorm active time: (3) Investigate the structure
and ion heating of slow shocks in the magnetotail The proposed study is expected
to contribute significantly to our understanding of the structure of the tail
plasma sheet boundary, the slow shocks and electromagnetic waves, and the ion
dynamics in the magnetotail magnetic reconnection. (B) Education Plan: In
addition to the scientific research, the other important component of academic
activities at the Physics Department of Auburn University is science education.
Instruction, research, and out reach are inexorably intertwined in a manner that
each re-enforces the other. The PI's education plan is made to balance the
research activity of the PI and to be consistent with the department goals.
Specifically, the education plan includes: (1) A five-year plan of undergraduate
and graduate course teaching at the introductory level, advanced undergraduate
and graduate level, which effectively utilizes the expertise of the PI; (2)
Research projects for undergraduate students in order to attract students to
higher levels of study and to contribute to the research activities of the PI;
(3) Outreach activities to area high schools, to interact with and train high
school science teachers and students, and participation in the $1.3 million
Hughes Initiative.