* 9507773
* Intermodal Determinants of Self-Exploration in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Philippe Rochat, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/1999
* USD 174,894.00

9507773 ROCHAT Infants from birth are actively involved in exploring and acting
in their environment, playing an active role in the rapid development of their
cognitive capacities. Although research has provided much information on the
early development of physical knowledge, and in particular how infants perceive,
explore, and act on objects, little is known regarding what they perceive of
their own body and how they develop an understanding of their own physical
actions. Considering that the body is a primary object of knowledge, self-
exploratory behavior in infancy is an essential aspect of early cognition. This
research will investigate self-exploration and the perception of self-produced
movements in infants between birth and 6 months. In the course of the first six
months, infants spend much of their waking hours exploring their own body,
bringing hand(s) to the mouth and in the field of view for long bouts of
inspection. Questions remain as to what determines such behavior and what kind
of perceptual information young infants pick up when engaging in self-
exploration. This research will examine what perceptual information young
infants are sensitive to and are capable of detecting while engaging in self-
exploratory behavior. In particular, the focus will be on the early development
of the capacity to perceive self-produced movements. A first experiment will
investigate the early capacity to discriminate tactile and proprioceptive
information specifying either self- or non-self- produced stimulation by
neonates, 1-, and 2-month-old infants. Five other experiments will investigate
what 2- to 6-month-old infants perceive while engaging in the exploration of
self- produced movements. In particular, these experiments will document the
early development of the perceptual ability to discriminate between different
levels of congruence of proprioceptive, auditory, or visual feedback
accompanying self- produced movements. In general, this research wil l provide
new empirical data on the origins of knowledge about the body and self-produced
actions, a fundamental aspect of human perception and cognition. It will provide
information on the importance of self-exploration and self-initiated action in
perceptual development, and in particular in the process of discovering the body
and its effectivities. The collected data will be potentially useful for the
assessment and prevention of hindered perceptual and cognitive development in
children lacking opportunities for self-exploration and self-initiated actions
due to physical or mental handicaps. ***