* 9507197
* Fish Maneuverability:  Factors Affecting Turning and Agility
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Paul Webb, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 260,000.00

9507197 The speed and maneuverability of fishes have long captured human
imagination. Most research has been concerned with how fish swim at high speeds
and accelerate at high rates, but as yet we have little understanding of the
causes for differences between species. Maneuverability may provide the unifying
explanation, yet there are virtually no studies on fish maneuverability, its
effects on speed and acceleration, or how variability in fish body and fin form
improves or restricts maneuverability. The purpose of the proposed research is
to fill this gap. Maneuverability includes two components: the ability to turn
in a small radius circle (turning radius) and the ability to turn at high rate
(agility). Fish use different patterns, or gaits, of locomotion to swim at
different speeds. Their primary gaits are routine swimming powered by the median
and paired fins, cruising and sprinting with the body and tail fins, and fast
start accelerations using the body and tail fins. Maneuverability differs
between gaits, and experiments will be performed to measure maneuverability in
each gait using mazes, circular raceways, and fast start trials. Maneuverability
will be measured using frame-by-frame analysis of movie or video recordings.
Three fish species varying in body shape and fin location will be studied.
Measurements of maneuverability during feeding around obstacles and movement
through mazes will determine whether how shape affects motor performance
(maneuverability) and energy gain during median and paired fin swimming. During
sprints, fish are expected to reduce speed to turn. This contrasts with current
theory for fish, which may be based on sub-maximum performance levels. Analysis
of fast-start maneuvers will test a unified model in which overall performance
depends on speed, the timing of a turn and its radius. These variables determine
the general pattern of the behavior, the specifics of linear acceleration and
deceleration patterns and the final escape trajectory. The research will provide
detailed measurements of maneuverability in various activities and a unified
approach to intra- and inter-specific variation in swimming behavior. Because
maneuverability may constrain habitat selection, the research should contribute
to solving problems like the rehabilitation of aquatic habitat. Understanding
the factors that limit speed and maneuverability will facilitate construction
design that minimizes fish losses due to entrainment in industrial practices.