* 9507030
* Vacuolar Targeting Machinery in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2001
* Natasha Raikhel, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2001
* USD 636,377.00

MCB-9507030 Raikhel The long-term goal of this project is to investigate the
molecular mechanisms of protein sorting to plant vacuoles. Three types of plant
vacuolar sorting signals have been identified, based on their location within
proteins. Signals within the propeptide regions at the C-terminus (CTPPs) and
N-terminus (NTPPs) have been characterized as well as signals within the body of
mature proteins. Among the different types of signals, there does not appear to
be a common sequence motif responsible for vacuolar sorting, and a distinct
receptor is implicated in the recognition of each signal. We have characterized
the CTPP signals in plant secretory proteins and identified specific mutations
that cause secretion of vacuolar proteins. There is no homology between
different CTPPs, and various mutations and deletions in CTPP are tolerated by
the sorting machinery. Although vacuolar sorting signals and most likely
receptors that recognize these signals are unique, the components involved in
vesicle transport are common among eukaryotic cells. To this end we have
isolated a functional homolog of yeast Pepl2p from Arabidopsis thaliana, an
integral protein thought to be involved in the specific recognition of vesicles
destined to the vacuole. We plan to characterize the A. thaliana Pepl2p and use
it as a tool to isolate other components of the machinery, including the
receptors that recognize vacuolar sorting signals. To compliment our molecular
and biochemical approaches we have isolated several putative A. thaliana mutants
with Altered Vacuolar Sorting (AVS). Based on this the following objectives are
proposed: 1) Completely sequence the aPEP12 cDNA clone, raise antibodies against
aPepl2p, and use them to determine the subcellular location, by organellar
fractionation and electron microscopy. 2) Study the function of aPepl2p in plant
cells by transforming aPEP12 in the antisense orientation in to A. thaliana
plants expressing independently barley l ectin, sporamin, or phytohemagglutinin,
and analyze the effect of altered levels of aPepl2p on sorting of either one or
all three different soluble vacuolar proteins by pulse-chase labeling followed
by immunoprecipitation and organellar fractionation. 3) Identify components that
interact with aPepl2p by gradient centrifugation and purify them by co-
immunoprecipitation using aPepl 2p antibodies. Additional approaches will
include affinity chromatography or chemical cross-linking. Corresponding genes
will eventually be cloned. 4) Isolate avs mutants of Arabidopsis. We shall
continue to screen for additional mutants that secrete CTPP-containing proteins
and set up a similar screen to isolate mutants that secrete NTPP- containing
proteins. Priority will be placed on the isolation of transacting mutations. 5)
Characterize avs mutants of Arabidopsis. The mutants isolated for secretion of
CTPP containing proteins will be tested for secretion or vacuolar sorting of
NTPP-containing proteins (and vice versa) by pulse-chase analysis and organellar
purification. Mutantsspecific for either the CTPP or the NTPP pathways will be
of particular interest because these have the highest potential to identify
components unique to plant vacuolar sorting. However, mutants that affect both
pathways could also help us to identify important common components. The
research should provide important insights into the fundamental processes of the
vacuolar sorting machinery that may be unique to plants or of broad
significance. Beyond its contribution to basic knowledge, this work could
improve the success rate of sorting novel gene products to desired parts of the
cell which might lead to crop improvement. %%% The vacuole is the site of
storage of protein and sugars within the plant cell. It is also the site at
which many of these storage proteins and sugars are broken down. With regard to
this latter function, the vacuole is somewhat similar to the animal cell
lysosome. Over the past five years, there has been rapid progress in identifying
some of the cellular machinery by which material is trafficked to the iysosome
in mammalian cells and yeast. In this study, this machinery is described in
plants. The plant machinery is explored starting with a plant protein involved
in vacuole traffic which can also work to allow traffic to the yeast vacuole.
This protein and the protein and membranes with which it interacts in the plant
cell are described. Other proteins and genes important in correctly targeting
proteins to plant vacuoles are discovered through generating mutants defective
in correct targeting of soluble vacuolar proteins. This enhances our
understanding of how traffic to the plant vacuole is regulated. There are many
eventual applications of this work, including altering the components of the
targeting machinery in order to get more efficient storage and transport of
novel proteins to the plant vacuole for the production of enhanced grain and
seed crops. ***