* 9507049
* RUI:  Expression and Regulation of a Novel Xenopus          FGF-Receptor mRNA
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Marc Servetnick, Ithaca College
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 239,160.00

9507049 Servetnick Mesoderm induction in Xenopus laevis embryos is mediated by
a number of diffusible signals, including members of the fibroblast growth
factor (FGF) family of signalling molecules. Members of the FGF family show
mesoderm inducing activity in vitro, FGF's are expressed at the appropriate time
and place in embryonic development, and inactivation of FGF receptors leads to
defects in mesoderm formation in vivo. The FGF signalling pathway interacts with
other signalling pathways that are thought to operate in mesoderm induction
(including members of the TGF-beta superfamily), though the nature of these
interactions is poorly understood. The proposed project focuses on a cDNA clone
encoding a novel FGF receptor, termed F37, from early Xenopus embryos.
Preliminary data show that F37 mRNA is present in the unfertilized egg, and
remains present through early development, consistent with a role for its
cognate FGF receptor in mesoderm induction. Because experiments to date have
characterized only a single FGF receptor present in the Xenopus embryo during
the period of mesoderm induction, the presence of this second FGF receptor mRNA
suggests that binding of FGF's to different FGF receptors, or the interactions
between different FGF receptors, may play a role in the induction or patterning
of mesoderm. A full length F37 clone will be isolated, sequenced, and its
embryonic expression pattern will be characterized both temporally and
spatially, using RNA blots and whole mount is situ hybridization. To determine
whether the regulation of F37 expression is similar to, or different from,
previously characterized Xenopus FGF receptors, the expression of all the
Xenopus FGF receptor mRNAs will be analyzed in several ways. Using RNA blots, 1)
the expression pattern of the FGF receptor mRNAs in isolated animal caps will be
determined; and 2) the timing of polyadenylation (and presumably translation) of
the various FGF receptor mRNAs during development will be determined. Finally,
experiments will be performed to test the hypothesis that over expression of FGF
receptors can extend the period of competence to respond to mesoderm induction.
***