* 9507102
* Molecular Organization of Mammalian Viruses
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Roger Burnett, Wistar Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2001
* USD 415,000.00

9507102 Burnett The overall goals are to explore the principles by which
mammalian viruses are constructed from their constituent proteins, and to
develop methods for imaging very large biological structures at high resolution.
A major aim is to determine the complete molecular structure of the adenovirus
virion. In previous work, the high resolution X ray crystallographic structure
of trimeric hexon (polypeptide ll), the major coat protein, was used to
interpret images from electron microscopy (EM) and develop a model of the
capsid. A three dimensional image reconstruction using cryo EM then revealed the
virion at 35 A resolution. As the shape of the EM hexon is in excellent
agreement with that seen by X rays, images from the two methods could be
combined to produce difference images. These defined the shapes and locations of
the vertex proteins, penton base (Ill), and fiber (IV), and three minor
"cementing" proteins (Illa, Vl, and IX). The current project continues the
attack on this challenging structural problem. High resolution EM data will be
collected to extend the resolution of the reconstruction. Novel maximum entropy
refinement methods will be used to improve the reconstructed image and obtain
more accurate difference images. The hexon positions in the capsid will be
refined and their interactions analyzed to understand the chemical forces
important for hexon hexon recognition and stability of the virion. The
adenovirus study emphasizes that cementing proteins are an important new class
that has received little previous attention. These proteins resolve the
conflicting requirements for weak interactions between the components of a large
macromolecular structure to ensure its accurate assembly, and for the strong
bonding necessary for its ultimate stability. Their use in viruses suggests that
novel "anti structural" drugs could act by stabilizing a virus particle to
prevent uncoating, or destabilizing the particle to make it vulnerable to
denaturing force s in the environment. The combined approach will be extended to
a second viral system, bacteriophage PRD1, that has an unusual internal
membrane. PRD1 shows remarkable similarities with adenovirus in its capsid
packing and the shape of the major coat protein, P3. The crystal structure of P3
will be determined and correlated with the emerging EM structure of PRD1. %%%
The overall goals are to explore the principles by which mammalian viruses are
constructed from their constituent proteins, and to develop methods for imaging
very large biological structures at high resolution. One aim is to determine the
complete molecular structure of the adenovirus virion. In previous work, the
structure of the coat protein, hexon, which was known from X ray
crystallography, was used to interpret electron microscopy (EM) images and
develop a model for the virus. This was confirmed and extended using cryo EM and
image reconstruction methods. The images of hexon, obtained from X ray
crystallography and electron microscopy, were combined to define the shapes and
locations of several other viral proteins, including three minor "cementing"
proteins. The current project continues the attack on this challenging
structural problem by extending the detail at which the virus is imaged. Novel
mathematical methods will be used to improve the images. The interactions of the
molecules in the virion will be analyzed to understand the chemical forces
important for its stability. The adenovirus study emphasizes that cementing
proteins are an important new class that has received little previous attention.
These proteins resolve the conflicting requirements for weak interactions
between the components of a large macromolecular structure to ensure its
accurate assembly, and for the strong bonding necessary for its ultimate
stability. Their use in viruses suggests that novel "anti structural" drugs
could act by stabilizing a virus particle to prevent uncoating, or destabilizing
the particle to make it vulnerable to denaturing forces in the environment. The
combined approach will be extended to a second viral system, bacteriophage PRD1,
that has an unusual internal membrane. PRD1 shows remarkable similarities with
adenovirus in its capsid packing and the shape of the major coat protein, P3.
The crystal structure of P3 will be determined and correlated with the emerging
EM structure of PRD1. ***