* 9507046
* Function and Evolution of tRNA Nucleotidyl Transferase      (the CCA-Adding Enzyme)
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Alan Weiner, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 07/31/1999
* USD 255,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 5 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l m 5 m 5 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; &lt; F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; * S M h } # E " &lt; | Q h j d z Q 3 : rWk ? }&lt; 1 ; V R P 7
G s iD l 9507046 Weiner The CCA-adding enzyme synthesizes and regenerates the 3
terminal CCA of tRNA. It is not yet known, from either a biochemical or an
evolutionary perspective, whether the CCA-adding enzyme is a specialized
polymerase or a sequence specific terminal transferase. The project will test
the hypothesis that the enzyme may resemble a polymerase in structure, with
amino acid residues functioning as an internal template for ribonucleotide
addition. These experiments plan an integrated approach to the structure,
function, and evolution of this unusual enzyme. Specifically, PCR will be used
to obtain additional sequences for phylogenetically diverse CCA adding enzymes,
and these sequences will be compared to identify conserved regions and residues,
as well as phylogenetically variable domains of the enzyme; and the effect of
mutations in conserved regions and residues, as well as the effect of deleting
phylogenetically variable domains, will be tested both in vitro and in vivo, to
identify regions critical for function. %%% The CCA adding enzyme is the only
known polymerase that can synthesiz e a defined nucleotide sequence without
using a nucleic acid template. It is not yet known--from either a biochemical or
an evolutionary perspective--whether the CCA adding enzyme is a specialized
polymerase or a sequence specific terminal transferase. The P.I. proposes an
integrated approach to the structure, function, and evolution of the CCA adding
enzyme. He will obtain sequences for phylogenetically diverse CCA adding enzymes
and compare the protein sequences of these diverse CCA adding enzymes to
identify conserved regions as well as phylogenetically variable domains. The
P.I. hypothesizes that the CCA adding enzyme may be structurally or functionally
related to the family of template dependent polymerases, and this proposal will
also test that hypothesis. If so, previous studies of the enzyme can now be
revisited in light of the newly emerging view of polymerase structure and
function. *** @ ....()()))()() ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT
marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ M 5 @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (
2 @ m 5 @ T Õ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 e = e " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | |
| | | | # f W T 4 " | | | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 &gt; " " " " | | 5 |
9507046 Weiner The CCA-adding enzyme synthesizes and regenerates the 3 terminal
CCA of tRNA. It is not yet known, from either a biochemical or an evolutionary
perspective, whether the CCA-adding enzyme is a specialized polymerase or a
sequence specific terminal transferase. The project will test the hypothesis
that the enzyme may resemble a polymerase in structure, with amino acid residues
functioning as an internal template for ribonucleotide addition. These
experiments plan an integrated approach to the structure, function, and
evolution of this unusual enzyme.