* 9507001
* Role of a 96 kDa Histone H2b Kinase in the Induction of     Cell-Cycle Arrest by Ras
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Bin-Tao Pan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1998
* USD 145,000.00

MCB 9507001 Bin-Tao Pan Ras, a small GTP binding protein, plays a pivotal role
in cellular proliferation, differentiation, development, and transformation.
Elucidation of how Ras controls the cell cycle is important in understanding how
Ras regulates these cellular processes. In this project the Xenopus egg system
is used to study how permanently active Ras (oncogenic Ras) controls the cell
cycle. Oncogenic Ras induces chromatin changes, inhibits cdc2 kinase, and blocks
or delays the progression of the cell cycle into M-phase. This project will test
the hypothesis that oncogenic Ras persistently activates a 96 kD histone kinase
which then feeds back to inhibit cdc2 kinase and results in arrest of the cell
cycle. To address this hypothesis the gene coding for the 96 kD histone kinase
will be cloned and full length transcripts from cDNA will be used to test
whether chromatin changes, inhibition of cdc2 and arrest of the cell cycle can
be induced. In addition, the cDNA will be used for structural and functional
analysis of the 96 kD kinase. %%% This project investigates how the process of
cell division is regulated from outside the cell by mechanisms associated with
the outer membrane of the cell. The mechanism of transducing information that
regulates cell division through the cells outer membrane is poorly understood.
GTP binding proteins (the Ras protein employed in this project) represent one
intracellular component thought to have a role. Consequently, examination of the
function of the Ras protein in cells is likely in increase our understanding of
how cell division is regulated. ***