* 9507328
* RUI:  Normal Cellular Process During Heat Shock:  Secretory Protein mRNA Stability
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Mark Brodl, Knox College
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1998
* USD 185,000.00

MCB-9507318 Brodl To study the cell biology of higher plants' responses to
environmental stress, a model system for investigation is the heat shock
response of barley aleurone cells. Normally aleurone cells are dedicated to
protein secretion; however, heat shock dramatically redirects their cellular
activities. Heat shock abruptly arrests secretory protein synthesis, yet
nonsecretory protein synthesis continues. This is accomplished by the selective
destabilization of otherwise stable secretory protein mRNAs. Heat shock also
causes the loss of the stacked cistemal ER lamellae upon which secretory protein
mRNAs are translated; only short, single tubular ER remain. Ribosome density
decreases by 50%. This may provide the discriminatory mechanism or selectively
stopping the synthesis of secretory proteins; nonseeretory protein mRNAs are
translated by "free" ribosomes. The principal distinction between secretory and
nonsecretory protein mRNAs is a region encoding an amino terminal signal
sequence that directs secretory protein mRNA translation to take place at the ER
surface. This proposal investigates the mechanisms that operate during heat
shock to selectively destabilize secretory protein mRNA. There are two central
objectives in this work: 1) To determine whether the signal sequence is an
important factor in selectively targeting secretory protein mRNA for
destabilization. Using PCR the coding region for the signal sequence (ss) of the
secretory protein a-amylase will be fused in-frame to the coding region of
b-glucuronidase (GUS). Constructs will also be made that include either or both
the 5' and 3' untranslated regions (UTRs) of a-amyase such that they flank GUS
or ss-GUS. Transcription will be driven by the tetracycline- regulated Top l0
promoter. The constructs will be microprojectile bombarded into intact aleurone
layers. The levels of the GUS reporter transcript will be monitored by GUS
selected PCR amplification at set intervals following tetrac ycline-induced
transcription arrest. 2) To understand something of the fate of secretory
protein mRNAs upon heat shock. For this objective two types of experiments will
be performed: a) The levels of secretory protein mRNAs in free and ER-bound
polysomes before and at selected intervals during heat shock will be monitored
in order to learn whether secretory protein mRNAs remain attached to the ER
during heat shock. b) UV cross-linking experiments with radiolabeled a-amylase
mRNA (including the UTRs) and cell lysates will be performed to investigate
whether heat shock induces the binding of RNA binding proteins that may play a
role in the destabilization of secretory protein mRNAs. %%% Plants respond to
higher-than-normal, non-lethal temperatures by synthesizing heat shock proteins
and by transiently shutting down the synthesis of other proteins necessary for
normal growth and development. My laboratory works to understand how the shut
down is controlled. Our model system for study is aleurone, an outer layer of
cells surrounding the cereal grain whose function is to start the breakdown of
starch reserves during germination. If the aleurone layer is briefly exposed to
higher-than-normal temperature (heat shock), the synthesis of proteins involved
this breakdown, including the starch-digesting enzyme, amylase, is shut down.
The synthesis of other proteins, those not released (secreted) from the
aleurone, continues unabated. Early experiments have determined the cause of
this selective cessation of protein synthesis. Messenger RNAs (mRNAs)
(transcripts of genetic information encoded by DNA) encoding the secreted
proteins are destabilized, but nonsecretory protein mRNAs remain stable. To
determine why, focus is brought to bear on another difference between mRNAs for
secretory and non-secretory proteins. Secretory proteins frequently have
additional amino acids tacked onto one end which are cleaved from the mature
protein, but function to target the prote in to the secretory system and are
encoded by their mRNA. This sequence of amino acids is called the "signal
sequence". Does the signal sequence contribute to the instability of mRNAs
encoding secreted proteins? To answer that question, genetic engineering will be
used to fuse the signal sequence coded by amylase mRNA to the mRNA encoding an
easily assayed (reporter) protein (b-glucuronidase) that is not normally
secreted. The stability of the reporter protein mRNA with and without the signal
sequence will be monitored during heat shock. If the hypothesis that the signal
sequence confers sensitivity to heat is correct, then the proteins which cause
destabilization by binding to the signal sequence-containing mRNA during heat
shock will be identified. These experiments to deepen our understanding of the
plant cellular and genetic response to environmental extremes are of importance
to agriculture in both temperate and tropical climates. They are also important
because they reveal part of the basic mechanism of cellular adaptation to
changes in temperature. ***