* 9507975
* Collaborative Research on Interdependence, Democracy, and   Peace
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* John Oneal, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1997
* USD 30,000.00

9507975 Oneal Nineteenth century liberals advocated policies to expand liberty
and increase prosperity. Politically, they sought to shift control of the
government from aristocrats to commoners, especially the commercial class. In
the realm of economics, they repudiated the protectionist policies of
mercantilism. They believed that free trade and democratization,l beneficial in
their own right, would also reduce the incidence of war. Their views continue to
inform theoretical and policy debates. The relationship between democracy and
international conflict has received careful attention in recent scholarship on
international relations; a wide range of formal and empirical studies have
established that democracies rarely fight each other, even at relatively low
levels of violence. The relationship between economic interdependence and
international conflict, however, has received less systematic attention. During
the past year the investigators have conducted new analyses on the period
1950-1986 that incorporate a measure of economic interdependence derived from
bilateral trade flows. Following closely earlier analyses of the effect of
democracy on conflict, the researchers found that economic interdependence also
has important effects in reducing conflict. In this project the investigators
extend this line of research by estimating a model to clarity the reciprocal
influence between trade and international conflict. They also evaluate the
pacifying influence of democracy and economic interdependence while controlling
for the expected utility of the use of force. In the process the researchers
explore whether democratic countries are more likely to trade with each other
than with non- democracies, check the implications of new measures for joint
democracy and economic interdependence., apply new sensitivity checks on the
findings, and extend the dataset into the 1990s to assess the impact of the
recent dramatic spread of democracy in the post-cold wa r world. ***