* 9508723
* The Intrinsic Conductivity of the Metallic Phase of         Conducting Polymers
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Arthur Epstein, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/1999
* USD 443,137.00

Abstract 9508723 Epstein The objective of this research is to explore
electrically conducting polymers. Despite the extensive studies there are many
open questions concerning the correct description of the metallic state of the
various conducting polymers and the determination of the ultimately achievable
conductivity of each of these families of conducting polymers. In this research,
an extensive array of correlated charge transport, magnetic and optical studies
of highly conducting polymers (including doped polythiophenes, doped
polypyrroles and doped polyanilines) is planned. In addition to traditional
experiments such as electrical conductivity, thermopower, and susceptibility,
frequency-dependent studies will be emphasized to gain insight into microscopic
processes. The dielectric constant and conductivity will be obtained at
microwave frequencies and also from the far ir to the uv. For the first time
synchrotron radiation will be used to span the important region between the
microwave and the far ir. Where appropriate, experiments will be conducted at
very high magnetic fields or very low temperatures. Correlation of the results
of these studies with structural and compositional information of the different
polymer systems should elucidate the design criteria for creating truly metallic
polymers, some with conductivities even exceeding that of copper. %%%
Electrically conducting polymers have been studied for the past 1.5 decades.
Highly conducting polymer materials have expanded from doped polyacetylene to
include also doped polypyrrole, doped polythiophene, doped polyaniline, and
their many derivatives and related polymers. There continue to be important
advances in these materials and their understanding. Initially, these systems
were only modestly good conductors, and, in fact, became insulators at low
temperatures. The present generation of materials have conductivities in the
range of that of traditional metals. This new generation of conduct ing polymers
share other properties in common with traditional metals (such as a negative
dielectric constant). Despite the extensive studies there are many open
questions concerning the correct description of the metallic state of the
various conducting polymers and the determination of the ultimately achievable
conductivity of each of these families of conducting polymers. These issues are
the subject of this research. Success in this research program would have an
impact in the understanding of electronic polymers, nanostructured materials,
and concepts of localization, delocalization, and electronic properties in
reduced dimensions. Also, development of a fundamental understanding of the
metallic state will impact the implementation of metallic polymers in
technologies ranging from electromagnetic interference shielding to molecular
manufacturing, to improved environmentally friendly materials for ease of
recycling.