* 9508656
* University - Industry Cooperative Research in Mathematical  Sciences:  Industry-Based Grad. Research Fellowship for     Finite Element Anaylsis of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Joseph Flaherty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1996
* USD 24,486.00

9508656 Flaherty The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Based Graduate Research Assistantships
provide the opportunity for graduate students to spend part of their time in the
classroom and part of their time in an industrial setting. These awards are a
means of contributing to the future vitality of the scientific effort of the
nation. Adaptive procedures are among the most efficient, reliable, and robust
computational techniques for solving problems arising in solid and fluid
mechanics. High- performance parallel computation is an essential performance
ingredient when solving modern three-dimensional transient and steady problems.
The difficulty is that adaptive mesh and order modification upset the load
balance of a parallel computation. Balance must be restored by dynamic
procedures that work in conjunction with adaptivity. Micro- electro-mechanical
systems (MEMS) are micron scale mechanical devices fabricated by using
technologies developed for integrated circuits to perform functions as sensors
and actuators. This award will provide funding for a Research Assistant, working
with InterScience, Inc., to develop appropriate elasticity models for MEMS and
implement them within the adaptive-parallel software system. Models will be
varied to appraise the effects of different forces and constitutive relations.