* 9508308
* Energy Partitioning Following Light Absorption by           Organic Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Peter Wagner, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1999
* USD 360,000.00

This renewal award, made in the Organic Dynamics Program, provides continued
support for Dr. Peter Wagner's research on energy partitioning in photoexited
organic molecules. Photoexcited ketones with limited structural flexibility will
be studied to determine how atomic and orbital orientations affect hydrogen atom
transfer. Temperature studies with substituted ketones will reveal whether
substituents affect the rate of hydrogen transfer by enthalpic or entropic
considerations. The application of these reactions to the synthesis of
benzofurans and other heterocycles from o-acylphenyl ethers will be explored.
Intramolecular hydrogen abstraction produces intermediates which have one
unpaired electron on each of two carbon atoms, leading to a variety of products
including cyclic products. The geometry of cyclization as well as how
intersystem crossing of biradicals with the same spin occurs will also be
pursued. Other reactions to be studied are the photoinduced cleavage of halogen
atoms in halogenated phenyl ketones and the cycloaddition of alkenes to triplet
benzenes. This research addresses basic questions of how molecular structure of
compounds affects the localization of energy when exposed to light and the
chemical reactivity of the resultant excited intermediates. The localization of
energy in specific parts of molecules allows for selective reactions of
synthetic interest and addresses questions of the effects of light on systems of
biological interest.