* 9508763
* Understanding the Relationship Between Interface Morphology and Dynamical Properties in Layered Molecular Assemblies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,03/31/2001
* Gary Blanchard, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 03/31/2001
* USD 524,712.00

The dynamical behavior of interfacial systems is the subject of this research
project at Michigan State University supported by the Analytical and Surface
Chemistry Program. Ultrafast spectroscopic methods using interfacially bound
fluorescent probe molecules are applied to the study of defect structure,
motional freedom of molecules, permeability of solvent into the interface, and
energy migration and dissipation in two classes of well characterized
interfacial layers in this work. Self-assembled monolayers of alkanethiols on
gold surfaces, and zirconium phosphonate multilayers synthesized on metal and
dielectric substrates serve as the model systems for developing a molecular
understanding of the dynamical properties of interfacial materials. This
information is crucial to the use of these materials in a variety of important
technologies, including molecular electronic devices and chromatographic
separations. Molecular interfaces play important roles in a range of critical
technologies, from catalysis to molecular electronic device fabrication. The
work of this research project is devoted to developing a molecular level
understanding of the dynamics of molecular interfaces using state-of-the-art
fast spectroscopic methods. Information obtained from these studies is essential
to the rational design and application of interfacial molecular layers.