* 9508630
* Single-Copy Sequence Evolution, Polyploidy and Phylogeny    Reconstruction
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Jonathan Wendel, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 12/31/1999
* USD 195,000.00

9508630 Wendel A common natural phenomenon in plants is chromosome doubling or
polyploidy. More than two-thirds of all plant species are suspected of having
passed through one or more rounds of chromosome doubling during their
evolutionary history, including many economically important species such as the
wheat, potato, cotton, soybean, and sugar cane. Chromosome doubling is highly
correlated with hybridization between closely related species. One consequence
of polyploidy is that all chromosomes, and hence genes, become duplicated in the
new genome, thereby creating "genetic redundancy". It has been hypothesized that
this redundancy leads to new gene functions, because one copy of each gene is
free to change while the other retains its original function. Alternatively,
perhaps one of the duplicated copies is lost through mutation, or perhaps both
copies maintain the original function. There is very little known about the
extent to which these processes operate in nature or their relative frequency.
Dr. Jonathan Wendel of Iowa State University is addressing the question, What
happens to duplicated copies of genes in polyploid plants? Using tools of
molecular biology and a model system of diploids and polyploids from the cotton
genus, Gossypium, duplicated genes will be isolated, sequenced, and compared to
each other as well as to copies from their non-polyploid ancestral types. Many
different types of genes will be studied from different chromosomes with the aim
of discovering general principles that guide the fate of duplicated genes in
polyploids. Results from this research will also help guide the choice of
nuclear genes used for phylogenetic analysis of closely related species and
genera.