* 9508604
* Organizational Complexity in Ecological Foodwebs:           Experimental Analysis of Interaction Strength in an         Old-Field System
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Oswald Schmitz, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 54,688.00

9508604 Schmitz This study will evaluate the importance of direct and indirect
species interactions in structuring a terrestrial old-field food web. Insight
into species interactions will be obtained through detailed work in natural
field settings involving plants, insect herbivores (grasshoppers, katydids, and
beetles) and carnivores (hunting spiders). The study will test a key hypothesis
in food-web ecology that the strength of effects of one species on another will
depend on species composition of the food web and the direct and indirect ways
the two species interact through their linkages will other species in the
system. Field experiments will be conducted to quantify precisely and reliably
the kinds of species interactions, their strengths and the network of pathways
through which the effects of species interactions pass. Experimental food webs
with varying numbers of species of old-field herbs and grasses, insect
herbivores and spiders will be assembled in enclosure cages in the field to
quantify the effect of increasing species diversity on species interactions in a
food web. The experiments will also evaluate whether or not food-web dynamics
become altered if food-web structure is reduced through species removals. This
research will provide important information on the way species in natural old-
field systems become linked together and it will offer insight into what happens
when these linkages are disrupted by natural or human disturbances. This
information is crucial for the conservation of biological diversity. Many
ecologists have suggested that a reduction in biodiversity that disrupts the
network of species linkages can have serious impacts on the dynamics of natural
food webs.