* 9508407
* Exploratory Continuous Multispectral Reflectance            Measurements at Harvard Forest
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Kathleen Moore, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

ABSTRACT/Moore The general objective of this research is to relate seasonal
changes in narrow-band surface reflectance to evapotranspiration in mid-latitude
deciduous forest. The specific objectives are: 1. To detect seasonal change in
surface albedo (reflectance) in certain important wavebands, and link these
changes to canopy liquid water content, 2. To relate reflectance measurements to
surface turbulent energy fluxes, especially evapotranspiration, through the
surface resistance to water vapor transfer, 3. To compare seasonal changes in
narrow-band multispectral reflectance with satellite broadband reflectance
(visible and near- infrared) in biweekly composites. 4. To use the aerosol
optical depths retrieved from the upward-looking shadowband instrument to
calculate atmospheric corrections for satellite data, according to published
schemes. The overall goal of this study is to improve indirect measurements of
surface energy and trace gas fluxes using surface- based remote sensing
techniques. The investigator proposes to study seasonal changes in forest canopy
reflectance and its relationship to surface turbulent energy exchange.
Vegetation exerts a strong influence on regional climate through control of the
surface fluxes of energy and trace gases, especially evapotranspiration. This
proposed study is a logical development form a unique, ongoing long-term
measurement program at Harvard Forest in Massachusetts; that study has yielded
results indicating that certain seasonal changes in canopy radiative properties
(near- infrared reflectance, thermal response) can be related to
evapotranspiration. The investigator proposes to complement the ongoing
turbulent energy flux and radiation measurement program at Harvard Forest with
both upward-looking and downward-looking Multifilter Rotating Shadowband
Radiometers.