* 9508775
* Mathematical Sciences: Courant - Morgan Stanley             Postdoctoral Research Associateship in the Mathematical     Sciences
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Marco Avellaneda, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1997
* USD 71,000.00

9508775 Avellaneda The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
provide two years of support for recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. The postdoctoral fellow will
work closely with scientific advisors from both academia and industry. The
postdoctoral fellow will work under the direction of Joseph Langsom at Morgan
Stanley Co. and Marco Avellaneda at the Courant Institute of Mathematical
Sciences, New York University. The research concerns models for the dynamics
interest rates and applications to pricing and hedging interest-rate derivative
securities, such as call and put options on U.S. Treasury bonds. This activity
touches upon several areas of applied mathematics, including analysis of
multidimensional stochastic differential equations, linear and nonlinear
parabolic partial differential equations, numerical modeling and Monte Carlo
simulation.