* 9508741
* Biotic and Abiotic Mechanisms for the Maintenance of        Variation in Flower Form of an Alpine Wildflower
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Candace Galen, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 07/31/2000
* USD 155,000.00

9508741 Gerhardt Explaining how genetic variation arises, is distributed among
organisms, and is maintained over time is a major goal of evolutionary biology.
Genetic variation in the characteristics that determine an organism's
reproductive success is especially important, because it underlies the capacity
of species to perpetuate themselves successfully under new environmental
challenges. For animal-pollinated plants, one such attribute is flower form.
Flower morphology is a complex trait that simultaneously influences plant
resource use, the behavior of enemies, and the likelihood of pollination. This
proposal addresses the environmental factors maintaining morphological variation
in the flowers of one of the most abundant and ecologically dominant flowers of
the Rocky Mountains, Polemonium viscosum. Specifically, experiments will test
whether the large showy flowers preferred by animal pollinators exact a high
cost in resources for future growth and survival and/or make plants more
apparent and susceptible to flower predators. Such ecological tradeoffs could
explain why genetic variation in flower form persists over time in P. viscosum
and nearly every other natural and agricultural plant species that has been
studied. Current farming expenditures on crop fertilization, irrigation and
chemical pest management are considerable. The research described here could
reduce such costs by suggesting how flower form can be genetically optimized to
alleviate the amount of resource diverted from plant growth and the number of
ovules lost to pest damage, while continuing to ensure adequate pollination. In
this way, the proposed studies have the potential to make the cultivation of
sunflowers, blueberries, strawberries, alfalfa and rapeseed, among myriad other
animal-pollinated crops, more economical and environmentally sound.