* 9508769
* Mathematical Sciences:  Mathematical Analysis of Soliton for High-Speed Data Transmission along Optical Fibers
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Ronald Perline, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1996
* USD 62,081.00

9508769 Perline The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Senior Research Fellowships
provide the opportunity for faculty members to broaden their research
perspectives through participation in industrial research activities. This
research involves a sabbatical collaboration between the principal investigator,
the applied mathematics group of AT&T Bell Labs at Murray Hill, and the soliton
transmission group at AT&T Bell Labs at Holmdel. The goal of this interaction is
to investigate mathematical issues related to implementation of commercially
viable, large scale data transmission systems based on the optical soliton
concept. This includes, but is not limited to, optimal design of "frequency-
guiding" filters currently used to eliminate noise and "jitter" in soliton
signals. The proposed research is likely to make substantial use of recent
developments in numerical analysis and nonlinear wave theory. The focus of the
research is a topic which relates to designated national priorities, namely the
High Performance Computing and Communications initiative.