* 9508271
* Erosion-Controlled Transport of Radioactive and             Argochemical Pollutants Within Agricultural Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Reza Khanbilvardi, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/1997
* USD 77,769.00

9508271 Khanbilvardi Soil erosion is major scientific and environmental problem,
but the laws governing this complex process are not yet completely clear,
especially when radionuclides are involved. These pollutants are being
transported with soil particles down and out of the slopes, but at the same time
they influence upon the erodibility of soils through various geo-and biochemical
processes involving soil minerals, soil mecrobiota, soil moisture and
traditional pollutants (predominantly agrochemical if the locality is far from
urban or industrial objects). A unique chance to select or better understand and
develop a model predicting erosion-controlled transport of radioactive
pollutants, based on both theoretical and field studies has been presented by
the Chernobyl disaster which occurred in Ukraine in 1986. Our cooperative
project will use this opportunity to the fullest extent possible. In the
vicinity of Chernobyl there are facilities staffed and equipped to study the
process in situ, using artificial rainfall. Numerous soil samples will be taken
at various cross-sections and analyzed for moisture content, grain-size and
aggregate distribution, chemical and particularly radioactive compounds, etc.
both prior to, during and after field experiments. Precipitation, runoff and
erosion parameters will be observed, benchmarks installed and periodically
leveled. These experimental data would provide necessary input information for
computerized mathematical modeling as planned for the second year of studies.