* 9508336
* Statistical Mechanics of Dynamics and Structure in Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/2001
* David Chandler, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 04/30/2001
* USD 925,500.00

David Chandler is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his research on the statistical mechanics of
dynamics and structure of liquids. Four specific research areas are targeted: 1)
dynamics of solvation will be studied in an attempt to understand the interplay
between solute and solvent relaxation times and length scales; 2) confined
fluids and the dynamics of their surface induced phase transitions will be
studied in an effort to understand the effects of confinement on time scales for
relaxation and nucleation of phases; 3) self assembly and the stability of
membranes will be studied to characterize conditions for stability and assembly
of complex fluid structures; and 4) metallization in fluids will be studied to
understand and contrast the structures of metallic and insulating liquid phases
such as are observed in metal/ammonia solutions. In all of these areas Chandler
will address natural phenomena with the development of models, and treat those
models with statistical field theory and simulations. Theoretical models for gas
phase systems have relied heavily on simplifications based on weakly interacting
particles undergoing elastic collisions. Models for the solid state rely on
simplifications arising from the symmetry and order of the solid state. In both
of these areas, theoretical models are quite well developed, and agree well with
experimental data. Theoretical treatment of the liquid phase, on the other hand
has been difficult because the systems are not orderly, and yet the interactions
are strong. Over the past 20 years, several good theoretical models have started
to emerge, for example, the so-called `reference interaction site model`
developed in part by Chandler and other collaborators. Chandler is continuing to
improve upon the theoretical models for liquids, and to apply them to new
systems which have important chemical significance such as molecular assemblies
and molecules undergoing conformational changes and chemical reactions.