* 9508522
* Solid State Nitrides
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Francis DiSalvo, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/1998
* USD 450,000.00

9508522 DiSalvo The objective of this research is to explore the formation of
solid-state ternary nitrides, their crystal structure and properties. This
research is a continuation of studies of a class of materials that so far had
been virtual y unexplored considerable technological utility. These include
titanium nitride for wear resistant coatings on machine tools, aluminum nitride
as a high thermal conductivity ceramic, and silicon nitride in numerous
applications where hard impervious films are needed and can be deposited by low
temperature chemical processes, as well as in bulk ceramics. This research will
address the development of general methods for the preparation of small single
crystals of the new phases to facilitate crystal structure determination, and
the examination of materials that contain continuous networks of transition
metal nitrogen bonds in one, two and especially three dimensions. The continuous
network compounds are expected to exhibit a wider variety of physical properties
and to be mechanically and chemically more robust. The synthetic methods to be
used include preparation from oxides in flowing ammonia, growth of crystals from
metallic fluxes, and high pressures and at temperatures from 500 to 1700 C. The
structures of the compounds prepared will be determined by x-ray diffraction,
and the electrical, magnetic and thermal properties will be determined. In some
cases chemical properties, such as catalytic activity or redox chemistry at low
temperatures (i.e soft chemistry such as intercalation) will also be examined.
The chemical and structural behavior of these materials will be compared to
related compounds such as oxides, sulfides or phosphides. %%% This research team
has pioneered the study of ternary metal nitrides and discovered many new
phases. The structure of some nitrides have shown that both the structural
features and properties of some of them are rather unique. Yet there are many
more systems left to investigate. These include compounds that are stabilized by
alkali metals other than lithium, or by rare earth metals. There remain
significant challenges in the preparation of single crystals and in compounds
that are rich in the transition metal. The proposed research outlines approaches
to these challenges and propose to continue the attack on this previously
neglected family of materials. The expectation is that some of these materials
will exhibit chemical or physical properties that may prove as useful as, or
more so than, some of the binary nitrides. The hope is that some materials will
exhibit novel phenomena that will lead to exciting science and perhaps even new
technology.