* 9508419
* Studies of Two-Dimensional Superconductors and Multilayers  in Magnetic Fields
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Malcolm Beasley, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 230,500.00

9508419 Kapitulnik A wide range of experiments will be conducted in order to
obtain a better understanding of the global Temperature vs. Magnetic field phase
diagram, as well as the kinetics associated with various phases of two
dimensional and layered superconductors such as the high-temperature
superconductors. The thermodynamics of the superconducting transition near the
mean-field line, and the range of validity of the Lowest-Landau-Letel
approximation to multilayers with various anisotropy will be investigated.
Experiments on the melting of the two-dimensional vortex lattice will focus on
different crossovers in the vortex dynamics as the length scales are being
tuned. Superconductor-insulator transitions will be studied by varying
systematically the degrees of screening and the Coulomb potential. The nature of
the zero-field superfluid transition with increasing amount of disorder will
also be investigated. The difference between weak and strong pinning will be
sorted out by studying the role of disorder on the resistive transition and
vortex dynamics. The variety of transport and magnetic measurements in the above
experiments will provide the global phase diagram of the multilayers, this may
uncover new glass phases and their incipient correlation. %%% High temperature
superconductors are layered materials where superconductivity occurs in the
copper-oxygen planes. They exhibit peculiar properties due to this two-
dimensionality. This proposal investigates the resistive transition in magnetic
fields, and the role of vortex structure and motion causing energy dissipation
in high temperature superconductors and two dimensional superconductors in
general. A broad range of experiments will be conducted on a model system of
molybdenum-germanium/germanium multilayer in which the PI's have extensive
expertise and capabilities of co ntrol and characterization. These experiments
together will provide a better understanding of the phase diagram as well as the
kinetics associated with the various phases of two-dimensional and layered
superconductors. ***