* 9508072
* Siliceous Paleoceanography: (Ge/Si) OPAL-IV
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Philip Froelich, Georgia Tech Research Corporation - GA Tech Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/1998
* USD 316,785.00

9508072 Froelich Recent advance in our understanding of minor biological
fractionation of Ge/Si by oceanic diatoms suggest that (Ge/Si) opal variations
measured in late Pleistocene piston cores and Cenozoic drill cores are recording
whole ocean (Ge/Si) seawater variations driven by rapid and large glacial to
interglacial changes in continental weathering intensity and river fluxes to the
sea. If so, then it is clearly important to produce high resolution records of
(Ge/Si) opal in cores with well-established 18 O and 14 C stratigraphies across
transitions to establish the shape and timing of the oceanic Ge/Si response
relative to other climate and weathering indicators. In addition, in order to
resolve whole ocean changes in the face of small biological fractionation
effects, it is necessary to carefully evaluate and remove the effects of Ge/Si
fractionation in local records. With the development of a rapid and highly-
sensitive HG-ICP-MS Ge-method, these problems can be addressed and unraveling
the causes and timing and ocean chemical variations can begin. As a result, this
is aimed at accomplishing two major goals: (1) Produce high resolutions late
Pleistocene (Ge/Si) opal records in cores that contain abundant diatoms and
forams in collaboration with others' measurements of the appropriate
paleogeochemical tracer in the same cores (e.g. 87Sr/86Sr); and (2) Provide
tests to refine the effects of Ge/Si biological fractionation with diatom
cultures, hydrographic and core top transects, and runs of the Hamburg ocean
Ge/Si model. In addition, opal paleoproductivity work in the Antarctic
(expanding into the North and South Pacific Oceans), and other ancillary
programs will be continued.