* 9508634
* Mathematical Sciences: Waves and Instabilitites in Optical  Fibers and Nonlinear Media
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Philip Holmes, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/1997
* USD 71,000.00

9508634 Holmes The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
provide two years of support for recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. The postdoctoral fellow will
work closely with scientific advisors from both academia and industry. Jose
Nathan Kutz received his doctoral degree from Northwestern University and will
work under the direction of Philip Holmes at Princeton and Paul Wright and
Pierre Hohenberg at AT&amp;T. The research will deal with optical fiber
technology and nonlinear wave propagation and pattern formation in spatially
extended systems. The common mathematical ground linking these areas is the use
of nonlinear partial differential equations in modeling wave and pulse
propagation in active and disordered media. In particular, equations of
nonlinear Schroedinger (NLS) and Ginsburg-Landau type frequently arise.