* 9508309
* Acquisition of a Computer Server for the GeoClio Electronic Bulletin Board of the U.S. National Committee on the        History of Geology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Theodore Feldman, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/1996
* USD 9,290.00

9508309 Dunn The PI's will establish GeoClio, an electronic bulletin board
accessible through the Internet computer network, for the U.S. National
Committee on the History of Geology at the University of Southern Mississippi.
The bulletin board will facilitate communication between geologists and
oceanographers doing research on historical topics in the Earth sciences, with
historians of science. It will serve as a means of communication between
geographically-widespread historical researchers on all the continents and
Australia. In addition to assisting communication by serving as a "bulletin
board" for researchers to post announcements of their particular research topics
and requests for collaboration or assistance, GeoClio will provide space for
listings of upcoming meetings, conferences, and symposia with historical themes.
It may also contain summaries of recent historical meetings and symposia, and
possibly the table of contents of publications in Earth history, to assist
beginning researchers in becoming more familiar with the historical literature.
GeoClio might also be used as an "electronic archive" in which text of
historically- oriented research papers and journal articles may be stored, if
this use does not violate appropriate copyright laws. The university currently
operates a link with the Internet computer network (whale.st.usm.edu) through
the Academic Computing Center of its College of Science &amp; Technology, and
this computer server will connect with the existing link to provide access to
the Internet. The GeoClio computer bulletin board will be accessible in text
mode (via Gopher) or in graphic mode, using the MOSAIC software package of the
National Center for Super computing Activities to establish GeoClio as a site on
the World- Wide Web (WWW). By combining both text and graphics access, GeoClio
will be available both to users who have only low-speed Internet access (in text
mode), and to users with high-speed computers able to acc ess WWW "home pages"
through MOSAIC. ***