* 9508571
* Fitting Mixotrophy into the Microbial Loop Paradigm:        Advantages and Consequences of Mixotrophic Behavior Among   Phagotrophic Algae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* David Caron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9508571 Caron Mixotrophy is the combination of heterotrophic and phototrophic
nutrition in a single organism. Among the unicellular microalgae, a wide variety
of species ingest particulate organic material. Several possible adaptive
advantages exist for mixotrophic behavior among phagotrophic algae. Thus far,
three general strategies are served by phagotrophic behavior: (1) primarily
phagotrophic growth at high bacterial abundances, with phototrophy serving as a
mechanism for very slow grouth when bacteria are present at low abundances, (2)
primarily phototrophic growth with phagotrophy serving as a mechanism for
supplementing growth at low light intensities, and (3) primarily phototrophic
growth with phagotrophy serving as a mechanism for acquiring major nutrients
such as nitrogen or phosphorus. This research will focus on the ability of
phagotrophic microalgae to compete with purely phototrophic protists (algae) and
purely heterotrophic protists (protozoa). The framework includes a model that
incorporates mixotrophy into a simple microbial food web in order to generate
hypotheses concerning the ability of phagotrophic algae to compete with
nonphagotrophic algae and protozoa. The model is based on the understanding of
the three strategies for mixotrophic behavior. Hypotheses will be tested in the
laboratory via a series of competition experiments between algae, protozoa, and
phagotrophic algae in continuous cultures. Experiments will examine the effects
of light limitation, additions of labile dissolved organic carbon, and inorganic
nutrient limitation on the growth of phagotrophic algae competing with
nonphagotrophic algae and protozoa. The guiding hypothesis is that the different
behaviors exhibited by different species of phagotrophic algae provide them with
a competitive advantage that will result in their success under particular
circumstances. These experiments will establish those circumstances and provide
valuable insights for explaining the distribution of mixotrophic species in na
ture.