* 9508673
* Regulation of Underground Insect Herbivores:  Subterranean  Trophic Cascades?
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Donald Strong, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 255,000.00

9508673 STRONG This research focuses on a below-ground trophic cascade
involving a root-feeding moth caterpillar, a bush lupine, a soil-dwelling
entomopathogenic nematode, and predators on this nematode. It is the nematode
predators that initiate this cascade. These predators are primarily the
nematophagous fungi impertecti, which are speciose and abundant in soils. The
trophic interactions are constructed as follows: Dead lupine killed by
caterpillars are substrates for mushrooms that are putatively the reproductive
stages of the nematophages. With opposite potential effect, leaves bearing
copious alkaloids that are potent fungicides accumulate in thick blankets on the
soil habitat of the nematophagous stages of the fungi. Neither the caterpillar,
which consumes only wood low in alkaloid, nor the nematode appear to be affected
by these alkaloids. The caterpillars are widely dispersed among lupine patches,
yet their numbers are negatively correlated with nematode abundance. The
nematodes suffer frequent local extinctions and are present only in areas where
lupines flourish. However, where caterpillar densities are high, both lupine
litter and the nematode-eating fungi are abundant. In these areas, there are a
few nematodes. Soils are among the most poorly known habitats of life on earth.
Underground insect herbivores, which are diverse, injurious to plants, and
influential in ecosystems, have been studied to a degree in agriculture systems,
but have had only had cursory treatment by ecologists. Population regulation of
underground insect herbivores has been almost totally ignored by
agriculturalists and ecologists alike. While underground insects are drawn from
familiar above-ground groups, their natural enemies in the soil are distinctive.
This research has clear linkages to understanding factors that regulate
populations of below-ground herbivores in natural and agricultural communities.