* 9508064
* Pseudoscience, Biology, and the Education of                African-American Students to be held in Phoenix             in March 1995
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Joseph Graves, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 02/29/1996
* USD 28,204.00

Recent research has detailed a general decline in scientific literacy among the
general American population and a concomitant rise in the belief in
pseudoscientific theories. Pseudoscience includes such views as alchemy and
astrology. One could argue that belief in such theories is largely harmless.
Yet, in the increasingly complex society that is developing in our country,
anything that distracts the general citizenry from understanding of the way
science and technology develop further divides citizens into technologically and
scientifically literate and those who are illiterate with respect to these
areas. Unfortunately, the latter group will become increasingly marginalized in
our future society. Under the leadership of Professor Joseph Graves, a group of
prominent African-American scientists and historians of science are seeking to
determine how cultural and social factors have impacted the scientific literacy
of the African-American community. These scientists have committed significant
time and energy to being the examination of the role of pseudoscience in
producing patterns of underrepresentation of African-Americans in science and
engineering. This is a crucial issue which, if not addressed, could retard all
the efforts made by national agencies to reverse this pattern of
underrepresentation of African Americans in the natural sciences. As part of
this study, these interested African-American scientists are meeting in March,
1995 in Phoenix to plan a major symposium to address this problem.