* 9508016
* Measurement of the Melting Curves of Mantle Materials       and Their Geochemical Implications
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Dion Heinz, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9508016 Heinz The high-temperature phase equilibria of mantle materials place
many constraints upon the thermal structure of the Earth's deep interior. For
instance, the melting curve of Fe-Mg silicate perovskite, which is believed to
be the major mineral in the Earth's lower mantle, places a direct experimental
bound on the temperature in the lower mantle since we know that the mantle is
solid. The melting curve of Fe places a constraint on the temperature at the
inner-outer core boundary, provided one can take into account the presence of a
lighter alloying component. Melting curves of the major minerals from various
laser heating laboratories are discrepant, and the differences need to be
understood to be able to aprive at a consensus for the correct melting
temperatures. New experiments using the thermal analysis technique in the laser-
heated diamond anvil cell, developed at the University of Chicago, will be used
to measure the melting curves of Fe-Mg silicate perovskite, a mixture of Fe-Mg
silicate perovskite and magnesiowustite, iron, nickel ,FeO, and FeS to pressures
on the order of 100 Gpa. it is hoped that the discrepancies, in the location of
the melting curve in pressure temperature space, between various laboratories
can be resolved. The melting curves of mantle minerals can be used to place
geochemical constraints on the current state and evolution of the Earth's
mantle.