* 9508417
* Hydrogen Peroxide Fluxes to Forest Canopies:  Field &amp;       Laboratory Experiments
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Candis Claiborn, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 07/31/2000
* USD 159,035.00

9508417 Claiborn Atmospheric hydrogen peroxide plays important roles in
tropospheric photochemistry and in converting sulfur dioxide to sulfuric acid in
cloudwater, and may also be toxic to vegetation. The interactions between plants
and atmospheric hydrogen peroxide are of interest to both the atmospheric and
plant sciences communities. While quantification of its dry deposition rates to
vegetation is necessary for photochemical models, there have been very few
studies that have attempted to measure deposition of hydrogen peroxide to
plants. In previous work it was demonstrated that it is possible, in both field
and laboratory experiments, to measure hydrogen peroxide with adequate precision
to enable calculation of fluxes. In this work, it is proposed to adapt a more
direct measure of the flux, the relaxed eddy accumulation (REA) method, to
measure hydrogen peroxide fluxes over a forest canopy. Then, over a three-year
period, the principal investigator will conduct two types of experiments: 1)
field measurements of deposition rates of hydrogen peroxide to forest canopies,
and 2) controlled chamber experiments on individual saplings representing some
of the same species found in the forest studies. By conducting both experiments,
it will be possible to both quantify the deposition rate to the canopy under the
environmental conditions of the experiment, and to predict how the deposition
rate changes with changing environmental conditions. The education plan is based
upon three main objectives. Like the proposed research plan, the education plan
emphasizes the cross-disciplinary nature of environmental studies. Development
of both undergraduate and graduate courses that emphasize the cross-media
behavior of pollutants and that draw upon several sciences including chemistry,
biology, atmospheric sciences, and engineering, is planned. The second objective
is to improve communication skills of engineering students, both at the graduate
and undergraduate levels. The third objective is to improve retention of
students, particularly from underrepresented groups.