* 9508545
* Topics in Algorithm Design
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* S. Rao Kosaraju, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 07/31/1999
* USD 287,481.00

This research project examines algorithm design issues in the areas of (1)
Pattern Matching, (2) DNA Sequence Assembly, (3) Data Structures, and (4)
Computation of n-body Potential Fields. The proposed problems in pattern
matching deal with efficient methods for the construction of suffix trees of
strings and trees, treatment of ambiguous symbols with the help of suffix trees,
external memory algorithms for suffix trees, and several issues related to
computation of convolutions of strings. These investigations are of great
significance to the broad areas of Digital Libraries and Computational Biology.
With the emergence of faster DNA sequencing methods, there is an immediate need
to develop better algorithms for assembling large numbers of DNA fragments.
Several problems that arise in such sequence assembly are investigated.
Recently, the PI developed an attractive procedure for transforming data-
structure-based algorithms which have good amortized speed into ones that have
matching worst-case speed characteristics. Another goal of this project is to
explore the applicability of this technique to problems related to persistence
of data structures and dynamic maintenance of minimum spanning trees. In
addition, the PI developed the concept of a well-separated pair decomposition of
points in d-dimensional space. For a set P of n-points, this consists of a
binary tree whose leaves are in P, with internal nodes corresponding to subsets
of P in the natural way, and a list of pairs of nodes, such that the sets
corresponding to each node are geometrically separated by appropriate distance,
and each distinct pair of points is `covered` by exactly one of the pairs of the
nodes. The PI had made use of this decomposition in designing efficient
algorithms for n-body potential field computations and several related problems.
These techniques are extended to other problems.