* 9508617
* Mathematical Sciences:  Dynamical Modeling and Estimation ofMechanical Behavior of Elastomer Based Smart Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1997
* H. Thomas Banks, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 10/31/1997
* USD 71,000.00

9508617 Banks The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
provide two years of support for recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. The postdoctoral fellow will
work closely with scientific advisors from both academia and industry. In
collaboration with polymer scientists at the Lord Corporation, the postdoctoral
fellow will use material independent force and moment balance derivations
combined with a material dependent finite strain elasticity theory to develop
and validate nonlinear dynamic models for rubber based filled elastomers
undergoing large deformations. The resulting nonlinear partial differential
equation models, to be used in design of controllable or "smart material"
elastomers, will be modified and validated using specially designed experiments
performed in Lord Corporation labs along with inverse problem algorithms that
are developed. These algorithms and associated computational packages will be
developed in the context of a mathematical framework for wellposedness and
approximation that will be developed by the applied mathematicians in this
multidisciplinary team.