* 9508781
* Japan STA Program:  Rapid Instrument for Determining        Organic Compounds in Air and Water
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,09/30/1996
* J HILLS, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Randall Soderquist
* 09/30/1996
* USD 3,000.00

9508781 Hills This award supports a 24-month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Ward Hills of the Department of Chemistry
at Washington State University. Dr. Hills will work with Dr. Yoko Youchi of the
National Institute for Environmental Studies in Tsukuba, Japan. The
investigators propose to collect and concentrate organic compounds on selective
adsorbents. The adsorbent will be charged with analyte compounds by flowing
samples of air or water through the sorbents. The purpose of this project is to
demonstrate that sorbent trapping, followed by quantitative transferring of
analytes with fluid carbon dioxide to a portable gas chromatograph, is a
practical and rapid field analysis technique for detecting organic compounds in
air, water, and soil. The Department of Energy's Hanford site, with its many
types of contamination, offers an excellent environment to test a field portable
instrument. After the instrument is developed in Japan, it will be brought to
and tested at Hanford. As a postdoctoral fellow, Dr. Hills will have the
opportunity to become familiar with research techniques and equipment at the
National Institute for Environmental Studies while contributing to the overall
research effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program
in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
collaboration. ***