* 9508199
* Variability of Dissolved Trace Elements in Rivers           and Streams: Seasonal Redox Effects
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Alan Shiller, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9508199 Shiller Recent laboratory work has shown that there is a seasonal
variation in the concentrations of dissolved trace elements in the Mississippi
River, and limited evidence that other river systems undergo similar seasonal
variations. This variation can best be explained by seasonal changes reducing
inputs to the river system. The goals of this research are to 1) better
understand the origin of the seasonal dissolved trace element variability in the
Mississippi River system, 2) look for similar variability in other smaller river
and stream systems, 3) lay the groundwork for future trace element work which
will focus on the effects of erosional regime, rock composition, and solution
chemistry on dissolved trace elements in streams, and 4) verify filtration
methods. Seasonal samples of the Mississippi River and its tributaries, as well
as other rivers in Mississippi and California, will be collected to better
define the seasonal effect and determine how widespread the phenomena is. Also,
experiments will be performed to detect temperature-dependent oxidation of
manganese oxides -- a process which may play a role in the seasonal cycle.
Researchers will also verify filtration methods and develop an easier syringe
filtration method which could be used by other workers collecting samples for
the research. River samples will be analyzed by atomic absorption, flow
injection, and ICP-MS. Characterizing the nature of seasonal variability is a
vital component of understanding the concentrations of dissolved trace elements
in rivers. The results of this research will be important for understanding some
of the controls on fluvial dissolved trace elements, designing and interpreting
other basic research aimed at understanding fluvial dissolved trace element
geochemistry, designing water quality programs, and interpreting water quality
data. ***