* 9508087
* Phosphorus Dynamics: Relative Contributions by Bacteria and Zooplankton to Recycling Processes in Lakes Michigan, Huron and Erie
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/2000
* John Lehman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 01/31/2000
* USD 300,607.00

9508087 Lehman Differences in availabilities and rates of supply of phosphorus
to the ecosystems of the Great Lakes of North America are known to be major
factors controlling rates of productivity, biomass development, and species
composition. Nonetheless, epilimnetic concentrations of phosphate are uniformly
low in all the Great Lakes during summer, and radiotracer studies demonstrate
that turnover times of the ambient pools are minutes to tens of minutes, as the
result of biological processes. In situ concentrations during the productive
summer months have generally proven intractable to accurate measurement, but it
appears that, in common with oceanic observations of ammonium dynamics, bacteria
dominate fluxes at ambient levels, whereas phytoplankton dominate when
concentrations are modestly increased. There are differences between turnover
dynamics and equilibrium partitioning of tracer P in Great Lakes of differing
trophic condition, and along inshore-to-offshore gradients within individual
Great Lakes. The main hypothesis to be tested in this research is that the
relative magnitudes of microbial recycling processes, and of P recycling by
zooplankton, change predictably with overall primary production, and with an
index of P deficiency, such that different proportions of recycled P are
incorporated by algae versus bacteria in different lakes. This research effort
will combine explicit kinetic models for P fluxes with experiments designed to
quantify the relative contributions of bacterial, protozoan, and metazoan
recycling rates in Lakes Erie, Huron and Michigan. A new analytical method
adapted from sea water for fresh water investigations (magnesium inducted
coprecipitation of P) now makes tractable the investigation of P dynamics and
regeneration rates by is tope dilution methods.