* 9508671
* Ecological Interpretation of Hydrogen and Oxygen Isotope    Ratios in Tree-Ring Cellulose
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* James Ehleringer, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 360,000.00

9508671 The relationship between seasonal and regional patterns of precipitation
and the use of those water inputs by plants has ramifications at several levels
and time scales that are of both basic and applied interest. Identification of
measurements that can provide quantitative assessment of specific water use
patterns (that is, use of precipitation versus groundwater) by plants would make
a major contribution to understanding that relationship. This research will test
the hypothesis that stable isotope ratio analysis of hydrogen and oxygen
isotopes at natural levels in wood will provide that information, at both short-
term and long-term scales. Its goal is to develop, test, and apply quantitative
models of the factors that influence isotope ratios of cellulose in tree rings.
The tree ring information will allow reconstruction of seasonal and annual
patterns of water use and humidity conditions during the growing season over the
life of the tree. The model will be developed through laboratory experiments
using four species of trees common in the western United States. It will be
tested through field observations at sites chosen because they differ in water
sources and humidity conditions. The model will then be used to reconstruct the
history of water use (precipitation versus ground water), atmospheric humidity
(leaf to air gradients) and relative water use efficiency (through carbon
isotope discrimination) by the four species in Utah from seedling establishment
through maturity. Once quantitative, mechanistic models of tree- ring isotope
ratios are developed, they can be applied to unraveling historic patterns of
seasonal precipitation across the landscape, sensitivity of physiological
processes to changes in moisture sources and humidity, and aspects of water
relations that contribute to the long-term changes in tree community structure.
This r esearch will allow for scaling of physiological parameters from
individual to landscape levels and will provide a direct link between physiology
and global-level studies of biosphere-atmosphere interactions.