* 9508735
* Systematic Studies in the Meloidae (Coleoptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* John Pinto, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 07/31/1999
* USD 26,770.00

9508735 PINTO This project will provide the first phylogenetic analysis of
relationships within the blister beetle family (Insecta: Meloidae).
Morphological and biological features of both adults and larvae will be utilized
in this analysis. Present classifications establish major groupings based on
phoretic behavior (dissemination by hitchhiking on another organism, mostly
other insects) of the first instar larvae and Dr. Pinto believes these are
unnatural groupings because this behavior has probably arisen independently in
different lineages. A major contribution of this project will be keys to the
blister beetle genera of the world (At present no keys exist.). Availability of
such keys will allow researchers in different parts of the world to undertake
further research with these beetles, ranging from applied research concerning
these agronomic pests to evolutionary studies of their unusual metamorphosis and
other aspects of their biology. %%% Members of the family Meliodae are known as
blister beetles because of the noxious, caustic defensive chemicals they
produce. Several species are important pests of crops in different parts of the
world and others are threats to the health of livestock (e.g. in this country
alone several horses become sick and some die each year from eating hay infested
with meloid beetles). This project will contribute to our knowledge of this
element of insect biodiversity and offer information that may prove of use in
reducing economic losses attributable to these pests. ***