* 9508686
* Genome Evolution in Allopolyploid Wheats:  Evidence from    Low Copy DNA Sequences
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Matthew Lavin, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 134,989.00

9508686 Talbert Many plant species, and some animal species as well, have
originated following hybridization between two or more progenitor species. In
many cases, both sets of chromosomes in each of the parental (diploid) species
are retained in the hybrid, which thus becomes a tetra(allopoly)ploid organism.
Many of our common crop plants like wheat, oats, cotton, and tobacco are
allopolyploids. The evolution of these species may proceed along pathways that
are not open to diploid species. For instance, it has been suggested that
allopolyploids are buffered against deleterious mutations more effectively than
diploids. One complication in tracing the ancestry of polyploid plant species,
however, lies in the finding that some diploid species are themselves hybrid
derivatives of past crossings. It is for this reason that polyploid hybrids can
be hypothesized to combine multiple parental lines. Drs. Luther Talbert and
Matthew Lavin of Montana State University are making imaginative use of new
methods of DNA analysis to study the origins of polyploid wheats, and in
particular the group designated as 'B' genome wheats. Their work builds upon
three converging research enterprises: 1) the development of specific markers of
genes on the two arms of each chromosome in wheats; 2) the use of breeding
stocks of polyploid wheats that lack a specific chromosome (so-called nullisomic
lines); and 3) the search for and maintenance of wild diploid wheats collected
in the Middle East. Their studies will test the hypothesis that each genome is
actually a composite of chromosomes from several progenitor species, and if so,
from which progenitors. The use of single or low copy-number nuclear DNA markers
on chromosomes should prove adaptable to other plant systems, in helping to
solve the problem of hybrid origins of polyploids.