* 9508642
* CAA: Identification and Characterization of Localized mRNAs in Early Development of Pelvetia
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Mary Slocum, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9508642 Slocum The process by which a single fertilized egg gives rise to
specialized cell types and structures in an adult organism remains one of the
major unsolved mysteries in developmental biology. In plants, differentiated
tissues and organ systems are defined early in plant development and the
occurrence of these differentiated structures reflects the initial establishment
of embryonic polarity and subsequent differentiation of specific cell types. The
body of knowledge concerning the mechanisms of cell differentiation in early
plant embryogenesis is scant, in part due to difficulties in accessing embryonic
tissue in higher plants. The molecular basis of polarity establishment and cell
differentiation is being studied in the brown alga, Pelvetia. In Pelvetia, eggs
are abundant and easily obtained. Unfertilized eggs are phenotypically apolar,
but express increasing asymmetry during the first cell cycle. The first zygotic
division gives rise to two distinct cell types with different developmental
fates. Experiments are being conducted to test the hypothesis that mRNAs are
segregated to different regions of the developing Pelvetia zygote and are then
unequally partitioned at the first cell division. Subsequently, proteins
translated from the localized mRNAs determine the fates of the embryonic cells
in which they reside. Spatially localized mRNAs are being characterized to
determine how proteins from these mRNAs specify cell fate and to determine how
they get targeted to and localized in distinct regions of the cytoplasm. ***