* 9508799
* U.S.-Japan Seminar on Clean Steels for the 21st Century:    Fundamental Issues; to be held April 1996 in Japan
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Alan Cramb, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 07/31/1996
* USD 14,000.00

9508799 Cramb This award provides partial financial support for a U.S. -
Japanese Seminar on Clean Steels for the twenty first Century, which is being
held in April 1996 in Japan. This seminar will allow a free exchange of
information, extensive discussions, and opportunities to promote international
collaborative research. This is the fourth joint seminar in a series. The other
seminars were held in 1976, 1983, and 1991. The main theme of the seminar is
future production of defect-free steel via near net shape processing that is
environmentally benign. This theme is a radical departure from the past the
featured smoke stacks and air pollution. University scientists and engineers
will be strongly encouraged to interact with industrial participants on topics
such as new iron production techniques, new casting process, recycling of dust
and sludge, and economic impacts of recycling and environmental issues. This
topic has its roots in fundamental research, and the information needed to
change the infrastructure of steel making via environmental benign processes is
often proprietary. This seminar will promote free exchange of fundamental
information on generic problems that are precompetitive in nature. These topics
are of major interest in industry and academia on both countries. The Program
Manager recommends Carnegie Mellon University be awarded $14,000 for 18 months.