* 9508338
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Molecular Biology  and Transport Physiology of Cation Exchange Proteins in     Crustaceans
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Gregory Ahearn, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 20,705.00

This award supports Professor Gregory Ahearn and two graduate students of the
University of Hawaii to collaborate with Professor Helmut Wieczorek of the
University of Munich in a study of cation transport by crustacean
gastrointestinal and renal cells. Professor Wieczorek is an expert in molecular
techniques for investigating the mechanism of ion regulation, particularly
potassium secretion, by intestinal epithelial cells in insects. His current
research focuses on the physiological properties of the cation antiporter
protein in the secretory process. Dr. Ahearn's group has developed complementary
expertise in applying radioisotopic tracer methods to assess the exchange
kinetics of the antiporter protein in crustacea. The cooperating U.S. and German
groups will link their research effort through reciprocal exchanges of graduate
students for two three month periods per year. This should be an effective way
to transfer their complementary expertise in molecular biology and transport
physiology studies, and to save time and other resources in pursuing their
research goal. This collaborative work is directly related to and enhances Dr.
Ahearn's ongoing NSF-funded research on the transport physiology and molecular
biology of the invertebrate cation exchange process. Sodium-proton exchange is
an important physiological process which regulates intracellular pH and cell
volume. While this fundamental ion movement occurs in similar fashion across the
plasma membrane of both vertebrate and invertebrate cells, it is effected by
very different exchange proteins. The molecular structure and function of the
vertebrate exchange proteins or `transporters` are now well understood, but we
know very little about the analogous sodium and calcium transporters in
invertebrates. In crustacea, for example, such transport proteins are involved
in the processes of food digestion, heavy metal sequestration and calcium
regulation associated with the molt cycle. The analogous proteins in vertebrate
cells has none of these functions. The collaboration between the University of
Hawaii and the University of Munich will produce a major contribution to our
knowledge of the molecular biology and the physiological roles of the sodium-
proton transport protein in crustacea. Considering the significance of these
transporters in the molt cycle and growth rate of the lobster, for example, one
can imagine potential practical applications to aquaculture from this new
knowledge.