* 9508088
* Generation of Multicellular Structures in Aspergillus
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Bruce Miller, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 09/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9508088 Miller The long term goal of this project is to address mechanistic
questions concerning the orderly differentiation and spatial organization of
diverse cell types into morphologies specific for a tissue or developmental
state. Conidiation in the filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans offers the
unique opportunity to investigate molecular mechanisms that control
multicellular development in eukaryotes. Conidiation is characterized by its
highly synchronous nature and the spatial organization of a limited number of
differentiated cell types. A genetic hierarchy consisting of five essential
regulatory genes controls 1) the transition from multinucleate filamentous
growth to uninucleate budding growth, the assembly of a multicellular
reproductive structure (conidiophore)and 3) the production of dormant conidia
(spores). Complex regulatory interactions provide a mechanism for establishing
overlapping spatiotemporal gradients in the transcription factors which, in
turn, coordinately activate hundreds of conidiation specific genes. The
objectives of this proposal are to begin elucidating mechanisms that integrate
spatiotemporal control of developmental gene expression with alterations in cell
cycle regulation. Dr. Miller is approaching this problem through a molecular
analysis of the modifier genes Medusa (medA) and Stunted (stuA). The medA
protein is required for commitment to the developmental program, functioning as
a co- activator of a subset of target genes. The stuA protein belongs to a
family of transcription factors that control cell cycle progression and fungal
development. The specific objectives are to 1) identify, isolate and
characterize regulatory gene(s) required for competence dependent stuA
transcription, one of the earliest events of the developmental program; 2)
identify and characterize gene(s) required for early induction dependent, brlA-
independent medA transcription; 3) functionally characterize the medA and stuA
proteins; 4) isol ate stuA target genes and 5) characterize extragenic
suppressors of stuA mutations and extragenic mutations that mimic the Stunted
phenotype. ***