* 9508038
* Development of Climate Relationships-Decision Models for    Environmental and Economic Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* David Changnon, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/1999
* USD 83,593.00

Abstract ATM-9508038 Changnon, David Northern Illinois University Title:
Development of Climate Relationships-Decision Models for Environmental and
Economic Applications Currently, in the field of applied climatology a "gap"
exists between climatologists, who develop and use climate data and information,
and weather- sensitive users, such as those in utilities, agriculture, water
resources, recreation, and transportation, who either do not understand climate
information or know how to apply it to their environmental and economic models.
To bridge this critical gap, this study will incorporate non-traditional
educational methods where students in an applied research environment will
collaborate with weather-sensitive user groups to develop and test relationship
models. This project represents a model, to be developed and tested locally,
which has great potential for application at regional and national levels. The
goal of the research component of this project is to develop a broader
understanding of what types of climate information can be utilized by various
weather-sensitive users in decision-making processes relating to environmental
and commercial situations. The goal of the education component is to create a
unique educational experience in a class room-laboratory setting where
undergraduate students in meteorology/geography can develop relationship models
through a collaborative process with those employed in weather-sensitive
agencies and firms. In the research activity, the P.I. will identify, through an
intensive literature search and by interviews with users of climate information,
the needs of weather- sensitive user sector groups for climate information. The
principal investigator will work with the National Weather Service and the
Midwestern Climate Center to assess the adequacy of available climate data and
information to meet the needs of these user groups. Based on the data obtained
he will develop climate-effect relationship mod els and disseminate them to
weather-sensitive users and climatologists. The education plan will involve
course research projects, where students under the P.I.'s supervision will work
hand-in-hand with users in government agencies and in the private sector to
develop and test the computer-based models that will relate climate information
to environmental and economic applications. Students will receive research
experience and important job training, i.e., where the students applies the
educational experience developed in class room-laboratory settings to address
problems similar to those they may encounter after graduation. Developing
continual information flow between climatologists and weather- sensitive users
will assist applied climatologists by identifying the types of climate
information that will be incorporated into decision models. This linkage will
also help direct the research focus of climatologists as they develop their
careers. Furthermore, it is critical that meteorology department expand their
curriculums to include such course(s) that will provide not only exciting
opportunities to understand the theoretical background associated with climate
but also to apply it in a real world situation. These applications would be
facilitated by partners from outside the university in government agencies and
private sector positions.