* 9508663
* University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the Mathematical Sciences: Graduate Research Assistantships in Industrial Mathematics
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* George Corliss, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1997
* USD 55,120.00

9508663 Corliss The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematiaal scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Based Graduate Research Assistantships
provide the opportunity for graduate students to spend part of their time in the
classroom and part of their time in an industrial setting. These awards are a
means of contributing to the future vitality of the scientific effort of the
nation. Almost all systems of interest in a corporation involve many
interconnected systems and subsystems that impact the performance of the
enterprise. The purpose of one part of this research is to investigate the area
of Hierarchical Modeling and Architectures and build a tool kit of models that
will combine the best features of analytical queuing theory methodology; the new
paradigms of object-oriented programming techniques such as C++; advanced
dynamic systems concepts; and advanced operations research methods. A second
area of research is a study of how to manage information on a global basis to
better understand consumers worldwide. This will be done by working with a
database established to facilitate learning from research through cross-country
and within-category analysis of consumer test results.