* 9508593
* NSF/ARPA Workshop on Visual Information Management Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Ramesh Jain, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Ashany
* 04/30/1996
* USD 30,000.00

This workshop will be held on June 19, 1995, in conjunction with the ICCV
conference at MIT in Cambridge, Mass. The objective of the workshop is to bring
together researchers who in the last few years have started addressing problems
in Visual Information Management (VIM). Most of these efforts, however, were
focussed either on only a small aspect of the problem or a very narrow
application. Clearly, visual information management systems encompass central
aspects of databases, image processing and image understanding, very
sophisticated interfaces, networks and storage systems, knowledge based systems,
compression and decompression, and object oriented systems. Without addressing
most of these issues, one may either address only theoretical issues, or may
work in a microcosm that will, at best, be extremely narrow in its utility and
extensibility. Considering the growing need and interest in the organization and
retrieval of visual and other non-alphanumeric information, and the insufficient
number of academic projects in this area, the workshop on visual information
management systems will provide a much needed platform. While VIM is a very
broad area, the focus of the workshop is on what researchers in computer vision
could contribute. The challange for vision researchers is to develop tools for
analyzing the semantic content of video and image, and then representing that
content in a way that can be efficiently searched and compared, and finally
delivering that content to users in the form a of useful, focused presentation.
Computer vision can contribute techniques for semiautomatically and
automatically extracting features that will be essential for indexing and query
formulation in image and video databases. Computer vision researchers have
addressed problems in human and robotic vision for several applications, but
very little attention has been given to this new emerging field. This workshop
will be exploring computer vision techniques which are going to prov ide the
basic foundation for visual information management systems.