* 9508983
* Relocation of the Planktonic Invertebrates Collection of    Scripps Institution of Oceanography
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

This project will support improvements for the Planktonic Invertebrates
Collection of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, University of California, San
Diego. This Collections has geographic and bathymetric strengths unequaled
elsewhere in the world. The Collection includes over 93,500 whole zooplankton
samples and 10 8 specimens from most regions of the world ocean, with extensive
and intensive geographic coverage of the Pacific. It includes more than 30,800
sorted, identified specimens. The collection includes a unique and ongoing time
series of continuous sampling of the Northeast Pacific ocean that began in 1949.
The collection includes extensive expeditionary collections, as well as over
1,780 zooplankton trawls from depths ranging to 4,000m. Beginning in early 1995
holdings of this Collection will be searchable on the Internet. The Planktonic
Invertebrates Collection is currently divided into 2 locations. More the 80% of
the collection is housed in a structure that has inadequate seismic safeguards
and no thermal insulation. High temperatures (to 34.4 degrees C) and ext ensive
daily temperature variations (to 10.2 degrees C) will eventually accelerate
evaporative losses of preserving fluids, pH changes, and could ultimately lead
to long term degradation of collection specimens. Prudent management of this
Collection for posterity suggests that relocation of the Collection to a new
facility is essential. A building has become available to house all of the
Planktonic Invertebrates Collection in a single location. Relocation the
collection to this building would accomplish several desirable goals: (1)
Buffering of temperature variations experienced by the samples, thus ensuring
long term physical integrity of specimens, (2) improvement of seismic safety
through installation of earthquake bars on all collection shelving, (3)
consolidation of all Planktonic Invertebrates Collection holdings, (4)
improvement of access to collection materials by placing them in a central
campus location close to research laboratories, (5) complete re-organization of
Collection holdings, and (6) provision for future growth.