* 9508198
* Artificial Selection for Spectral Sensitivity and its       Effects in Poecilia reticulata
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1999
* John Endler, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 02/28/1999
* USD 111,916.00

9508198 ENDLER What generates the great diversity of shapes, sizes, and color
patterns in animals? Through the analysis of traits with known function, and
explorations of the theoretical and experimental relationship between structure,
function, and fitness, we can begin to understand why required functions differ
and why structures also differ among species. A particularly good model system
is the genetics of vision and of color patterns, which are essential to visually
oriented species. The appearance, perception and usefulness of an animal's color
pattern depend upon interactions of the spectral composition of the light
environment, the reflectance spectra of each pattern element, and the cone
pigments in the viewers' eye. Any changes in the visual environment or visual
parameters should affect perception and hence fitness in a predictable way. Dr.
Endler proposes to examine the effects of sensory biases by means of an
extensive artificial selection experiment that will select for altered vision,
and examine the possible effects of this in Poecilia reticulata. He will also
run a semi-natural experiment in which visual conditions and predation will be
varied independently. These questions are interesting and important from the
viewpoint of selection, and also have important implications for the origin and
maintenance of species. Efforts to conserve and protect endangered species
usually concentrate on ecological factors such as minimum viable population
size, genetic factors such as effective population size, and unknown factors
encompassed in efforts toward general habitat protection. However, if we do not
understand how a species maintains itself we cannot hope to protect it
indefinitely. The proposed work specifically inquires into species recognition,
and will quantify (1) changing visual perception by direct artificial selection
on visual parameters, and (2) changing the visual environment. Because the
research tests general principles with an ideal model system, the results should
be of wide general application.