* 9508797
* Grain Size and Ductility of Nanocrystalline Intermetallics  and Intermetallic Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Carl Koch, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 12/31/1998
* USD 300,063.00

DMR-9508797, PI-Koch: The scientific objective of the proposed research is to
determine the influence of grain size on intrinsic ductility in nanocrystalline
materials, which should help to elucidate the deformation mechanism. Intrinsic
ductility means defects (cracks, voids, etc.), impurities, or environmental
effects (e.g. hydrogen embrittlement) which may mask the fundamental ductility
behavior. Since the ductilization of nominally brittle intermetallic compounds
(by creating nanocrystalline microstructures) would be of significant scientific
and technical importance, the materials to be emphasized are intermetallics and
intermetallic-matrix in situ composites. In order to eliminated extrinsic
factors which may influence the ductility that are induced by a given processing
route, at least two processing methods for production of nanocrystalline
materials are selected. These are (1) mechanical attrition and compaction of
powders, and (2) crystallization of amorphous ribbons or foils prepared by rapid
solidification. Mechanical testing includes compression tests for screening
purposes, but emphasizes tests with tensile components, i.e., miniaturized disk-
bend tests and tensile tests. ***This study of intrinsic ductility of
intermetallics and intermetallic composites as a function of nanocrystalline
grain size should provide insight into the deformation mechanism for such
materials as well as determining the optimum grain size for ductility and
toughness. This program is a collaborative effort between North Carolina State
University and Oak Ridge National Laboratory. Special educational benefits to
the graduate students result from spending the summers doing research at Oak
Ridge. The proposed research will also be carried out under the guidance and
interaction with Pratt & Whitney and its program on nanocrystalline
composites.***