* 9508193
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Resource Use, Economic     Change, and Local Soil Knowledge Among Small-Scale Producers of Ilha Ituqui, Para, Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Karl Zimmerer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James W. Harrington
* 03/31/1996
* USD 8,058.00

SBR-9508193 Carl S. Zimmerer Antoinette M.G.A. WinklerPrins University of
Wisconsin - Madison Dissertation Improvement Research: Resource Use, Economic
Change and Local Soil Knowledge Among Small-Scale Producers of Ilha Ituqui,
Para, Brazil The objective of this dissertation improvement research is to
understand the impact of a changing regional economy on local soil knowledge.
The placement of local systems of ecological knowledge within a broader
sociological and political economic framework is critical to their utility as
guides to future sustainable resource use. The Ilha Ituqui floodplain island in
the lower Amazon will serve as a setting to test hypotheses. The study will use
an integration of human and physical geography methodologies. Three topics
within the people-environment tradition of geography will be addressed by this
research: local soil knowledge studies, gendered knowledge, and soil quality
maintenance. The study approach emphasizes the importance of evaluating local-
level decision-making within a framework of broader sociological and political
economic arenas. The study w ill demonstrate a link between economic change and
local ecological knowledge. This link is a crucial connection for understanding
sustainable resource use because how small-scale producers of the area maintain
soil quality in a challenging flooded environment and under pressure of economic
change will provide important insights for other parts of the lowland tropics
undergoing economic change.