* 9508680
* Molecular Modelling of Fluids Mixtures in Microporous       Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/1998
* USD 218,301.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9508680 Keith E. Gubbins Cornell University Micro-and meso-porous
solids find widespread use in the chemical, oil, pharmaceutical and food
industries as adsorbents and membranes for separation processes, and as
catalysts and catalyst supports. At present the design of such processes and
materials is largely empirical. The aim of this project is to provide more
powerful methods, based in molecular theory and simulation, for prediction of
absorbed fluid behavior and for the design of improved processes. Modern
statistical mechanical methods, including density functional theory, simulation,
and kinetic theory will be employed to carry our studies in four areas: 1.
Development of an improved method for pore size distribution (PSD) analysis.
Density functional theory proves much more powerful than classical methods for
determining PSD's from absorption isotherms. This method, which is already
findine commercial application for carbons, will be extended to gases other than
nitrogen, and to materials such as aluminosilicate and oxide molecular sieves,
which have cylindrical pore geometries. 2. Molecular simulations will be used to
develop and understanding of the importance of connectivity effects in networks
for both pure fluids and mixtures. The effects of connectivity on both diffusion
rates and absorption isotherms will be investigated. Goals include incorporation
of network effects into PSD analyses, and understanding how networks can hinder
and promote separations. 3. Selective absorption of trace components in gas
streams. Calculations will be made to elucidate the role of pore and system
variables on the selective absorption of trace contaminants in nitrogen and air
streams for materials with pores of cylindrical geometry. Specific case studies
will be made for several trace halocarbons in a range of molecular sieves,
carbons and oxides. The goal of this work is to develop methods for designing
improved absorbents for removal of trace contaminants. 4. Viscou s flow and
diffusion in pores. Nonequilibrium molecular dynamics methods will be used to
study viscous flow and mutual diffusion in mixtures in pores. The goal of this
work will be to develop an understanding of the role of fluid-wall interactions
and pore shape and size on these transport processes.