* 9508711
* Mathematical Sciences:  Optical Solitons and Semiclassical  Solutions of the Quantum Nonlinear Schrodinger Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Jerrold Marsden, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/1998
* USD 71,000.00

9508711 Alber The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
provide two years of support for recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. The postdoctoral fellow will
work closely with scientific advisors from both academia and industry. Gregory
G. Luther received his doctoral degree from the University of Rochester and will
work under the direction of Mark S. Alber at Notre Dame, Jerrold E. Marsden at
Berkeley, and Jonathan Robbins at Hewlett-Packard. Collaborators at Los Alamos
National Laboratory will also participate. The research will be on soliton-based
long-haul optical communications systems. Both advanced analytical and numerical
techniques will be used to study details of soliton and soliton-like solutions
of the nonlinear wave equations that model optical communications and
information processing systems.