* 9508066
* Peptide Bond Synthesis at Monolayer Film Interfaces
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* John Oliver, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 42,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o o
l 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ;
@ @ @ p @ Oliver 9508066 The primary objective of this research is to
demonstrate that peptides can be synthesized from suitably derivatized and
aminoacylated nucleotides which are suspended as a monolayer film at a water/air
interface. Successful peptide synthesis at a monolayer surface may be a good
mimic for ribosomal peptide synthesis as well as an efficient method to
synthesize certain peptides. The formation of amide bonds from ester bonds is
energetically downhill. However, biological systems find it necessary to
catalyze peptide synthesis from activated amino acids with proteins or
protein/RNA complexes. The catalysts perform at least two functions. The first
role is to accelerate amide bond formation so that it competes with non-
enzymatic hydrolysis of the activated amino acids. In addition the catalyst
imposes order on the synthesis so that only a defined polymer is produced. We
have now demonstrated that lipid derivatized nucleotides form monolayer films
and these films can be compressed to densities similar to those seen in solids.
This provides a compelling motivation to investigate the possibi lity of
synthesizing peptide bonds at the monolayer. Nucleotides conjugated to lipids at
the 5'-phosphate and aminoacylated at the 2',3'-position will be used to form a
monolayer film. The surface pressure and packing density in the monolayer can be
controlled by physically changing the surface area of the interface. At high
packing densities we expect to see amide bond fomlation with rates higher than
background hydrolysis. It is expected that the results obtained from this
research will be both general and important, with significant implications for
enzyme mechanisms and chemical peptide synthesis. %%% The goal of this award is
to demonstrate that polypeptides can be synthesized in a non-enzymatic system at
rates approaching those seen with ribosomes. We intend to synthesize derivatives
of amino acids which will incorporate physical characteristics required to lock
them at an air-water interface. Reaction rates at this interface will be
controlled by varying the surface pressure andl thus the density of the amino
acid derivatives. Infrared spectroscopy will be used to monitor the progress of
the reaction. These preliminary experiments coupled with methods to preorganize
the amino acid derivatives may allow us to design a method of rapidly
synthesizing polypeptides of defined sequence. *** @ @ ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m
m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 5 R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT jack cohen jack
cohen @ { R @ G @ ug @ u Microsoft Word 6.0 7 e = e j j j j j j j g = ) I T ( g
j g j j j j ~ j j j j a Oliver 9508066 The primary objective of this research is
to demonstrate that peptides can be synthesized from suitably derivatized and
aminoacylated nucleotides which are suspended as a monolayer film at a water/air
interface. Successful peptide synthesis at a monolayer surface may be a good
mimic for ribosomal peptide synthesis as well as an efficient method to
synthesize certain peptides. The formation of amide bonds from ester bonds is
energetically downhill. However, biological systems find it necessary to
catalyze peptide synthesis from activated amino acids wit