* 9508014
* Single Node and Multiple Node (End-to-End) Teletraffic      Analysis of Connection-Oriented Packet-Switched Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Khosrow Sohraby, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1998
* USD 179,948.00

9508014 Sohraby Effective teletraffic analysis of communication networks is
essential for their successful design and engineering. This project will
introduce and examine a new paradigm for the teletraffic analysis of
communication networks which is based on a system theoretic approach that is
well rooted in the field of control theory. This approach has the following
features: 1) it is based on a dynamical system viewpoint for the workload
distribution in the system; 2) it provides both exact solution and approximate
solution (with less computational effort); 3) it is unifying in the sense that
the method is capable of solving most of the proposed teletraffic models in a
unique and simple framework, including fluid flow approximations, queues fed
with different correlated and bursty arrivals, general Markov chains of M/G/1 or
G/M/1 type, etc.; 4) the method can be viewed as a "bridge" between the matrix
analytic methods and spectral decomposition techniques where it avoids the need
for a large number of iterations (especially in heavy traffic) encountered in
the methods of the former type and the ill-conditioned root finding problem
(especially when individual source characterization is complex) of the problems
of the latter type; 5) the method can be easily implemented using traditional
analog filtering theory; and 6) the method can also be implemented using known
and effective algorithms extensively used in the field of control theory for the
solution of Riccati equations. ***