* 9508003
* The Geochemical Carbon Cycle: A Vadose-Hydrologic Study of the Effect of Plants on Weathering
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* C. Kent Keller, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 12/31/1996
* USD 35,989.00

9508003 Keller Carbon dioxide (CO2) is a greenhouse gas. One avenue to
understanding the relationship of atmospheric CO2 concentration to climate, is
to study processes affecting atmospheric CO2 on long time scales. The principal
pathway for long-term transfer of CO2 from Earth's atmosphere to its crust is
"chemical weathering" of common minerals in soils, subsoils, and groundwater
systems followed by transport of the dissolved material to the oceans in
continental drainage, where they are deposited on ocean floor. This sequence
effects transfer of CO2 because mineral dissolution consumes CO2 containing
acids, entrains bicarbonate, deposits carbonate minerals. CO2 in buried
carbonate minerals returned to the atmosphere by volcanism and metamorphism. The
relative rates of these processes determine the masses of CO2 in the atmosphere
and lithosphere at any on time and, in the process, affect Earth's climate. It
is therefore important the factors controlling the rates of the various
processes in the cycle. Plant communities, are an important factor. Plants could
enhance chemical weathering by raising subsurface concentrations of acids,
facilitating the exposure of fresh mineral surfaces, and binding mineral grains
into water-retaining structures characteristic of soils. The actual extent of
weathering enhancement by these mechanisms is, however poorly understood because
of the difficulty of factoring other variables out of comparative field studies.
This study takes advantage of ongoing long-term, field-scale experiments in
plant nutrient cycling. To collect needed data for subsequent research to test
hypotheses on plant-weathering relationships. Existing instrumentation will is
augmented to observe how chemical weathering evolves with depth and time in
soils and subsoils beneath various plant communities