* 9508637
* In Situ Scanning Tunneling Microscopy Studies of Ultra High Vacuum Deposition Chemical Vapor Deposition Growth of       Aluminum on Silicon (001)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Eric Ganz, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1998
* USD 236,000.00

9508637 Ganz A recently developed high speed scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) will be used to study chemical vapor deposition (CVD) growth and diffusion
processes on silicon surfaces in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV). The surfaces will be
imaged with atomic resolution in situ before, during, and after growth at
temperatures ranging from room temperature to 800 K. This instrument operates
roughly 30 times faster than conventional instruments, at scan rates up to
100,000 /s which allows the study of CVD processes with atomic resolution on
time scales down to 10 ms. The project will address three general aspects of Al
CVD on silicon: the growth of Al using the precursor, dimethylethylamine alane
(DMEAA); surface mass diffusion of the deposited material; and selective area
growth of Al on clean and patterned silicon surfaces. The selectivity of growth
will be tested on clean surfaces with small metal islands, and also using
features drawn into a monohydride resist layer. The ability to remove hydrogen,
atom by atom, from hydrogenated silicon surfaces using the STM tip coupled with
selective growth of Al on unexposed areas allows basic studies of nanoscale
fabrication, in addition to the investigation of fundamental nucleation and
growth phenomena associated with CVD. %%% A high speed scanning tunneling
microscope (STM) has recently been developed and will be used for basic research
studies of the growth and diffusion of aluminum on silicon, a process important
to the fabrication of advanced microelectronic devices and circuits. The
ultrafast STM technology will be studied further as part of the research, and
tested for possible use in the definition and delineation of ultrafine device
and circuit patterns. This technology is also being considered for applications
in the fabrication of high density memory media. Additionally, an important
feature of the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The knowledge and und
erstanding gained from this research project is expected to contribute generally
to improving the performance of existing, and the creation of new, more advanced
devices used in computing, information storage and processing, and
telecommunications. ***