* 9508533
* Oxygen Activation in Engineered Heme Proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Harry Gray, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 06/30/1999
* USD 450,000.00

Dr. Harry B. Gray and Dr. John H. Richards, Chemistry Department, California
Institute of Technology, are supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and
Organometallic Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division to develop methods
and materials for studying the intermediates in the oxygen-activation chemistry
of single heme proteins. A series of kinetic studies which focus on the critical
O-O bond cleavage reactions will be carried out. Photochemical methods will be
developed for rapidly injecting electrons into the dioxygen coordinated to iron
of a heme group. According to current theories is the step which initiates O-O
bond cleavage in these enzymes. By study of the resulting excited states
information will be obtained on reaction intermediates and the details of the
O-O bond cleavage mechanism. Systems to be investigated include heme-cavity-
modified forms of myoglobin, horseradish peroxidase, and mutants of yeast
cytochrome c. Oxygen is a powerful and readily available oxidant, yet man-made
catalysts that effectively utilize oxygen are rare. The best examples of oxygen
activation and utilization are found in biochemical systems. Iron containing
enzymes are responsible for a large portion of biochemical oxygen activation.
Nonetheless, the exact way in which these iron containing biomolecules are able
to activate oxygen is unclear. This project is designed to probe the mechanism
of the critical oxygen-oxygen bond cleave process which must lie at the heart of
the process. An understanding of how the biological systems operate may permit
new ways of directly utilizing oxygen in a variety of laboratory and industrial
processes.