* 9508733
* LTREB: Responses of a Saline Lake to Environmental Change   from Seasonal to Decadel Time Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Robert Jellison, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/2002
* USD 250,689.00

Lakes constitute nearly half of inland waters by volume and provide ecologically
important habitats in arid regions. They often have high rates of productivity
which support higher trophic levels, especially birds. At Mono Lake, California,
environmental concern has focused on the threat to increasing salinity
accompanying diversions of freshwater streams out of the watershed. State
agencies have now conditioned Los Angeles water rights to raise and maintain the
surface elevation of Mono Lake at a level significantly higher than the present.
The ecological response to different lake levels and salinities is uncertain.
During the past 16 years, Mono Lake s plankton dynamics were dominated by large
changes in nutrient availability. Salinity bioassays on individual organisms and
modeling studies predict higher primary and secondary productivity at the lower
salinities accompanying higher surface elevations. However, recent analysis of
sediment cores indicate little correlation between changes in salinity over the
past 170 years and organic matter accumulation in the sediments. Thi s research
will determine the response to change in salinity through key limnological
measurements during the anticipated period of rising lake levels and decreasing
salinity,will directly compare the resulting long-term record of plankton
dynamics to the sedimentary record, and includes analysis of a 150-200 year
sedimentary record for which lake level and salinity estimates are available.
The comparison between the 21-yr record of plankton dynamics and organic matter
accumulation in the sediments will be enhanced through contemporaneous
measurements of sinking fluxes. Saline lakes are increasingly threatened by
human-caused changes in salinity. The proposed research not only addresses the
impact of changing salinity at Mono Lake, but also contributes to interpreting
the sedimentary record of other lakes. Additionally, this research will advance
efforts at.understanding the effect of species diversity on basic functioning of
ecosystems. There are no comparable records for large, temperate, relatively
deep, species poor lakes with which to compare to well-studied, species-rich,
temperate lakes. This research will help to fill that void.