* 9508239
* Next Generation Wide Area Optical Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Biswanath Mukherjee, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 07/31/1999
* USD 413,887.00

9508239 Mukherjee This project will (i) explore new architectures for the next
generation of networks employing optical technology, in particular wavelength-
division multiplexing (WDM), for wide-area (nationwide) coverage, and (ii)
evaluate and stress-test the performance of these networks by employing
realistic workload (traffic) models. This ``almost-all-optical'' wide-area WDM
network will utilize wavelength multiplexers and optical switches in a routing
node, so that an arbitrary virtual topology can be imbedded on a given physical
fiber network. The virtual topology, which is packet switched and which consists
of a set of ``all-optical lightpaths'', is set up to exploit the relative
strengths of both optics and electronics -- packets of information are carried
by the virtual topology ``as far as possible'' in the optical domain, but packet
forwarding from lightpath to lightpath is performed via electronic switching,
whenever required. This WDM-based network architecture provides high aggregate
system capacity due to spatial reuse of wavelengths, support for a large and
scalable number of users given a limited number of wavelengths, and very lenient
requirements on the wavelength-tunable optical devices of the individual users.
On a microscopic level, this research will optimize the cost, efficiency and
throughput of the WDM routing node. On a macroscopic level, we will (a)
investigate the overall design, analysis, upgradability, and optimization
(including cost vs. performance tradeoffs) of a nationwide WDM network
consistent with device capabilities; (b) examine related device issues such as
optical amplification, fiber nonlinearities, etc.; (c) study traffic control
issues related to switching, routing, and performance management of the network
to develop ``adaptive reconfiguration algorithms'' in order to reconfigure the
virtual topology when the pattern of offered traffic changes; and (d) develop
optical hardware support and algorithms for emerging networking services such as
multicasting. *** ******* Darleen Fisher Program Manager Networking and
Communications Research Program 4201 Wilson Blvd. Room 1175 Arlington Va 22230
(703) 306-1949 (703) 306-0621 (FAX)