* 9508528
* Multi-Sender and Multi-Receiver Network Security
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Yvo Desmedt, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Rodger E. Ziemer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 275,240.00

ABSTRACT: NCR-9508528, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Multi-Sender and
Multi-Receiver Network Security, PI-Yvo Desmedt: State of the art network
security is based on end-to-end encryption and link encryption. In many security
operations there are multiple senders and/or receivers. The straightforward
application of link or end-to-end oriented techniques to network security
implies either that the required bandwidth increases dramatically or that a
terrible key management problem is created. Several multi-sender-multi-receiver
cryptosystems have been presented previously. One of these schemes guarantees
unconditionally the authenticity of broadcast. Several schemes have been
developed in which the power to use a cryptosystem is shared non-interactively
without the need for having a trusted party. The schemes protect against
insiders conspiring with outsiders. Some of the schemes allow a majority of co-
senders to co-sign a document non-interactively without enabling a minority to
use the occasion to substitute a fraudulent message. Others allow a majority of
co-receivers to co-decrypt a ciphertext. A minority cannot use such a decryption
process to decrypt another ciphertext. Different schemes allow for different
security requirements (e.g. heuristic and proven secure). Having demonstrated
previously the feasibility to achieve several of the original objectives
refinements are studied here including (1) how one can detect and correct
internal disrupters who jam the co-production of a signature by sending
erroneous data (and simi lar problems will be addressed for the joint
description of ciphertext), (2) how to trace those who co-signed, in general
those who used their share of cryptographic power, and (3) how to improve
previously developed schemes and study bounds on performance.&lt;br/&gt;********
********************************************************************* Aubrey M.
Bush&lt;br/&gt;Program Director, Acting Deputy Divison
Director&lt;br/&gt;Division of Networking and Communications Research and
Infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;National Science Foundation