* 9508572
* Defect Formation During Organometallic Vapor Phase Epitaxy  of III-V Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Richard Cohen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1999
* USD 265,387.00

9508572 Cohen This research aims at a definitive assessment of doping and
diffusion effects in organometallic vapor phase epitaxy (OMVPE) with the study
of GaAs, InP, and InGaAs. The research emphasis is on atomicl level details of
nucleation, epitaxy, and crystal dislocation formation. Studies will be
conducted to better understand and hence to control: (1) suppression of
diffusion in order to minimize junction motion, precipitation in heavily doped
regions, misfit dislocation formation, and (2) enhancement of diffusion to
produce second phase formation including adjacent phases with potential
application for lateral devices with different bandgaps. Changes in diffusivity
and dopant solubility will be related to Fermi level pinning and the orientation
of the wafer surface. The results will be characterized in terms of mesoscopic
defect structures such as bunching of atomic steps, nucleation or suppression of
misfit dislocations, and second condensed phase formation. %%% This project will
be important to gaining increased fundamental understanding of doping and
diffusion related effects of compound semiconductor materials which occur during
their synthesis and processing. An important feature of the program is the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The knowledge and understanding of materials,
and materials processing resulting from this program is expected to contribute
significantly to advanced devices used for information processing, computing,
and telecommunications. ***