* 9508977
* Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Kate Okikiolu, NJ Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

9508977 Okikiolu The Mathematical Sciences Postdoctoral Research Fellowships are
awards to recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the mathematical sciences.
These awards are a means of contributing to the future vitality of the
scientific effort of the nation. As researchers in the mathematical sciences
expand their interactions with other disciplines, and as the interplay increases
between the various areas of mathematics itself, opportunities for postdoctoral
research and training are becoming increasingly important. The Fellowships are
designed to permit awardees to choose research environments that will have
maximal impact on their future scientific development. The fellowship is
designed to provide 24 months of support divided into 18 academic-year months
and three periods of two summer months. The recipient may choose (1) the
Research Fellowship option which allows for full time support for any 18
academic year months in a three year period, in intervals not shorter than 3
consecutive months or (2) the Research Instructorship option which allows the 18
months of academic year support to be taken as nine months of full time support
and 18 months of half time support. Not more than two months of summer support
from this Fellowship may be received in any calendar year. Kate Okikiolu
received her doctoral degree from the University of California at Los Angeles
and will pursue research under the guidance of Professor David Jerison at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The research is in the area of harmonic
analysis, specifically on the spectral properties of certain operators on
compact manifolds.