* 9508666
* Kinetics of Unimolecular and Bimolecular Reactions of       Halocarbons and Haloalcohols in the Gas Phase
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Bert Holmes, Lyon College
* Continuing Grant
* joyce guest
* 06/30/1998
* USD 152,800.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, Bert Holmes of
Lyon College is funded by a Research in Undergraduate Institutions award to
measure unimolecular and bimolecular rate constants for a series of gas-phase
reactions involving halocarbons using chemical activation. Studies will include
the 1,2-dehydrohalogenation of haloalkanes for which for which the nature of the
transition states will be determined, and 1,2-dehydration of chemically
activated haloalcohols for which rate constants and threshold energy barriers
will be determined. The results from these studies will be used to test recent
theories concerning transitions states for bimolecular reactions of haloalkyl
radicals. This work will provide an improved understanding of some of the
reaction resulting in ozone depletion. Additionally, the work will provide
strong motivation for undergraduate students to pursue careers in chemistry.
Ozone depletion is a complex problem involving gas-phase, liquid-phase, and
interfacial reactions. In order to understand the problem, typical unimolecular
and bimolecular reactions of molecules known to contribute to ozone depletion
must be measured and understood. Professor Holmes' work will address some of the
issues involved in this serious problem, while at the same time giving
undergraduate students the opportunity to perform experiments in a timely and
important area.