* 9508709
* University - Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the  Mathematical Sciences:  Large Deviations Analysis and Monte Carlo Methods for High Speed Telecommunications Networks
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Paul Glasserman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1998
* USD 71,000.00

DMS-9508709 Glasserman The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in
the Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
provide two years of support for recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. The postdoctoral fellow will
work closely with scientific advisors from both academia and industry. Emerging
standards for high-speed telecommunications networks of the near future pose new
challenges for mathematical modeling and computation, and offer an exceptional
opportunity for advanced mathematical ideas to help shape a major new
technology. The high speed of the new technology and the stringent performance
constraints of new services require for their analysis the development and
application of asymptotic methods for stochastic processes. This project
addresses that need through the development of new asymptotics and bounds for
performance, and the development of efficient, robust Monte Carlo methods for
numerical evaluation of network designs and controls.