* 9508112
* CAREER:  Magmatism in the African Western Rift:             Lithospheric Structure and Melting Dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1995,11/12/1998
* Tanya Furman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* William Hart
* 11/12/1998
* USD 90,000.00

9508112 Furman The goal of this project is to understand the genesis of alkalic
volcanic rocks associated with continental extension in the African Western
Rift. This research will use the geochemistry of young volcanic rocks to
document interaction between asthenospheric and lithospheric melts and
characterize the relative contributions from these two source reservoirs. The
results of this project will help constrain global geodynamic models of source
reservoir mixing, and will also advance understanding of the relationships
between metasomatism, magmatism and rifting in continental environments. This
proposal is part of a long-term research program that integrates field,
geochemical, isotopic, experimental and geophysical data to determine the
dynamics of melting and melt extraction in continental rifts. The African Rift
was selected for detailed study because it is the type locality for rift-related
magmatism. Comprehensive analysis of appropriate samples is critical to
interpretation, and this research will provide the most robust data set for
assessment of magma dynamics in the continental rift environment. The
educational component of this proposal represents a focused effort to encourage
participation of African-American students in the earth sciences. A middle/high
school instructional unit (grades 7-9) will be developed on African geography
and resources. This unit will be provide a counterbalance to current foci on the
creative aspects of African heritage, by presenting a vehicle through which
African-American students can express enthusiasm for science while still
developing a sense of cultural identity. A college course for non-science majors
will be developed with the same goal, but the material will be significantly
more detailed and rigorous. Modern and creative pedagogical techniques will be
used in developing educational materials for both courses.