* 9508691
* Collection Improvement for the Intermountain Herbarium
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Mary Barkworth, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1997
* USD 104,970.00

The Intermountain Herbarium is a Regional Systematics Resource Center for the
Intermountain Region. It currently comprises over 216,500 accessioned specimens.
These are stored in the equivalent of 196.5 full-sized herbarium cabinets. The
quality of these cabinets varies widely. Over have (110.5 full-sized
equivalents) are standard cabinets that protect specimens from ceiling leaks,
insects, and dust. The remaining cabinets (86 full-sized equivalents) do not do
so. The storage space for unaccessioned specimens is also of major concern. For
lack of better facilities, these are stored on open shelves that provide even
less protection than the substandard wooden and metal cabinets. An additional
hazard facing many of the specimens in the collection is the severed
overcrowding that exits. A recent count revealed 310 shelves so crowed that the
folders have to be squeezed slightly when being taken out or returned. In each
instance, the cabinets on either side are so full as to preclude relieving the
situation by redistribution of the specimens. The need to upgrade the specimen
storage facilities in the Intermountain Herbarium became evident in 1993 and
1994; three separate instances of damage form insect infestation were
discovered, four ceiling leaks occurred, and approximately 300 unmounted
specimens had to be discarded because of a ceiling leak that had occurred in
1986. Some precautions have already been taken to minimize further damage.
Specimens are now routinely frozen before being placed in the collection or loan
cabinets and polyethylene sheets have been stapled across the tops of all wooden
cabinets. Neither of these measures, however, can provide the level of
protection provided by standard herbarium cabinets that seal tightly when
closed. It is essential that the herbarium be able to place all the specimens it
houses, both its own and those loaned by other institutions, whether accessioned
or not, in good quality cabinets. This will require the purchase of 130
standard-sized cabinets: 100 to replace the existing substandard storage, 24 to
relieve overcrowding, and 6 to accommodate the next five years. In addition,
non-archival genus folders need to be replaced and new folders made between the
taxonomic treatment of the Asteraceae in recent publications affection the
Intermountain Region, a nomenclatural program designed to remove inconsistencies
and provide cross-references in this family is needed to facilitate use of the
collection