* 9508742
* Algebraic Geometry and Computational Algebraic Geometry for Image Database Indexing, Image Recognition, and Computer    Vision
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Peter Stiller, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 01/31/1999
* USD 71,000.00

9508742 Stiller The University-Industry Cooperative Research Programs in the
Mathematical Sciences are programs designed to establish a mechanism for
exchange of mathematical scientists between academia and industry at different
stages of their careers. These programs will strengthen the links between
industry and academia and identify and encourage new avenues of research in the
mathematical sciences. The University-Industry Postdoctoral Research Fellowships
provide two years of support for recent recipients of doctoral degrees in the
mathematical sciences. These awards are a means of contributing to the future
vitality of the scientific effort of the nation. The postdoctoral fellow will
work closely with scientific advisors from both academia and industry. The
Postdoctoral researcher will be engaged in a joint research effort that unites
researchers at Texas A&amp;M University with a group at the David Sarnoff
Research Center in Princeton, New Jersey. The research will focus on the
application of techniques in algebraic geometry, notably geometric invariant
theory, and computational algebraic geometry to problems in image recognition,
image database indexing for content-based retrieval, and computer vision. The
fellow will do original research to develop a theory of equivariant
correspondences coming out of questions motivated by problems in relating 3- D
objects to 2-D images and vice versa. The work will involve the design of
algorithms to implement the results, as well as an analysis of their robustness
with respect to geometric variation.