* 9509863
* Cloning, Structure and Regulation of the sp56 Gene
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Jeffrey Bleil, The Scripps Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1996
* USD 100,000.00

9509863 Bleil The primary interest of Dr. Bleil's laboratory is analysis of
mammalian fertilization at the molecular level, combining techniques of cell
biology, biochemistry and molecular genetics. He has identified a mouse sperm
protein, a lectin called sp56, which has many properties expected of the protein
responsible for sperm recognition of the mouse egg's zona pellucida. He has
recently isolated and cloned the cDNA encoding sp56. Amino acid sequence derived
from this cDNA indicates that: 1) the protein is translated on the endoplasmic
reticulum, 2) has no transmembrane domain, and 3) is a member of a superfamily
of extracellular protein receptors. Probes directed against sp56 and its mRNA
reveal that transcription of the sp56 gene and translation of its mRNA occur
exclusively in spermatogenic cells of the mouse. The long term goals to be
addressed by studies described here are: 1) to genetically prove or disprove the
hypothesis that sp56 is the sperm protein which recognizes the mouse egg zona
pellucida, mediating sperm binding to the egg's zona pellucida, and 2) to
determine the molecular structure of the sp56/ZP3 complex. In order to attain
these goals, the gene encoding sp56 must be identified and isolated. The
specific aims of the proposed study are as follows: 1) To use cDNA encoding
sp56, currently available in this laboratory, to screen a mouse genomic library.
Genomic DNA clones, including sequence upstream of the translated region, will
be purified and sequenced; 2) To analyze the sequence of the sp56 gene in order
to identify regulatory sequences which might encode specific expression in
testes. Comparison with other, previously identified genes which are expressed
in testes may reveal common regulatory sequences. ***