* 9509938
* Mathematical Sciences: Workshop on Fermat's Last Theorem; August 9-18, 1995, Boston, Massachusetts
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,09/30/1996
* Gary Cornell, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew G. Earnest
* 09/30/1996
* USD 80,000.00

This award provides support for a conference entitled Fermat's Last Theorem to
be held in August 1995 at Boston University. The conference will focus on two
major topics: (1) Andrew Wiles' recent proof of the Taniyama-Shimura-Weil
conjecture for semistable elliptic curves; and (2) the earlier works of Frey,
Serre and Ribet showing that Wiles' Theorem would complete the proof of Fermat's
Last Theorem. The conference is aimed primarily at advanced graduate students
and recent PhD recipients, but it will also be valuable to more experienced
mathematicians seeking to master the powerful tools used in the proof of
Fermat's Last Theorem. In addition, about 80 high school students and
undergraduates from Boston University's PROMYS program will join the more
general conference activities, thereby enhancing these young people's experience
in PROMYS and reinforcing that mathematics is a flourishing modern research
activity. The themes of the conference belong to the general mathematical area
of Arithmetic Geometry. This ultramodern research area combines two of the
oldest branches of mathematics: number theory and geometry. The new insights
arising out of this combination are producing increasingly powerful tools to
solve longstanding problems like Fermat's Last Theorem, which have resisted the
strongest efforts of over three centuries of mathematicians. In addition, though
Arithmetic Geometry is sometimes regarded as among the purest of pure
mathematics, it has also been developing insightful new techniques leading to
dramatic progress in such applied areas as error-correcting codes and
cryptography.