* 9509789
* Accommodation Site Autonomy in Distributed Constraint       Maintenance
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Subhasish Mazumdar, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/1999
* USD 70,000.00

Integrity is a guarantee offered by Database Management Systems, both
centralized and distributed, against nonmalicious errors in its data, i.e., the
data is faithful to the relevant external world objects and their constraints.
Heterogeneous distributed databases (HDDBs), by allowing shared access to pre-
existing databases, are growing in importance. They exhibit site autonomy, the
right of each local database to reject arbitrary global demands. Unfortunately,
site autonomy seriously exacerbates global integrity maintenance. The aim of
this research is to develop methods for maintaining integrity in distributed
databases while accommodating site autonomy. The research plan is to explore
three related techniques: generation of local sufficient constraints from global
constraints, automated theorem proving, and relaxation of constraints. Some
global constraints can be transformed into relatively simple, adjustable local
ones needing little coordination, thus satisfying autonomy. This project
investigates both the theoretical questions regarding what class of constraints
is so transformable, and the p ractical question of how to produce a tool for
generating such transformations. The proposed tool extends theorem proving
techniques previously applied to centralized databases and allows special
predicates that capture the notion of relaxation of constraint checking. This
work will result in better integrity assurance in distributed databases in spite
of site autonomy, with applications in decision support systems, optimization of
material flow, and integration of scientific data from several sources, and
other the areas where these requirements are important.