* 9509184
* Can Non-Random Mating Result in Evolutionary Change:        A Selection Experiment Using Wild Radish as a Model System
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Ann Evans, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/1997
* USD 55,303.00

9509184 MARSHALL Understanding plant reproduction is important for both basic
and applied science. From the basic science perspective, plant ecology and
evolution cannot be understood without knowledge of the causes of variation in
plant reproductive success. From an applied perspective, plant reproduction is
important because many of our agricultural products are the direct products of
reproduction, seeds, and because understanding of reproductive success is
necessary to plant breeding programs. However, knowledge of plant reproduction
has been limited because most current information is about success of plants as
seed parents, even though plants reproduce both as seed and pollen parents. If
selection is occurring on the ability of plants to achieve reproductive success
through pollen donation, then some of the features of plants may have
misinterpreted or under-utilized. This study focuses on testing whether
selection is occurring on plants that act as pollen parents. An artificial
selection experiment is used to address whether pollen donating ability is
genetically based and to test whether selection on this ability alters other
characteristics of plants. Wild radish has been chosen for the model organism
because it is very easy to work and is closely related to crucifers that are
grown as crops. The study directly addresses a fundamental issue in plant
evolutionary ecology and may have rather direct agricultural implications as
well. Because it involves selecting seeds from different regions of the fruits
the research will address whether this form of selection could be useful in
plant breeding. A study of alfalfa has already shown that seeds selected from
different regions of fruits have different growth and reproductive
characteristics. This project can be used to address whether the most vigorous
seeds typically come from particular regions of fruits in an unrelated plant and
thus whether this might be a generally useful method of selection in plant
breeding programs.