* 9509629
* The Third, Fourth and Fifth NSF Materials Chemistry         Workshops
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Seth Marder, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 02/28/1998
* USD 72,000.00

The Office of Special Projects of the Chemistry Division and the Solid State
Chemistry and Polymers Program of the Division of Materials Research in support
of the Advanced Materials Processing Program are funding Dr. Seth Marder of the
California Institute of Technology to organize and run three annual NSF
Materials Chemistry Workshops. These workshops provide an opportunity for
informal discussion among scientists with diverse backgrounds emphasizing
progress, research ideas, and directions in the growing area of materials
chemistry. Attendance will be by application, including a one-page abstract of
the research area to be discussed. Selection of approximately 30 applicants will
be based on merit by a committee chosen by the organizers which includes
participants from the previous workshops. Participants will be drawn from
universities, industry, and government laboratories at all stages of careers and
backgrounds. Junior faculty, women, and underrepresented minorities will be
strongly encouraged. Two discussion leaders will be invited in addition to the
thirty speaking participants. Each participant will make a 30-minute
presentation followed by a compulsory discussion period of at least 10 minutes.
The goals of the three-day weekend sessions will be to provide a format for
lively discussion and to produce a document which provides a consensus of
opinion for the future of materials chemistry education and research. Such
discussion will help identify new directions and opportunities for chemists and
chemistry in NSF's Advanced Materials and Processing Program.