* 9509286
* Dissertation:  The Effect of Parasitism and Predation on the Spatial and Temporal Distributions of a Freshwater Snail
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Curtis Lively, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 08/31/1997
* USD 8,900.00

9509286 Lively Parasites can dramatically influence the behavior of their hosts.
Such behavioral changes can sometimes benefit the parasite by increasing its
probability of being transmitted to another host. Preliminary studies have
demonstrated that a trematode parasite, Microphallus sp., causes of significant
behavioral change in the freshwater snail, Potamopyrgus antipodarum. This
research will experimentally determine if the behavioral change is simply a
byproduct of parasitism, or if it is an adaptive strategy on the part of the
parasite to increase the likelihood that infected snails are eaten by the final
host in the life cycle, ducks. These ideas will be tested by determining the
effect of food deprivation on the behavior of infected and uninfected snails, as
well as determining the removal rates of infected snails from the population by
waterfowl and predators that cannot serve as final hosts for the parasite. This
study will be the first to begin to examine the interaction of host and non-host
predators in shaping host-parasite relationships. These types of studies are
important because models of parasite spread in populations usually assume that
transmission is a random event. However, this clearly is not the case. Since
many trematode parasites of snails also infect humans and domestic livestock as
a final host, an understanding how the parasite affects the behavior of
intermediate hosts may lead to better control measures.