* 9509628
* 7th International Conference on Fluid Properties and Phase  Equilibria for Chemical Process Design
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1995,02/29/1996
* John O'Connell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 02/29/1996
* USD 16,625.00

The International conferences on Fluid Properties and Phase Equilibria for
chemical Process Design are held every three years, presently alternating
between North America and Europe. The first six conferences have produced highly
desirable interactions between academic and industrial and government workers in
this vital area for chemical process design and simulation. The meetings have
also become the most important gatherings for workers from all over the world;
the Sixth Conference held in 1992 in Cortina d Ampezzo, Italy attracted 194
participants form 28 countries. Each conference has produced important
collections of papers in Proceedings volumes. The Six conference provided almost
900 pages of reviews and new research when published in the international
journal Fluid Phase Equilibria. The Seventh Conference is scheduled for June
18-23 1995 in Snowmass/Aspen Colorado, USA with much of the same successful
format as for the previous Conferences but including some significant
enhancements. The proposal requests funds for travel, meals and lodging for 25
needy US a cademic researchers to reach the conference site. Those supported
would include 12 invited presenters of papers with the rest being young research
workers who would not be able to attend without such support. No request is made
for Meeting activity expenses, for organizing committee needs, or for non US