* 9509862
* East Asia Region Workshop:  International Freshwater        Initiative, to be held June 25-28, 1995, Oahu, HI
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Raymond Herrmann, American Water Resources Assoc
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 04/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

This is a one year project proposed by Drs. Ray Herrmann and William Back and
Mr. Ivan Johnson, American Water Resource Association (AWRA). This proposal
requests $10,000 for five representatives from five developing countries in the
East Asian and Pacific region to attend the American Water Resource Association
(AWRA) summer symposium on water resources and environmental hazards. Fresh
water is an important issue in the East Asia and Pacific countries, particularly
in many developing East Asian countries where there are high rates of population
and economic growth. The involvement of scientists from these countries is
important, since these scientists have first hand of information concerning
problems in water quality and quantity and ecosystem integrity. These scientists
will also participate in special workshops to assess the need for a network for
scientists and policy makers from Oceania, the Pacific Islands, and the Pacific
Rim countries to develop a prioritized research agenda relating to regional
water issues and to determine the scope of such a research agenda, as well as to
identify critical water problems across the region. The modest cost to involve
scientists from developing countries is well justified since the potential gain
in advancing understanding of global water issues is great.