* 9509081
* The Yeast 3-Hybrid System:  A Genetic Method for Screening  RNA-Protein Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Tien-Hsien Chang, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Charles D. Liarakos
* 03/31/1996
* USD 25,000.00

9509081 Chang Specific RNA-protein interactions are crucial in a variety of
biological processes. These interactions are accomplished by proteins which can
recognize a specific RNA structure rather than a particular RNA sequence. At
present, identification of the physiologically relevant RNA ligand for a given
RNA-binding protein is laborious and difficult. As the number of proteins
predicted to bind RNA continues to grow, there is an urgent need for a reliable
method for identifying their RNA ligands. To this end, this project will develop
a "3-hybrid" genetic system, building on the concept of the well-known yeast
2-hybrid system. A "3-hybrid" test system consisting of two fusion proteins (the
first and the second hybrids) and a "bipartite" RNA molecule (the third hybrid)
will be produced in a yeast reporter strain. If the specific "sandwich-like"
protein-RNA-protein interaction can be achieved in vivo, then GAL4
transcriptional activity may be reconstituted, leading to the transcriptional
activation of a reporter gene. The long term goal of this research is to develop
this in vivo screening method for identifying the RNA ligand for any given RNA-
binding protein, or vice versa. %%% Specific RNA-protein interactions are
crucial in a variety of biological processes. These interactions are
accomplished by proteins which can recognize a specific RNA structure rather
than a particular RNA sequence. At present, identification of the
physiologically relevant RNA ligand for a given RNA-binding protein is laborious
and difficult. As the number of proteins predicted to bind RNA continues to
grow, there is an urgent need for a reliable method for identifying their RNA
ligands. To this end, a "3-hybrid" genetic system will be produced in yeast so
that specific protein-RNA-protein interactions in vivo will result in the
transcriptional activation of a reporter gene. The goal of this research is to
develop this in vivo screening method for identifying the RNA ligand for any
given RNA-binding protein, or vice versa. ***