* 9509082
* Improvement of the University of Arkansas Arthropod Museum  Facilities
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1998
* James Whitfield, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 51,920.00

; R o o t E n t r y F d C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l d d 4 @ ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9509082 Whitfield The University of Arkansas Arthropod Museum
(UAAM) is located in the Ozark Plateau, within a short distance of the Ouachita
Highlands. These two regions represent important areas of geographical endemism
for many of the species in the collection, represented by more than 650,000
specimens. Because of its unique geographical coverage and history of excellent
collection and curation, UAAM maintains the most important regional collection
of insects from the Ozark and Ouachita interior Highlands. UAAM has recently
added to its value as a scientific and educational resource with completion of
the Insect Molecular Systematic Laboratory, and extensive computerization and
linkage with Internet for database exchange these new facilities enable the
museum to keep pace with the most recent developments in systematics. However, a
recent increase in the expansion rate of the collection (upwards of 10% in the
last year) has created an immediate need for increased storage capacity. In
addition, the UAAM collection requires rearrangement to enhance storage
efficiency and accessibility. An in crease in the capacity and upgrading of the
hardware of the museum will be accomplished through the replacement of old wood
cabinets by modern metal storage cabinets and the purchase of new cabinets
designed for the safe and efficient storage of alcohol-preserved specimens in
vials. The reorganization will have an immediate impact on the appearance and
ease of use of the collection by the museum staff and visiting scientists, as
well as enhance the visibility of the display space for use by the local
community. ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ( Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9509082 Jethro Moorefield Jethro Moorefield @ f d
@ @ f d @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e b b j j j j j j j ; 1 # l T = ; j ; j j j
j ~ j j j j 0 9509082 Whitfield The University of Arkansas Arthropod Museum
(UAAM) is located in the Ozark Plateau, within a short distance of the Ouachita
Highlands. These two regions represent important areas of geographical endemism
for many of the species in the collection, represented by more than 650,000
specimens. Because of its unique geographical coverage and history of excellent
collection and curation, UAAM maintains the most important regional collection
of insects from the Ozark and Ouachita interior Highlands. UAAM has recently
added to its value as a scientific and educational resource with completion of
the Insect Molecular Systematic Laboratory, and extensive computerization and
linkage with Internet for database exchange these new facilities enable the
museum to keep pace with the most recent developments in systematics. However, a
recent increase in the expansion rate of the collection (upwards of 10% in the
last year) has created an immediate need for increased storage capacity. In
addition, the UAAM collection requires rearrangement to enhance storage effi