* 9509550
* Molecular Differences, Adaptive Radiation, and Geographic   Speciation in the Hawaiian Lobelioids
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Thomas Givnish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 08/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9509550 GIVNISH The plant subfamily Lobelioideae in Hawaii represents one-ninth
of the plant species native to Hawaii. There these plants have undergone an
amazing radiation with striking specializations in leaf shape, flower form and
seed dispersal adaptations. Most species are restricted to individual islands
and the species diversity seems to be rapidly disappearing with habitat
alterations. Relationships among these Hawaiian species and the group's
relationships to other Pacific lobelioids remain controversial. This project
will utilize sequence data from both chloroplast and nuclear DNA to construct
family trees for the species in the two largest genera of Hawaiian lobelioids
and to address relationships to other genera and suggested ancestral groups.
Goals of the study include: 1) deriving a molecular based family tree with which
to interpret patterns of morphological variation in the Hawaiian lobelioids in a
non-circular fashion; 2) determining the amount of agreement between family
trees based on molecular data and those previously proposed from morphological
data, in order to evaluate the reliability of the morphological traits that have
been used to classify the Hawaiian lobelioids; 3) Analyzing the tie between
ancestry and distribution and inferring the number of inter-island dispersal
events required to account for the diversification seen in the two largest
genera; 4) comparing the apparent rates of molecular change in these genera,
calibrated against the geological ages of each island, and estimating their
approximate time and place of origin; and 5) assessing the relationships of the
Hawaiian lobelioids to each other and allied groups to determine if the Hawaiian
lobelioids are descended from a single ancestor and identifying which of the
proposed groups are implicated in their origin. %%% This study will provide
knowledge on the biodiversity and its origins for an important and threatened
group of native Hawaiian plants. ***