* 9509121
* Phylogenetic Analysis of the "Long-lived Gilia" Clade       (Polemoniaceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1998
* Dieter Wilken, Rancho Santa Ana Botanic Garden
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 11/30/1998
* USD 184,423.00

9509121 Porter The important role that animal pollinators like insects play in
the origin of morphological diversity in flowering plants is generally
appreciated. However, we still know little about the actual sequence of events
associated with evolutionary change from one pollination syndrome (for example,
by bird, bat, bee, or moth) to another. Through analysis of the historical,
genealogical sequence of speciation events in a group of plants with well-known
pollination syndromes, we should be able to reconstruct in detail the
evolutionary path to new pollination mechanisms. Dr. J. Mark Porter, a
specialist in molecular systematics, and Dr. Dieter Wilken, a specialist in
plant morphology and taxonomy, are working together to determine the phylogeny
of the species of the phlox family, Polemoniaceae. About 120 species will be
studied, as representative of the floral and pollinator diversity in the family,
for both DNA and morphological characteristics. DNA analyses will be conducted
on nuclear ribosomal sequences and on chloroplast genes. Congruent patterns of
species divergence that are revealed by both molecular and morphological
analysis constitute robust hypotheses of phylogenetic relationship. This
genealogical framework in turn provides a road map to the sequence of changes in
floral shape, size, and phenology associated with the ecological shifts in
pollinators through the course of evolution in these plants.