* 9509229
* RPG:  Isolation and Characterization of a Floral Induction  Gene in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Mary Honma, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9509229 Honma The long term goal of the proposed research is to understand the
developmental changes that occur during the transition from vegetative to
reproductive growth in Arabidopsis thaliana. Physiological experiments suggest
that environmental as well as endogenous factors regulate the time to flowering.
Relatively little is known, however, about the genes and their protein products
that are required in this critical transition to the reproductive state. The
identification of mutants altered in floral induction and the isolation of the
corresponding genes will contribute to the understanding of this complex
process. An Ac/Ds transposon system was developed for mutagenesis and gene
isolation. This system has been used to generate an early flowering mutant,
eaf20, that makes the vegetative to reproductive transition earlier than wild-
type plants grown in the same condition. Genetic and molecular experiments
indicate that the eaf20 gene is tagged with Ds. The Ds transposon sequences were
used to isolate a small segment of the flanking genomic region that encodes the
flowering gene. Future experiments will focus on isolation and characterization
of genomic and cDNA clones that correspond to the eaf20 gene. Genomic clones
covering the eaf20 region will be cloned using the previously isolated Ds
flanking sequence. To confirm that the eaf20 gene has been isolated, a
complementation experiment will be done in which the genomic clones are
introduced into the eaf20 mutant plants and screened for rescue of the mutant
phenotype. Sequencing of the genomic copies of the eaf20 gene will provide
valuable information regarding regulatory regions of the gene that will be used
for subsequent studies. The genomic clones will also be used to isolate eaf20
cDNAs. Sequencing the eaf20 cDNAs will be followed by database searches to look
for regions of similarity to genes with known biochemical functions. These
molecular studies will lay the foundation for fut ure experiments and will
contribute to our understanding of floral induction in Arabidopsis.