* 9509810
* Investigation of Microphysical, Kinematic and               Electrical Characteristics of CaPE Thunderstorms
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Dennis Musil, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 11/30/1999
* USD 270,000.00

Detwiler/Abstract ATM-9509810 The objectives of this research are to
characterize in detail hydrometeor development and the co-evolution of storm
circulations, cloud and precipitation particle populations, and electric fields
in Florida thunderstorms. Aircraft, radar, satellite, radiosonde, and surface
observations of thunder storms from the Convection and Precipitation/Electricity
(CaPE) project will be used. This project was conducted near the Kennedy Space
Center during the summer of 1991. Results from three CaPE case studies completed
under prior funding have shown that ice-phase precipitation, along with upper-
level downdrafts, develop prior to the first indications of storm
electrification. Negative electric charge is co-located with areas of
precipitation at mid-levels in these storms in their early to mature phases,
although the charge carriers were not identified. Data from more than a dozen
additional research flights is available to refine and generalize preliminary
conclusions reached in these three completed studies. These data will be
composited to yield a more general picture of evolution in Florida
thunderstorms. In collaboration with other workers, interpretation of multi-
parameter radar signatures will be refined using intercomparisons with in situ
aircraft microphysical measurements. Further analysis of airborne electric field
and airframe discharge data will be undertaken to reduce uncertainties in
electric field retrievals from in situ airborne measurements.