* 9509819
* A Query-Based Approach to Database Mining:  Database Tools  for Rule Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Tomasz Imielinski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 02/28/1999
* USD 384,036.00

Many government and commercial organizations possess extremely large databases,
with sizes often measured in terabytes, containing such information as consumer
data, astronomical observations, biological sequences, etc. The extraction of
information from such large databases has become known as database mining and is
an area where machine learning techniques must meet performance requirements of
very large database systems. This research focuses on one particular database-
mining task, the problem of rule discovery. Rule discovery is viewed as an
interactive process with a human in the loop , an iterative process where the
user is not only trying to discover interesting results, but also interesting
questions to ask. The approach is based on the key idea that rules can
themselves be viewed as objects. Under this view the space of possible rules
supported by a database can itself be treated as a database, and the rule-
discovery process can be approached as a process of querying the rule base
implicitly defined by each database. The human in the loop user of the discovery
system would interact with the system via ad hoc rulebase queries, designing the
desired query interactively as various results are returned during a rule
discovery session. The proposed implementation of the data mining system is
tested on the data from the health-care field, obtained through an ongoing
collaboration with a major provider of managed health care.