* 9509885
* Studies of High-Tc and Buckminsterfullerene Superconductors Under High Hydrostatic Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* James Schilling, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 243,390.00

9509885 Schilling This project will search for oxygen ordering in High-Tc oxide
superconductors in order to determine the essential structural and cation
characteristics responsible for the ordering. Temperature dependent oxygen
relaxation phenomena will also be examined in detail. An objective is to
establish any link between these phenomena and photo-induced superconductivity.
The functional dependence of the superconductor transition temperature and the
electronic density of state in fullerene superconductors such as K3C60 and
Ru3C60 will also be investigated. The project will focus on the pressure
dependence of the transition temperatures as well as the Pauli spin
susceptibility. This project is devoted to a fundamental study of
superconductivity, however, the results may be of technical interest in the
context of pressure effects on high-Tc and related materials. %%% In a typical
high-temperature superconductor, approximately half of the constituent atoms are
oxygen. These atoms, via there arrangement in the crystal lattice, sensitively
influence the temperature at which a material becomes a superconductor. This
project is devoted to the study of the oxygen atoms, and their ordering
(arrangement) in the high-Tc materials lattice. The materials will be studied as
a function of both temperature and pressure (these are important thermodynamic
variables for the high-Tc materials). The methods will also be applied to
another interesting superconductor material: "fullerenes", which contain
potassium or rubidium. The experiments, which probe how the conducting
properties of the materials vary with temperature and pressure, will yield
information that will be of considerable interest to theorists. The project is
of a fundamental nature, but may have technical relevance if it leads to new
routes to higher temperature superconductors. ***