* 9509181
* RPG: Developmental Changes in Myelin Membrane Fluidity Evaluated with Novel Bioengineering Techniques
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Cynthia Husted, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Martin Poe
* 05/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9509181 Husted The overall goal of this research is to evaluate central nervous
system (CNS) myelin membrane fluidity as a function of temperature- induced
development in fish. In particular, the following questions will be addressed:
(1) How do temperature-induced changes in myelin lipid composition affect myelin
membrane fluidity in fish adapted to different growth temperatures? (2) How do
these changes affect the interaction forces between myelin lipids and proteins?
To address these questions, the following specific aims will be accomplished:
Aim 1. Membrane fluidity of cerebral and spinal cord myelin lipids from fish
adapted to different growth temperatures will be characterized using carbon-13
magic angle spinning NMR spectroscopy and correlated with variations in myelin
lipid composition to determine how changes in myelin lipid composition affect
myelin membrane fluidity. Aim 2. Short-, intermediate-, and long-range
attractive and repulsive forces in myelin membranes from fish adapted to
different growth temperatures will be evaluated with the Surface Forces
Apparatus and correlated with changes in membrane fluidity to determine how
changes in myelin membrane fluidity affect myelin lipid-protein interactions %%%
The dynamic state of lipid in biological membranes is a central feature of
current models of membrane organization. The motion of membrane constituents is
referred to as membrane fluidity. This research will evaluate central nervous
system myelin membrane fluidity as a function of temperature-induced development
in fish. In particular, the following questions will be addressed: (1) How do
temperature-induced changes in myelin lipid composition affect myelin membrane
fluidity in fish adapted to different growth temperatures? (2) How do these
changes affect the interaction forces between myelin lipids and proteins?
Membrane fluidity will be characterized using nuclear magnetic resonance
spectroscopy. Short-, intermediate-, and long-range attr active and repulsive
forces in myelin membranes from fish adapted to different growth temperatures
will be evaluated with the Surface Forces Apparatus and correlated with changes
in membrane fluidity to determine how changes in myelin membrane fluidity affect
myelin lipid-protein interactions. ***