* 9509826
* Parsnip Webworms as Selective Agents On Primary Metabolites of Wild Parsnip
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1996
* May Berenbaum, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 12/31/1996
* USD 92,540.00

9509826 Berenbaum The interactions between the parsnip webworm, an introduced
plant-feeding insect, and the wild parsnip, an introduced weed that serves as
its principal host throughout its range, is one of very few natural systems in
which estimates have been made of the ability of an insect to select for
chemically based resistance in its hostplant. To date, attention in this system
has focused on the role of furanocoumarins, insecticidal compounds produced by
the plant, in conferring resistance against the insect. The focus of this
proposal is to determine whether plant primary metabolites, which may serve as
nutrients for insects, are under selection by insect herbivores. The hypothesis
that plant nutritional quality can evolve in response to insect herbivory has
remained effectively untested for almost two decades. This study is one of few
to examine the consequences of variation in plant primary metabolites on insect
resistance and as such can be used to evaluate that hypothesis and its
implication for studies of plant/insect interactions. In addition to its
importance to basic studies, this project has implications for the management of
crop-consuming pest species. There is currently interest in developing novel
mechanisms to reduce pest problems in agroecosystems and at the same time reduce
chemical inputs to those systems. Because humans do not feed exclusively on a
single plant species, as do many phytophagous insects, selective breeding for
altered nutrient levels in plants may lead to reductions in insect damage in the
absence of chemical inputs, with little or no adverse impacts on human
consumers.