* 9509101
* The Impact of Genetic Recombination on Adaptation
* BIO,DEB
* 10/15/1995,09/30/1999
* William Rice, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 09/30/1999
* USD 220,000.00

9509101 RICE Genetic recombination is a prominent feature of virtually all
complex, multicellular organisms. Yet some species of plants and animals lack
this genetic feature, including many agriculturally important species like fruit
trees, grape varieties, etc. The proposed research tests one of the prevailing
theories about the importance of genetic recombination, i.e., it accelerates the
rate of beneficial adaptation in response to environmental change. The common
fruit fly (Drosophila melanogaster) is used as a model system owing to its
inexpensive culturing, short generation time, and availability of numerous
genetic tools critical for the operation of multi-generation experiments. Using
a new strain recently developed in Dr. Rice's laboratory, he will experimentally
vary the amount of genetic recombination in different populations. He will then
challenge these populations with a new environment (low grade thermal stress),
as it might occur during a period of rapid global warming. Next he will measure
the rate of adaptation and relate this to the experimentally controlled level of
genetic recombination. Current theory predicts that genetic recombination will
greatly enhance the capacity of the populations to adapt to the new environment.
The capacity for rapid adaptation is becoming increasingly important owing to
the rapid environmental change induced by human activities. Results from these
experiments will contribute to basic understanding of plant and animal breeding
programs, and will help to predict the capacity of different life forms to adapt
to human-induced environmental change.