* 9509178
* Curation and Integration of Orphaned Collections of Fossil  Invertebrates: Florida Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Douglas Jones, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 211,424.00

The Florida Museum of Natural History (FLMNH) at the University of Florida (UF)
recently acquired three, significant, orphaned collections of invertebrate
fossils. Each collection is composed primarily of specimens from the Cenozoic of
Florida and the southeastern U.S. and each represents a unique, scientific
research resource. The Invertebrate Paleontology (IP) Division at the museum
will execute a three-year project to curate these orphaned collections and
integrate them into its Systematic, Type, and Stratigraphic collections, as
appropriate. the ultimate goal of this project is to preserve the specimens and
associated information within each of these valuable research collections and to
make them available to the scientific community. Each collection presents
distinct strengths and challenges. The collections include: (1) Florida
Geological Survey Collection. In 1993 the Florida Geological Survey (FGS) in
Tallahassee officially transferred its collection of fossil invertebrates to the
FLMNH for permanent care and conservation. The FGS Collections large ( 13,000
catalogued and ca. 5,000 uncatalogued lots), represents most of the
stratigraphic units in the state, and contains over 178 primary types as well as
many figured, referred, and voucher specimens. (2) Hunter-Banks Collection. This
large collection was made during 1960-1978 by Muriel E. Hunter and the Lake
Joseph E. Banks while employed by the Coastal Petroleum Company of Tallahassee,
FL. It consists of fossil invertebrates from Florida (85%), the southeastern
U.S. (10%), and form abroad ( 5%). The vast majority of the specimen lots (ca.
22,200) were stratigraphically collected, including many sites which are no
longer accessible. (3) Victor Zullo Collection. Shortly after his untimely death
in July 1993, the fossil barnacle collection of Dr. Victor Zullo was transferred
to the FLMNH from the University of North Caroline, Wilmington. This vital
collection (ca. 1,000 lots) consists primarily of balanomorph barlacles which
Zullo was researching. The collection is accompanied by 10 manuscripts in
various stages of completion which are being distributed to appropriate workers
for completion. The collection will contain many primary and secondary type
specimens which result from this systematic research.