* 9509164
* Stable Expression and Beta-adrenergic Receptor Subtype-     Specific Regulation of the Cardiac L-type Ca2+ Channel
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Atsuko Yatani, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,000.00

9509164 Yatani The voltage-dependent Ca2+ channel is a multi-subunit membrane-
spanning protein that plays a critical role in the regulation of a variety of
cell functions. The long-term goal of this research is to understand the
physiological regulation of ion channels in the cardiovascular system. The
identification of the mechanism underlying sympathetic modulation of the cardiac
L-type Ca2+ channel is a key step in achieving this goal. Specific aims are: (1)
To establish an useful expression system in which the molecular events which
govern AR/L-type Ca2+ channel interactions can be deducted; (2) To define the
relative contribution of -adrenergic subtypes ( 1AR and 2AR) to cardiac L-type
Ca2+ channel regulation. The receptor subtype-specific regulation (both direct
and indirect responses) will be compared in transfected cells; and (3) To
investigate, at the molecular level, the regions of the AR which are critical
for subtype-specific interactions with the Ca2+ channel. %%% The long-term goal
of this research is to understand the physiological regulation of ion channels
in the cardiovascular system. The research will take advantage of the cloning of
the distinct beta-adrenergic receptor ( AR) subtypes and of the cardiac Ca2+
channel, and examine directly the regulatory mechanisms of AR on the Ca2+
channel at the molecular level. The results obtained from this research will
serve as an initial data base for a more thorough study of the physiological
regulation of ion channels. ***