* 9509245
* International Postdoctoral Fellows:  Investigation of       ca. 3.5 Ga Mafic-ultramafic Sequence, South Africa:         Implications for Archaean Mantle and Crustal Evolution
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Jesse Dann, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/1996
* USD 16,745.00

9509245 Dann The International Junior Investigator and Postdoctoral Fellows
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad. This award will support a twelve-month
postdoctoral research visit by Dr. Jesse C. Dann to work with Professor Maarten
de Wit at the University of Cape Town in South Africa. The U.S.-South Africa
Program is providing a portion of the support for this project. This research
project will involve the continuation of a detailed mapping project of some of
the oldest (3.5 billion years old) and best preserved rocks on Earth, which are
located in the Barberton Greenstone Belt of South Africa. The results will
increase our understanding of the nature of Archean crustal behavior, providing
an important link in reconstructing the tectonic history of the Earth. The first
year of this project, funded by the South African Foundation for Research and
Development (FRD), allowed the initial mapping and collection of samples for
petrographic and geochemical analysis. During this second year, mapping will be
completed, analysis conducted and results worked into publishable form. ***