* 9509219
* Characterization of a Novel Transcriptional Activator
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1997
* Bonita Biegalke, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 10/31/1997
* USD 21,272.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 3 C C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l 3 C 3 C 4 @ 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; is 9509219 Biegalke Alteration of the transcriptional activity
of promoters is a major mechanism used to control the resulting amount of gene
product produced. Viral model systems have been very useful in elucidating the
elements involved in transcriptional regulation. Human cytomegalovirus provides
an excellent model for the study of transcriptional regulation. One viral
protein, pp71, is a novel transcriptional activator; activating a viral promoter
through multiple copies of an Ap 1 binding site as well as additional as yet
unidentified sequences. This project will identify the additional sequences that
contribute to promoter activation by pp71. During this planning activity,
deletion and mutagenesis analyses will be performed to identify the second
target elements involved in pp71 transactivation. A full research proposal will
be submitted using this preliminary work as a foundation for the investigation
of the mechanism of transcription activation. %%% The appropriate expression of
specialized proteins is required for differentiation and development. Signals
that control the expression of special ized proteins can be identified and have
been identified in large part by using viruses as model systems. One human
herpes virus, human cytomegalovirus, provides a particularly useful model system
for investigating the controls that determine protein expression. A novel viral
regulatory protein, pp71, has been identified in human cytomegalovirus. pp71
along with other control elements and proteins influences the amount of viral
protein production. Identification of the other control elements and proteins
will further the understanding of regulatory processes in general and will allow
examination of additional systems to see if these mechanisms are commonly
utilized. This planning activity will provide the foundation for a full proposal
to study the mechanism of pp71 transcription activation. *** @ ....()()))()() S
u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 0 Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ @ @ @ C @ q
Microsoft Word 6.0 5 e = e " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | # h Y
T 4 " | | | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 > " " " " | | 7 | 9509219 Biegalke
Alteration of the transcriptional activity of promoters is a major mechanism
used to control the resulting amount of gene product produced. Viral model
systems have been very useful in elucidating the elements involved in
transcriptional regulation. Human cytomegalovirus provides an excellent model
for the study of transcriptional regulation. One viral protein, pp71, is a novel
transcriptional activator; activating a viral promoter through multiple copies
of an Ap 1 binding site as well as additional as yet unidentified sequences.
This project will i