* 9509074
* Genetics of Adaptive Evolution in ZEA
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* John Doebley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1998
* USD 140,000.00

9509074 DOEBLEY Closely related species can differ from one another by traits
that best adapt each to the specific environment that it inhabits. How such
adaptive traits evolved in nature is not well-understood. Many evolutionary
geneticists subscribe to the view that the evolution of new adaptations
typically involves changes at many genes, each with a small effect on an
organism's appearance, or phenotype. Others have argued that one or two genes of
large effect are sufficient to establish a new adaptation and that this is the
more common mode of adaptive evolution in plants. Empirical studies germane to
this debate are relatively few and inconclusive. The proposed research will
investigate the genetics of adaptive evolution by analyzing the inheritance of
adaptive characters that distinguish natural species of the genus Zea. The
traits analyzed will include annual vs. perennial habit, rhizome formation,
flowering date, degree of pigmentation in the leaf sheath, seed weight, and
flower size and number. The inheritance of these traits will be determined by
mapping the individual genes that control these traits to their positions on the
chromosomes. By this means, it will be possible to determine the number of genes
affecting each trait and the magnitudes of the effects of the individual genes.
Overall, this study will provide a detailed picture of the genetic control of
adaptively important traits from which one can infer the genetic basis of
adaptive evolution in Zea. Because the genus Zea includes cultivated corn and
because some of the traits to be studied are of potential agronomic importance,
the proposed research can contribute to our understanding and improvement of
corn.