* 9509570
* Improvement of Entomological Collections at Carnegie Museum of Natural History with Emphasis on Lepidoptera
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Chen Young, Carnegie Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 09/30/1999
* USD 899,938.00

The entomological collections at The Carnegie Museum of Natural History (CMNH)
are scientific resources of international significance, containing 6.5 million
prepared specimens and more than five million unprepared ones. Among New World
institutions, CMNH has the third largest collection of Lepidoptera and the most
diverse collection of Afrotropical insects, associated with a library of
exceptional historical coverage for systematic research. The rate that CMNH
specimens are being used by researchers and students has risen dramatically in
recent years with specimen loans and scientific visitors at the highest levels
in CMNH history. Collection growth is at unprecedented levels, due to fieldwork
worldwide, donation of private collections, and survey programs addressing
biodiversity issues. Specimen integrity, research use, and growth of the
collection are hindered by housing problems. More than half of available wooden
storage equipment is in perilous condition; only 22% of existing storage is
acceptable by modern standards. Old insect drawers housing the Lepidoptera are
frag ile and breaking with age, and are unsuitable for using unit trays.
Specimens are packed into drawers at maximum density, preventing curation and
hindering use in research. Collections in fluids and on glass slides require
modern storage. Backlog preparation is required for specimens of unique value,
including 130,00 papered Lepidoptera and fragile specimens in alcoholic bulk
samples. This three-year project will resolve these problems by accomplishing
the following goals: 1. Renovate new space in the Carnegie Museum for expanding
collection storage and associated research areas (CMNH cost-sharing; see
Appendix 2, J-49). 2. Transfer and rehouse 41% of the Lepidoptera collection
into a compactorized storage system containing quality drawers and unity trays
(NSF funding requested for labor and storage equipment; CMNH cost-sharing for
labor). 3. Transfer to new drawers and unit trays all non-Lepidoptera currently
in unacceptable temporary containers (NSF funding requested for labor and
storage equipment). 4. Obtain equipment necessary for transfer, maintenance, and
curation of the collection (NSF funding requested for stereomicroscopes,
computers, printers, and freezers for non- chemical pest control). 5. Provide
special attention to specimens of exceptional scientific value ( NSF funding
requested for labor to segregate and conserve type specimens and to prepare
specimens of greatest value form backlog storage; CMNH cost-sharing for labor to
recondition historically important specimens). 6. Provide preliminary curation
of taxa currently represented by large numbers of prepared but unsorted
specimens (CMNH cost-sharing for visiting specialists).