* 9509620
* Designing Communication Support for Mobile Hosts in         Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Tomasz Imielinski, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Anand R. Tripathi
* 08/31/1999
* USD 138,163.00

The rapidly expanding technology of cellular communications, wireless LAN, and
satellite services will make it possible for users to access information
anywhere and at anytime. In this environment, users will be mobile, use low
powered computers, and communicate with the network over narrow bandwidth links.
Such an environment introduces new challenges in the design of communication
mechanisms due to constraints such as bandwidth, energy, cost, and the
availability of computing resources due to host mobility. Hence, communication
protocols should be designed for adaptability to changing environments brought
by mobility. The research project will design and build support for mobile
communications applications that explicitly take into account bandwidth
limitations, energy limitations, and mobility using the following approaches:
(1) The communication between the client and the server will be via an
intermediary. Indirect interaction allows for optimization and development of
specialized protocols for the wireless link and mobile host without having to
change any protocol that is running on the fixed hosts. (2) Design environment
aware communication primitives that will have access to the current environment
state and also be notified about any changes. Thus, the type of communication to
use can be tailored to the prevailing conditions.