* 9509100
* Convergence of Comparative Modeling, Molecular              Dynamics and Simulated Annealing Protocols
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Marcela Madrid, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1997
* USD 17,000.00

9509100 Madrid This research will explore the convergence of comparative
modeling, molecular dynamics and simulated annealing techniques, as a function
of the degree of homology of the protein structures used as templates.
Comparative modeling techniques will be used to predict the structure of several
proteins from weakly and highly homologous sequences. The predicted structures
will be subject to molecular dynamics and simulated annealing protocols, to
study the efficiency and accuracy with which these techniques bring the
predicted structures into better agreement with those experimentally determined.
Novel protocols will be tested and compared, including molecular dynamics in the
picosecond and nanosecond time scales, sequential simulated annealing and
parallel Monte Carlo simulated annealing. The accuracy of the calculations
depend, among other factors, on the approximations used to treat the
electrostatic interactions and to simulate the solvent effects. A novel
treatment of the electrostatic interactions, the Particle Mesh Ewald protocol,
will be applied. Both crystal and solution structures will be simulated, for
comparison purposes. Proteins will be selected from the Brookhaven Protein Data
Bank (PDB) based on the existence of a family of experimentally determined
structures from different species. They will include phospholipase, lysozyme and
myoglobin. The calculated protein structures will be compared to the
corresponding X-ray crystallography and NMR-determined structures from the PDB.
%%% This research will explore the convergence of comparative modeling,
molecular dynamics and simulated annealing techniques, as a function of the
degree of homology of the protein structures used as templates. Comparative
modeling techniques will be used to predict the structure of several proteins
from weakly and highly homologous sequences. This will be valuable in
determining the confidence level that can be placed on predicted structures. The
knowledge gained from this research can be directly applied to the prediction of
unknown protein structures and mutants, the refinement of experimentally
determined structures, and to the rational design of macromolecules to be
prepared by site-directed mutagenesis techniques. ***