* 9509168
* CAA: Relationship Between Fatty Acid-binding Proteins and   Neurotransmitter Systems in Developing Brain
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Peggy Sellner, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 05/31/1998
* USD 54,158.00

9509168 Sellner This project addresses the hypothesis that the developmental
expression of the heart subtype of fatty acid-binding protein (H- FABP) is
related to the simultaneous development of neurotransmitter systems in the
brain, namely GABA. The hypothesis is based on 1) similar localization of the
proteins by immunohistochemistry, 2) the documented timing of differentiation of
particular pathways/regions in the brain at a time when H-FABP is also present,
3) data showing effects of free fatty acids on both the GABA transporter and the
GABA-a receptor, and 4) in vitro studies showing an enhanced uptake of GABA by
synaptosomes when exogenous H-FABP is added. The hypothesis will be addressed by
developing a cell culture system from neonatal mouse cerebellum, using
established protocols. The cultures will be examined for their expression of
H-FABP using antiserum prepared against synthetic peptides and using synthetic
oligonucleotide probes. The presence of the GABA transporter will be verified by
measuring 3H- GABA uptake by the cultures. Next, the efdects of exogenously
added fatty acids on the levels of H-FABP and on rates of GABA uptake will be
studied. Finally, antisense oligonucleotides will be added to the cultures to
inhibit the expression of H-FABP, and effects on GABA uptake will be determined.
The activities described in this proposal are designed to obtain sufficient
pilot data to warrant submission of a major grant proposal. ***