* 9509738
* The Population Dynamics of a Nonlethal Parasitoid:          Trichopoda pennipes and Nezara viridula
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Andrew Taylor, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 174,967.00

9509738 Taylor Parasitoids are insect species in which females lay eggs in or on
other insects, which then are eaten by the parasitoid larvae. In most species
the hosts are attacked in immature stages and are killed before reaching
reproductive maturity. Many species of fly parasitoids, however, attack adult
hosts, which often reproduce before being killed. This project will describe
such nonlethal parasitism by one such species, Trichopoda pennipes, on its host,
the southern green stink bug. Laboratory experiments and rearing of parasitized
hosts from field collections will be used to describe the effects of parasitism
on host mortality and reproduction and on the success of parasitoid
reproduction, in relation to factors such as the age of the host when
parasitized and the number of parasitoid eggs laid on it. Preferences of
parasitoids for hosts of different ages also will be determined. The probable
effects of these processes on the population dynamics of the parasitoid-host
system will be analyzed with mathematical models. Parasitoids are important
sources of pest control in agricultural and other ecological systems. The host
species to be used in these studies is an important agricultural pest worldwide,
and the parasitoid specie has often been used as a biological control agent for
it, though with limited success. This research will lead to better understanding
of factors, particularly non-lethal parasitism, affecting the ability of this
and other parasitoids to control their hosts. This knowledge should enhance the
effectiveness of biological pest control efforts and thus reduce our dependence
on chemical insecticides.