* 9509056
* Coevolution and Selective Abscission in the Yucca-Yucca Moth Interaction
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* N. Olof Pellmyr, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 06/30/1999
* USD 94,207.00

9509056 Pellmyr Ecological specialization is a powerful engine driving
diversification and species formation among organisms. For this reason, it is
important to understand the pathways of specialization: how often are new traits
truly novel, and when do they arise through modification of preexisting traits?
Answers to this question have major bearing on our understanding the
evolutionary plasticity of interactions. This issue will be explored using
highly specialized yuccas and yucca moths as a model system. These species
depend on each other for reproduction, with the moth being the sole pollinator
of the plant and yucca seeds being the exclusive food of the moth's larvae. A
mechanism of selective abscission of young fruit allows the plant to balance the
degree of seed destruction caused by the moth against pollination quality. This
project explores whether components of the abscission mechanisms are novel or
modifications of preexisting traits. First, experiments will be performed to
test whether selective abscission based on pollination quality exits in more
basal members of the yucca family. Second, the physiological mechanism mediating
abscission will be explored, using an experimental approach to test the effect
of a chemical faator from eggs of yucca moths and their relatives on seed
development. The results from these experiments should provide a detailed
understanding of the role of coevolution and preadaptations in ecological
specialization. The answers can have immediate implications for applied biology
in, for example, how we manage new agricultural pests.