* 9509596
* Chemical Heterogeneity Among Cloud Drop Populations and its Effects on Sulfur Oxidation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Jeffrey Collett, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 05/31/1999
* USD 329,521.00

9509596 Collett Cloud chemistry models utilizing explicit treatments of cloud
microphysics predict that cloud drop composition varies with drop size. Recent
experimental observations confirm that large and small cloud drops typically
have quite different chemical compositions. Chemical heterogeneity among cloud
drop populations can influence removal rates for individual solutes, and can
also enhance rates of sulfur oxidation relative to rates predicted from average
cloud water properties. Clouds are major contributors to global atmospheric
sulfate production. Developing an accurate picture of the atmospheric production
of sulfate therefore requires an accurate understanding of the rate of sulfate
production in real, chemically heterogeneous clouds. The primary objective of
this project is to characterize variations in cloud drop chemistry across the
drop size spectrum and determine how much sulfate production in clouds is
enhanced by chemical heterogeneity among cloud drop populations. Data will be
collected through simultaneous measurements of the chemical composition of
multiple drop size classes. Cloud water will be collected with two cloud
collectors used in previous work (two-stage, and three-stage, respectively), as
well as a new five-stage instrument to be constructed as part of this project.
Major ions, pH, free and complexed sulfur (IV), oxidants, and catalysts will be
measured and used to characterize sulfur oxidation rates as a function of drop
size. Measurements of the size-dependent aerosol composition and of soluble
trace gases also will be made to determine the influence of particle and gas
scavenging on the drop size-dependence of the cloud water composition.