* 9509289
* Cloning and Characterization of a Novel Endothelin Receptor
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Parema Narayan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Charles D. Liarakos
* 12/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9509289 Narayan The importance of endothelin-l (ET-l) as a potent
vasoconstrictor and mitogen in cardiovascular and pulmonary systems has become
well established. The presence of both endothelin and endothelin binding sites
in the brain also has been documented; however, the role of endothelin in the
central nervous system is obscure. The overall objective of this research is to
elucidate, at the molecular level, the role of endothelin and its receptor(s) in
the central nervous system. Competitive binding experiments using endothelin
receptor agonists and antagonists with SCP cells suggest the presence of two
classes of binding sites for ET-l: a high affinity site with an ICso of 0.9 nM
and a super-high affinity site with an ICso of 0.1 pM. Both binding sites
exhibit the pharmacological characteristics of the ETA receptor subtype, but the
super-high affinity binding site is unique in that ligand-receptor interactions
with this extremely high affinity have not been previously documented. The
results of the binding studies suggest that the SCP cells contain two distinct
receptor molecules encoded by two separate mRNAs or that a single receptor
molecule can exist in two affinity states. The immediate goal of this research
is to clone the normal, high affinity as well as the novel, super-high affinity
receptor cDNAs from SCP cells. The working hypothesis is that this novel
receptor maintains sufficient homology with the normal ETA receptor to
facilitate the cloning. The cloned receptor will be expressed in a heterologous
cell line and its ligand binding properties will be determined. The predicted
results are that two clones that share sequence homology and exhibit different
binding affinities will be obtained or that one clone that yields two binding
affinities will be produced. With the receptor clone(s) in hand, it will be
possible to examine the distribution of the receptor in different parts of the
brain and cell types within the brain. This information will be extremely
valuable in determin ing the physiological role and possibly the mode of action
of endothelin in the central nervous system. %%% The imortance of endothelin-l
(ET-l) as a potent vasoconstrictor and mitogen in cardiovascular and pulmonary
systems has become well established. The presence of both endothelin and
endothelin binding sites in the brain also has been documented; however, the
role of endothelin in the central nervous system is obscure. The objective of
this research is to begin to elucidatethe role of endothelin and its receptor(s)
in the central nervous system by cloning the normal, high affinity as well as
the novel, super-high affinity endothelin receptor cDNAs from sheep choroid
plexus (SCP) cells. With the receptor clone(s) in hand, it will be possible to
examine the distribution of the receptor in different parts of the brain and
cell types within the brain. This information will be extremely valuable in
determining the physiological role and possibly the mode of action of endothelin
in the central nervous system. ***