* 9509237
* Testing Reaction-Diffusion Theory:  Spatial Dynamics in a   Bark Beetle-Predator System
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* John Reeve, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 270,000.00

9509237 Turchin Reaction-diffusion theory has been employed in several branches
of biology in order to understand and model formation of spatial patterns. Among
ecologists there is currently a wide appreciation of the importance of spatial
heterogeneity, and it has been theorized that reaction-diffusion theory provides
a common mechanisms by which such patchiness arises. However, this theoretical
explanation has not been empirically tested. Reaction-diffusion theory will be
tested in the ecological system consisting of southern pine beetles (SPB), pine
trees that are attacked by SPB, and SPB predators. This system is characterized
by an extremely patchy pattern of SPB attack; in some areas, called 'SPB spots',
all trees are killed, while outside spots very few trees are killed. Reaction-
diffusion theory suggests that the discontinuous pattern of SPB attack is due,
at least partly, to the effect of predators disproportionately killing SPB just
outside the spot boundaries. This project will combine modeling with
experimental studies. Field studies will be used to measure the parameters of
the model, and to test the model predictions. The strongest test of the theory
will consist of adding predators to existing SPB spots. Although the primary
thrust of this research is basic, it will also yield information highly relevant
to applied aspects of ecology, such as the effects of spatial heterogeneity and
fragmentation on biological conservation and pest control. Moreover, if
predators are found to play an important role in preventing spread of SPB spots,
this will provide a very useful tool for biological control of SPB, the most
destructive pest of southern pines.