* 9509537
* SGER:  Reformulation of System Theories in Robotics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* David Benjamin, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 07/31/1996
* USD 49,678.00

This award, in the SGER mode, explores how the formulation of a system's motion
affects the efficiency of synthesizing a plan to bring the system to a desired
state. In general, a system's motion can be described in a variety of ways whose
computational properties may differ. An especially important computational
property is the decomposability of a theory of motion. A theory is decomposable
if it is expressible as the composition of a set of subtheories. Decomposability
is important because it implies that global properties of the system can be
derived from local properties, thereby reducing the expense of computing these
properties. In particular, global plans can be built from local plans.
Decomposition is usually performed by the human designers of the system, who
have prior knowledge of the demands that will be placed on the system, and
engineer a representation whose properties will aid the system in meeting these
demands efficiently. In robotics and artificial intelligence, the goal of
designing truly autonomous problem solving systems requires a method for
automatic decomposition. This research is built upon a new method for
reformulating and decomposing theories of motion. Each representation of a
theory is analyzed using the tools of semigroup theory. Each distinct
representation corresponds to an abstract coordinate system, which then yields a
matrix representation that is used to transform and decompose the representation
into its irreducible invariants. Furthermore, this decomposition is guaranteed
to hold for all tasks in a class of tasks inductively defined from the given
task, permitting reuse of the decomposition on all members of this class. The
ultimate goal of this research is to build systems that can automatically design
and modify their representations by deriving algorithms for automatic
reformulation of representations to improve their use in synthesis. Previous
research in robotics and AI has produced powerful methods for searching task
spaces - spaces whose states are configurations of the task domain. If
successful, this research should produce reformulation methods of sufficient
power that the search of the space of representations will be as automated as
the search of task spaces currently is.