* 9509838
* Phase Segregation in Multicomponent Polymer Blends
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Monica Olvera, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 165,000.00

9509838 Olvera de la Cruz This project studies phase segregation in ternary
polymer blends. Ternary mixtures can decompose into two or three phases. The
investigator is studying the kinetics of the separation process when the mixture
is unstable against the formation of two phases and stable, metastable, and/or
unstable to the formation of a third phase. The work extends preliminary work on
symmetric ternary blends in two dimensions into non-symmetric blends in three
dimensions. She will also investigate equilibrium interfacial profiles between
two phases in ternary systems. %%% Much of the current theoretical effort in
understanding polymer mixtures involves the process in which molecules that were
first completely mixed form structures in which like polymers stay close
together. This happens, for example, in reaction to a drop in temperature. The
precise scales and shapes of the sometimes wormlike structure of these separate
phases, called the microstructure, is responsible for many of the properties of
these materials. Practitioners seek the understanding of how to get the
particular microstructure that they believe will give the desired properties.
This research fits into this field by being the first to go beyond previous
studies on binary (twocomponent) blends to three-component (ternary) blends.
Practical systems are almost always composed of more than two components, so
this work is particularly relevant to real materials. ***