* 9509839
* High Resolution Studies of Late Quaternary Climate and Oceanographic Change, Santa Barbara Basin
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* James Kennett, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1999
* USD 329,774.00

9529839 Kennett Funds are requested to conduct high resolution paleoclimatic and
paleoceanographic investigations of Site 893 (588 m water depth), a late
Quaternary sediment sequence (200 m thickness) of very high quality from Santa
Barbara Basin, California. Initial chronological, oxygen isotopic and
foraminiferal assemblage investigations reveal a complete to near-complete
climate record representing near-linear sedimentation rates at ~15 cm/100 years
for the last 160 kyrs. The sequence is well located to monitor changes in
upwelled intermediate waters associated with changing modes of thermohaline
circulation in the north Pacific. The sediment sequence records many
oscillations between low oxygen conditions, represented by sediment laminations
and low oxygen tolerant benthic foraminifers, and higher oxygen conditions,
represented by non-laminated bioturbated sediments and oxygen-loving benthic
forminifers. Our relatively detailed studies for the last 20 ky interval
suggests close coincidence between switches in basinal ventilation and global
climate changes as recorded by foraminiferal 18O and planktonic forminiferal
assemblages. Oxygenated conditions prevailed during colder intervals (Younger
Dryas and last glacial maximum). Conversely, suboxic conditions occurred during
warmer intervals (Bolling/Allerod and Holocene), Radiocarbon age differences
between planktonic and benthic foraminiferal pairs are smaller (av. 90 yrs)
during cool intervals; larger (av. 470 yrs) during warm intervals. We have
interpreted these oscillations in sediment facies and radiocarbon ages to
reflect changes in intermediate waters with a greater proportion originating
from a relatively proximal source during cooler intervals compared with a distal
source during warmer intervals, including the present day. Our initial studies
suggest an absence of any significant lags between the ventilation and climate
changes during the last 20 kyrs. This suggest that a tight coupling existed
between changes i n circulation influencing Santa Barbara Basin and climate. The
Santa Barbara Basin sequence has been an inherently unstable environmental
system that is highly sensitive to global climate change. We have also recently
discovered that the sequence of laminated sediment intervals in Site 893 closely
correlated with almost the entire sequence of glacial interstadials (Dansgaard-
Oeschger events) as recorded in the Greenland ice sheet and indirectly in
sediment sequences in the north Atlantic. We proposed to conduct studies to test
several hypotheses: 1. that the changes in ventilation in Santa Barbara Basin
are intimately linked with global climate change during the last 70 kyrs; 2.
that the changes in ventilation during the last 70 kyrs were linked to the north
Atlantic deep sea sediment record through changes in oceanic conveyor
circulation, or through thermohaline changes in Pacific intermediate waters
resulting from global climate change, or to both in unison; and 3. that climate
during peak-warming of the last interglacial episode (substage 5e or Eemian;
125-115 ka) was sufficiently different from that of the Holocene to affect major
change in Pacific thermohaline circulation at intermediate water depths that, in
turn, caused fundamental changes in basinal environmental conditions that we
record in Santa Barbara Basin.