* 9509505
* Parallel Architectures for Speech Recognition: Nonlinear    Optimization of Expectation-Maximization (EM) Training of   Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) in a Reconfigurable Environment
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Harvey Silverman, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* John Cozzens
* 02/28/1999
* USD 279,022.00

This research involves the development, construction and testing of new
architectures for high-speed computing. The idea being exploited is that of
combining in a loosely-coupled fashion, general-purpose, RISC-based processing
nodes each with multiple field-programmable-logic-array(FPLA) based coprocessor
systems. With this kind of system, one has the hardware properties of a general-
purpose computer, but the advantage, brought about by suitable
reconfigurability, of performance more akin to that of a special-purpose engine.
In particular, the 20-node Armstrong III system has been built and is
operational and provides nearly two-orders of magnitude improvement over current
advanced workstations. The hardware system, combined with its configuration
compiler, a program that automatically translates a C function subroutine to
both machine code and to the hardware design of the reconfigurable coprocessors,
are the basic building blocks for this class of architectures. Thus, this
research is directly focused on one of the strategic areas of national concern,
that of high performance computing. There is uniqueness to this program in that
not only has the hardware/software system been built, but it is also being
tested on important, real applications. In particular, the training of a modern
hidden Markov model(HMM) based speech recognition system requires hundreds of
hours, even with some of the variants developed recently at Brown and elsewhere.
The reduction of this training time to ten or so minutes means that research
progress in this area may be made at a faster rate and/or that expensive
nonlinear optimization techniques may now be applied to the problem. Also, this
means that data from a less cumbersome sensor system (the microphone array
systems in place and being developed at Brown) can be suitably incorporated into
a more robust speech recognition system. Currently, eight PhD students, two ScM
students and five undergraduates are involved with this project; ni ne PhD's
have been graduated from this project under past funding.