* 9509954
* Implementation of a Computational Facility for Quantitative Geomorphologic Acquisition, Processing, Analysis and Display of Large Digital Data Sets
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Frank Pazzaglia, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/1997
* USD 22,846.00

9509954 Pazzaglia NSF funding will supplement matching funds from the University
of New Mexico to build and implement a UNIX-based computational facility within
the Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences. Specifically, a Sun SPARCstation
20 workstation with 64 MB of memory, 10 GB of mass storage, a large-format color
monitor with a graphics accelerator card, a CD-ROM and software including, Sun
Solaris operating system, FORTRAN-90 and C compilers, ARC/INFO and S-PLUS will
be acquired. An extant department-wide network serviced by DEC-PATHWORKS will
enable all faculty, research staff, and students to access the new facility with
the option to have their PC or Macintosh run X-applications through the
SPARCstation 20 workstation. The facility will be designed primarily to meet the
research needs of the Quaternary Studies Group in acquiring, processing,
analyzing, and displaying large digital data sets, but will also have an
interdisciplinary focus in enhancing UNIX-based resources and applications for
the Department. Research to be performed by Quaternary Studies Group at this
facility will include manipulation of high-resolution (30 and 90 m) USGS digital
elevation data to perform (1) regional quantitative morphometric analysis, (2)
investigate the fundamental relationship between uplift, relief, mean elevation,
and erosion, (3) perform computationally-intensive Fourier analyses on
topography to extract the tectonic component in landscape development, (4)
provide a framework for the preparation and compilation of surficial geologic
maps, and (5) use topographic data and surficial geologic data in concert with
GIS-based applications in landscape evolution analyses. ***