* 9509215
* Characterization of the Sak1+ Gene of Fission Yeast: A      Member of the RFX Family of DNA-Binding Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Maureen McLeod, SUNY Health Science Center at Brooklyn
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 0 7/ @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c
t P o o l 0 7/ 0 7/ F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh
+' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @
V 5/ @ @ l7/ @ d Microsoft Word 6.0 4 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( e m
s h n h o P W M N O Q R S T V W Z u c u D c U c V c c * = A J N P Q R S U V X Y
Z ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' , 0 ! K @ Normal a " A@ " Default Paragraph Font +@ Endnote
Text c *@ Endnote Reference h " @ " Footnote Text c &amp;@ ! Footnote Reference
h , @ , TOC 1 0 , $ ( @ ( TOC 2 0 , $ ( @ ( TOC 3 p 0 , $ ( @ ( TOC 4 @ 0 , $ (
@ ( TOC 5 0 , $ &amp; @ &amp; TOC 6 0 , $ @ TOC 7 0 , &amp; @ &amp; TOC 8 0 , $
&amp; @ &amp; TOC 9 0 , $ * @ * Index 1 ` , $ * @ * Index 2 0 , $ &amp; .@ &amp;
TOA Heading , $ "@ Caption c O _Equation Caption 5 marcia
steinberg!\\CLM11\MCBPUB\BIOCHEM\MCLEOD.WP5 @HP DeskJet Printers LPT1: HPDSKJET
HP DeskJet D L f , , " / d }w;/ } d " W HP DeskJet D L f , , " / d }w;/ } d " W
&lt; &lt; q q &lt; &lt; C Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial 5 Courier New 9 ) G
eR e "4 marcia steinberg marci a steinberg ; e = e N " " " " " " " L L L L L d n
L C x | | | | | | | # f W T 4 " | | | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 &gt; " " "
" | | 5 | 9509215 McLeod The sak1+ gene is an essential regulatory element in
the life cycle of fission yeast, Schizosaccharomyces pombe. Expression of sak1+
delays cell cycle progression and causes cells to slow their rate of growth.
Thus, analogous to tumor suppresser genes, sak1+ is likely to encode an element
of a pathway coordinating cell growth and events of the cell cycle. The
predicted protein product of the sak1+ gene contains several strong regions of
homology to a family of transcription factors identified in humans and mice.
Members of this family, known as RFX, are involved in regulation of many
cellular and viral genes. The regions of homology between sak1+ and the RFX
proteins are highly significant because they correspond to important functional
domains. In particular, a DNA binding domain, a dimerization domain and a motif
associated with the ability of RFX to activate transcription are also highly
conserved in sak1+. The structural conservation observed between yeast RFX and
human RFX suggests that these regions may also be functionally conserved. The
short te