* 9509249
* Symposium on Non-Oxidic Solids to be held in Chicago, IL,   August 20-24, 1995
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1996
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/1996
* USD 4,000.00

9509249 Kanatzidis The proposed symposium is titled "Synthesis Reactivity and
Properties of Non-Oxidic Solids". We chose this topic to highlight the
significance of these materials to fundamental chemistry and to technology.
Although the chemistry and significance of oxides is well known to the chemical
community and well represented by a plethora of ACS and other symposia, in
general non-oxides such as chalcogenides, halides, pnictides, borides, carbides
and intermetallics have received very little attention, especially in ACS
symposia. These materials impact both our understanding of fundamental chemical
science and our technological progress in a major way. Little is known about
these materials, and an ACS symposium will help in projecting the important
issues and problems in this area to a broad chemistry audience and particularly
to students and young researchers. The proposed symposium is very timely given
the continuing strong interest in the properties of these compounds which
include non- linear optics (chalcogenide, pnictides, superconductivity
(borides), rechargeable batteries (hydrides), oxygen storage and transport
(cyanides) and others. Emphasis will be given to new synthetic techniques,
measurement and characterization and processing of non-oxidic solids. %%% To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first symposium that focuses specifically on
non-oxide solid state materials. ***