* 9509585
* Collaborative Research: Influence of Predators, Habitat     Structure and Disturbance on Corridor Movement by Stream    Fish
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Douglas Fraser, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 09/30/1999
* USD 115,000.00

9509585 Fraser Human activities have greatly fragmented the landscape, and as a
result, critical habitats are often isolated. While it is generally considered
desirable to reconnect such isolated habitats by means of corridors, little is
known about the movement of animals through corridors. The goal of this study is
to investigate the properties of a river corridor that may facilitate or retard
the movement of a fish between tributaries. In the study system a predatory fish
divided the watershed into two zones: a lower zone in which the predator is
common in the river but not adjoining tributaries, and an upper zone in which
the predator is absent. The research will test three hypotheses about how the
predator, physical structure of the river, and seasonal floods can interact to
promote or retard movement of the prey fish along the river corridor connecting
tributaries. The hypotheses will be tested by: (1) a large marking experiment
with fish in the upper and lower zones of the watershed, in which movement will
be followed through wet and dry seasons, (2) a study in an experimental stream
facility, on-site, in which predators and physical structure can be manipulated,
and (3) a comparative genetic analysis of the populations in the tributaries in
the upper and lower zones of the watershed. By focusing on how physical and
biological properties of corridors can work to facilitate or retard movement of
an organism through a corridor, this project will contribute to our future
ability to design realistic corridors reconnecting habitat fragments. Therefore,
the research is applicable to conservation of species and management of
biodiversity.