* 9509758
* Design and Evaluation of Artificial Retina Device to Benefit Visually Impaired
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Wentai Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 12/31/1999
* USD 154,568.00

Abstract: 9509758, PI-Liu: The overall goal of this investigation is to develop
an implantable visual prosthesis comprised of a silicon Laser Powered Bipolar
Point Contact Artificial Retina Chip (BPCARC). The project would seek to resolve
two problems: 1) provide power to a chip isolated within the ocular cavity, and
2) on opposite sides of the chip, fabricate the photoreceptors and the
electrodes to stimulate the retina. A laser would provide power to bias a chip
equipped with photoconducting pixels, as the cornea is transparent to laser
light of any visible wavelength. The photovoltaic cells would convert the laser
radiation into electrical current. Using the BPCARC technology, the chip would
be polished to a thickness to allow light from the opposite side from where the
electrodes are fabricated to activate the photoconducting pixels. Thus the
fabrication to create the PC photovoltaic cells, the photosensing or
phototransistor array, and the stimulating array, could all be performed on a
single side of the chip, simultaneously. Successful results would provide the
fundamental knowledge needed to make an artificial, implanted, retina to enable
the more than 10 million persons afflicted by retinal diseases such as retinal
pigmentosa, and age-related macular degeneration, to regain the sense of sight.
Demonstration of the performance of the chip using frog and rabbit eyes would be
performed by the Vitro Retinal Service of the Wilmer Eye Institute, Johns
Hopkins University.