* 9509619
* Collections Improvement for Paleobotany at the Denver Museum of Natural History
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Logan Ivy, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 122,559.00

The paleobotanical collection at the Denver Museum of Natural History (DMNH) is
an important national and regional resource for research on the nature of
vegetation and climate in the Western Interior of North America. There are
approximately 26,000 specimens in the collection including four type specimens
and a number of significant assemblages from the Late Cretaceous, Paleocene, and
Eocene. Highlights include superb collections from Cretaceous-Tertiary boundary
sections in North America and New Zealand. Most of the collection (89%) has been
amassed since 1991 and, as such, is associated with precise and reliable
locality and stratigraphic data. This collection represents the fourth largest
collection of Late Cretaceous and Early Tertiary plant fossils form the Western
Interior, and the only such collection located in the Western Interior. Since
1991, the Department of Earth Sciences (DES) at DMNH has had a commitment to the
acquisition, storage, and study of paleobotanical specimens. In 1991, a full-
time courator was hired and since then the Museum has supported research,
fieldwork, collections management, and collections storage. In the past four
years, nearly 24,000 specimens have been added to the collection, and nearly
3,000 specimens have been catalogued and housed in steel cabinets. In addition
to Paleobotany Curator, the Department has a Vertebrate Paleontology Curator, a
Collections Manager, two Preparators, and a Registrar who are devoted to work on
the paleobotanical and vertebrate fossil collections. Although recent DMNH
support has improved the condition of the collection considerably, approximately
78 percent of the collection remains housed in cardboard boxes, and all of the
collection is stored in an inadequate space behind exhibit dioramas. The
collection is presently at risk form water damage and access-related handling
problems. In 1993, DES received a grant form the NSF to improve its collection
of vertebrate fossils. This grant is nearing completion and most of the
vertebrate fossils will soon be archivally stored and accessible. Rearrangement
of DES storage space due to the installation of vertebrate fossil compactors and
the acquisition of new space presents an opportunity to build an adjacent
compactor unit for fossil plants. This project will assist in housing the
paleobotanical collection in steel cabinets in a compactor system. The goal of
this effort is to preserve the collection so that it is available for research
and to allow for continued growth of the collection. Primary needs are for steel
cabinets and drawers, a compactor system, and additional personnel to label and
move the specimens.