* 9509026
* Dispersal Limitation:  Does it Limit the Distribution and   Abundance of Pioneers in a Neotropical Forest?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Stephen Hubbell, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 05/31/1998
* USD 125,055.00

9509026 HUBBELL A long-term study of a 50 ha permanent plot of neotropical
forest on Barro Colorado Island (BCI) Panama, has revealed that individual
pioneer species are absent from many potentially suitable gap sites. Although
pioneer species are not expected to be common in a forest where suitable sites
are rare, they appear to be less common than would be expected by chance. This
research will test the hypothesis that distribution and abundance of pioneer
species in the BCI forest are primarily controlled by dispersal limitation
rather than by germination and establishment limitation. All canopy gaps greater
than 25 m2 will be mapped on the 50 ha plot. A series of field experiments in
gaps will be conducted to determine if the environmental conditions in gaps and
closed forest affect germination and establishment. Seed fall will also be
monitored as a measure of dispersal limitation. The potential importance of
dispersal limitation goes far beyond finding explanations for distribution and
abundance. Recent theoretical work has shown that strong dispersal limitation
can promote tree species richness by greatly slowing competitive exclusion. In
addition, this work will provide important insights into mechanisms that
maintain species diversity in neotropical forest communities that are rapidly
disappearing due to deforestation.