* 9509004
* Collaborative:  Biodiversity, Trophic Structure, and        Productivity -- An Experimental Test in Pond Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Mathew Leibold, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 06/30/1999
* USD 154,000.00

9509004 Leibold A wide variety of mechanisms have been proposed to explain the
ways by which energy flow regulates the biodiversity of ecological communities.
However, there has been relatively little experimental work aimed at
discriminating among these competing hypotheses. These investigators will
conduct direct experimental tests of the most plausible hypotheses relating
eutrophication to biodiversity in aquatic communities. These experiments will be
conducted in a series of mesocosms which provide three important advantages: (1)
both nutrient loading and trophic structure can be independently manipulated,
(2) other potentially confounding factors can be controlled, and (3) the
expected biological responses can be easily measured and evaluated. Additional,
experimental enclosures will be established in ponds to test these hypotheses
under more natural conditions. Finally, extensive analyses of controls on
biodiversity in natural ponds will be conducted, as well. The results of this
study will confirm or reject four competing hypotheses that are believed to
explain patterns of biodiversity in natural systems. Moreover, the research will
assess the relative importance of "bottom-up" versus "top-down" factors in the
regulation of plankton diversity. This knowledge is particularly important if
future environmental policies directed at the protection of biodiversity are to
be based on valid scientific premises. Finally, this work will provide an
increased understanding of the potentially detrimental effects of eutrophication
on biodiversity in natural wetland communities.