* 9509118
* RUI: Separating Population Structure From Population        History
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Eric Routman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 12/31/1998
* USD 215,036.00

ABSTRACT - Routman - DEB-9509118 One of the most important goals of population
genetics is to be able to understand the underlying causes of the distribution
of genetic variation within and among populations. Scientists usually attempt to
understand these causal phenomena by measuring the number of different forms of
a gene and their frequencies in each population. Unfortunately, many of the
causal mechanisms result in similar geographic patterns, and cannot be
distinguished when the data consist only of frequencies. Dr. Routman will
attempt to test a new method that incorporates the genealogical relationships of
the genetic variants to differentiate among possible underlying causes. Genetic
variation in mitochondrial DNA will be measured in populations of Ambystoma
tigrinum from the midwestern USA. Genealogies of these variants will be
reconstructed, and used in the new method that relates the underlying causes
listed above to the geographical distributions of nested sets of related
variants. The addition of the genealogical information results in different
predictions from the underlying causes. Because some of these causes are
actually known in this species, Dr. Routman can test to see if the predictions
of the new method are correct. Computer simulations will also be used to test
the predictions. If the method withstands rigorous testing, it will be extremely
useful for wildlife managers and taxonomists working with a wide variety of
organisms.