* 9509020
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Methods to Produce Nanocrystalline    Materials
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1997,12/31/1998
* Jacob Stiglich, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1998
* USD 305,000.00

9509020 Stiglich This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
design and construct an improved, optimized machine that will produce
nanoparticles of alloys and dispersed phase composites using electrodes of
inexpensive normal grain size materials, opposed electrodes of different
materials or braided wire electrodes. The feasibility of producing nanoparticles
of iron and nickel aluminides as well as Ta (tantalum), W (tungsten), and W-2%
ThO2 (thorium oxide) was demonstrated during Phase I by using equipment that was
adapted based on pulsed reactive electrode (PRE) technology. The machine will
have much greater control over the process parameters, and hence, the final size
of the nanoparticles produced. A secondary objective of Phase II will be to
increase production rates from g/hr to kg/day, typically 5-10 Kgs of nanopowder
per 8 hr shift, thus demonstrating a prototype production capability scaleable
to a full size commercial process in Phase III. The redesigned machine will be
used to produce intermetallic nanoscale powders such as a and y titanium
aluminides and molybdenum di sulphide (MoSi2 )- both pure and in composite form
with refractory metal (e.g. Nb (niobium), Ta) dispersed phases. The addition of
reactive gases to the particle production process can cause formation of
carbides, nitrides, and borides thus creating unique nanocomposites. A
potentially large application area exists for MoSi2 based nanomaterials in the
Kiln/ incinerator/metallurgical furnace industries. A significant retrofit
business has been identified for converting from direct fired rotary kilns and
calciners to indirect fired systems. Additionally, automotive manufacturers such
as GM and Ford are interested in connecting rods, hollow shafts, and fan blades
from TiAl.