* 9509059
* SBIR Phase II: Airborne Science Data Relay Using ORBCOMM
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1995,07/31/1997
* John Langford, Aurora Flight Sciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1997
* USD 276,724.00

9509059 Langford This is a Small Business Innovation Research Phase II award to
support a project to develop and demonstrate a two-way, low-cost airborne
science data relay. The company identified a need for a lightweight, low-cost,
bi-directional communications link for science aircraft. Phase I of the project
investigated atmospheric science user requirements for data relay and mission
control. The feasibility of using low-Earth orbit communications satellites to
meet these requirements was demonstrated through ground testing of a brassboard
system. In demonstrating this system, it was discovered that straightforward
data relay to the first visible satellite does not always provide minimum
message transmission time. In order to ensure the most timely delivery of
science and mission data, a "SmartLink" scheduler for use with the ORBCOMM
system was developed. Phase II will implement a real-time version of the
scheduler, install the system into a UAV communications package, and conduct
over-the-horizon flight tests. The SmartLink scheduler, integrated into ORBCOMM
transceivers, will be used first for unmanned scientific aircraft; however, it
also can provide a low-cost Internet link for manned aircraft. Any operation
requiring low-cost, short latency, Internet communication with a remote site
will benefit from this product and is a potential customer.