* 9509088
* CAA:  Evolution of Archosaur Hindlimb Muscles:  Use of      Muscle Protein Isoforms as Molecular Markers for Homology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Mary McKitrick, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Annalisa Berta
* 06/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9509088 McKitrick Birds possess more hindlimb muscles than their closest living
relatives, the crocodiles and alligators. In addition, some muscles primitively
present in birds have been lost numerous times within the avian lineage during
the course of history. If historical relationships among crocodilians and birds
(archosaurs) are to be understood, hypotheses must be constructed about the
sequence of appearance and loss of specific muscles or muscle parts. Prior to
such analysis, however, it is crucial to develop hypotheses about which muscles
in birds and crocodilians are homologous in the historical sense, i.e., which
muscles correspond in the two groups. Identifying these homologies has not been
possible with traditional techniques such as gross anatomical study of muscle
form. In this proposal, a new approach will be taken to analyze homologies in
archosaur hindlimb muscles by the use of developmental studies of muscle
proteins using avian and crocodilian embryos. Muscle proteins have different
types, termed isoforms, at different stages of organismal development,and these
are highly conserved among species. The developmental shifts in isoforms of
contractile proteins such as actins, myosins, tropomyosins and troponins, as
well as other related proteins follow specific patterns. The earliest forms of
these proteins are replaced by embryonic versions and later by neonatal and
adult forms. Since individual muscle groups bear "signature" sequential
patterns, the PI will examine the protein isoforms and their messages in birds
and crocodilians to see whether muscles of known homology in the two groups have
retained the ancestral patterns. If so, such patterns can be used to hypothesize
historical relationships between muscles of heretofore questionable homology.
%%% This approach has the potential to solve important problems in comparative
biology about the relationship among traits in related organisms where
historical change has in effect obliterated the record. ***