* 9509307
* A Retrospective Dendroecology of American Chestnut          in the Southern Appalachian Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* David Stahle, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9509307 Stahle The catastrophic chestnut blight destroyed one of the most
important species of the eastern deciduous forest and initiated dynamic forest
responses that may last for centuries. The scarcity of quantitative data on pre-
blight forests has complicated efforts to understand the environmental impact of
the blight. Fortunately, an exact and detailed record of chestnut growth can
still be recovered from blight-killed logs in a few selected forests that are
otherwise largely undisturbed. This project will develop 200- to 300-year long
tree-ring chronologies of American Chestnut from blight killed logs at six
ancient forest locations in the southern Appalachian region. Tree-ring
chronologies will also be developed at the same locations for three age
categories of hemlock, and oak. These three categories will be ancient, young
pre-blight, and young post-blight trees. At least 24 chronologies will be
developed, including 3 chestnut and nine oak from xeric sites. The chestnut
chronologies will be extended when possible with ancient chestnut timbers
recovered from early historic buildings. All chronologies will be compared with
monthly climate data which begin as early as 1871 in order to define the climate
response of chestnut in pre-blight forests, and two of its important former
associates in pre- and post-blight forests. The chronologies will be used to
test hypotheses concerning possible changes in the climate forcing of southern
Appalachian forest ecosystems following the blight. The PIs will test the
hypothesis that the mature growth rates of chestnut were limited by specific
climate variables unique to chestnut. If true, this unique climate influence on
an important fraction of presettlement forests has been greatly diminished by
the selective removal of chestnut. They will also test the hypothesis that the
microclimate changes initiated by the blight have altered the specific seasonal
climate variables most limiting to the growth of chestnut associates such as
hemlock and oak. The p roposed tree-ring chronologies will salvage a priceless
record of chestnut growth that has been ignored for over 50 years and may soon
decay beyond recovery.