* 9509871
* SGER: A Political History of the Washington State Court of Appeals
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Charles Sheldon, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 03/31/1997
* USD 9,350.00

9509871 Sheldon This Small Grant for Exploratory Research (SGER) will support
the completion of a political history of the Washington State Court of Appeals.
It will analyze how that court evolved from its creation in 1969 and what has
accounted for that evolution. Both quantitative and qualitative data will be
gathered from court documents, interviews of judges and commissioners, and
surveys of law clerks, experienced appellate attorneys and staff personnel.
These data will be classified according to how the judges go about their tasks
and how they interact with one another. Such data should help explain how the
court meets its goals. The aging of the Court's personnel and the efficiency of
data gathering during the P.I.'s university sabbatical provide an urgency to the
research that justifies a SGER. %%%% This Small Grant for Exploratory Research
(SGER) will support the completion of a political history of the Washington
State Court of Appeals. It will analyze how that court evolved from its creation
in 1969 and what has accounted for that evolution. Both quantitative and
qualitative data will be gathered from court documents, interviews of judges and
commissioners, and surveys of law clerks, experienced appellate attorneys and
staff personnel. These data will be classified according to how the judges go
about their tasks and how they interact with one another. Such data should help
explain how the court meets its goals. The aging of the Court's personnel and
the efficiency of data gathering during the P.I.'s university sabbatical provide
an urgency to the research that justifies a SGER. ****