* 9509257
* Optical Nonlinearities and Electrooptic Effects in          Asymmetric Quantum Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Stephen Lyon, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 313,308.00

9509257 Lyon This proposal suggests new operating principles and approaches to
constructing switches for optical signals. The devices proposed here utilize an
asymmetric semiconductor quantum structure (such as a stepped quantum well)
embedded in a parallel plate metallic waveguide. Preliminary work indicates that
these structures can be used to construct ultrafast electrooptic and all-optical
devices. In particular, calculations have been performed which suggest that
these structures will support coupled-field (coupled electrical and optical
pulses) solitons. The objectives of the proposed work are to study the physics
of these structures, use this information to refine the models and calculations,
and to fabricate and test devices based on these principles. The work will
involve investigations of various types of asymmetric quantum structures,
ultrafast electrical pulse propagation on parallel-plate metallic waveguides,
and the interactions of these electrical pulses with optical pulses traveling
through the semiconductor embedded within the waveguide. Molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) will be used to grow the semiconductor materials, which will then be
analyzed with various optical and electrical probes. The electrical pulses will
be generated and measured with ultrafast optical pulses. Building upon this new
knowledge, optical switches will be designed, fabricated, and tested. ***