* 9509879
* Belowground Dynamics in a California Blue Oak Woodland:     Production, Mortality and Decomposition of Oak and Grass    Roots
* NONE,NONE
* 10/15/1995,09/30/1999
* Caroline Bledsoe, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 09/30/1999
* USD 214,894.00

9509879 BLEDSOE Belowground Dynamics in a California Blue Oak Woodland:
Production, Mortality and Decomposition of Oak and Grass Roots Roots acquire
nutrients and water for plants, as well as providing structural support. Roots
also grow, die, and decompose, making them part of ecosystem carbon and nutrient
cycles. Although roots have very important ecosystem functions, their
belowground location makes them difficult to study. Consequently, less data
exist for roots than other parts of plants. This research project focuses on
root dynamics and asks these questions: (1) How does fine roots growth, death,
and decomposition vary spatially and seasonally? (2) Do oaks and grasses coexist
with limited competition or do they compete for water and nutrients, especially
during annual summer drought? These questions will be answered by measuring
seasonal soil water and temperature, soil respiration, and root dynamics. Oak
mycorrhizae, a beneficial partnership between certain fungi and plant roots,
will be studied. Because blue oaks and annual grasses have different types of
mycorrhizae, the research also will examine whether mycorrhizal types affect how
well the plants take up water and nutrients. This research will help further
maintenance of California's blue oak woodlands and understanding how mycorrhizae
alter plant competition.