* 9509064
* Elucidating the Molecular Mechanism of a Ni Hydrogenase:    An Infrared Spectroscopic Approach
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Kimberly Bagley, SUNY State University of New York Central Administration
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 11/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9509064 Bagley This research details the utilization of static and time resolved
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy for delineating the molecular mechanism
of hydrogen binding and activation in Ni hydrogenases. The research objectives
are: (1) Determination of whether the anomalous infrared bands detected between
2100 and 1900 cm-1 are general features of Ni hydrogenases. To this end a series
of infrared studies will be carried out on a well-characterized hydrogenase from
Desulfovibrio gigas. (2) Identification of the structure responsible for these
unusual infrared signatures using infrared spectroscopy coupled with chemical
modification of the enzyme and the study of isotopically labeled enzyme. (3)
Utilization of the three infrared signatures for further study of the various
redox states of the enzyme. This approach provides a unique opportunity; Ni
hydrogenases display at least two EPR-silent species which are distinguishable
by their infrared signatures in the 2100 and 1900 cm-1 spectral region. (4)
Utilization of mid- infrared spectroscopy to examine the role individual amino
acids play in the activation of hydrogen. (5) Examination of the oxidation state
of the Ni center in various redox states of the enzymes. This approach used the
infrared detectable carbon monoxide stretching frequency, arising from Ni bound
carbon monoxide, as a probe of the oxidation state of the Ni. %%% Ni
Hydrogenases are enzymes that catalyze the simplest reaction in nature and the
simplest conversion of electrical energy into chemical energy of universal
utility: 2e- + 2H+ = H2. This research involves a spectroscopic study of the
anomalous infrared absorption bands that are characteristic of these enzymes.
Infrared spectroscopic studies will be made on the well-characterized Ni
hydrogenases from Desulfovibrio gigas. It is a anticipated that this work will
have important consequences for understanding the mechanism underlying Ni
hydrogenase's ability to split molecular hydrogen into protons and electrons.
The work also involves the development of methodologies for handling infrared
samples under strictly anaerobic conditions, and should prove of general utility
in infrared studies of other oxygen sensitive metallo-proteins. ***