* 9509760
* Nonlinear Stability of a Premixed Flame Under Confinement
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Jennifer McGreevy, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 04/30/1997
* USD 15,236.00

9509760 McGreevy This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for Women
Scientists and Engineers Award. The project will involve conducting a
preliminary investigation and setting the ground work for a full nonlinear study
of flame propagation in a closed tube. The nonlinear stability analysis will be
carried out by investigating, via asymptotic analysis, bifurcation theory,
multiple time scales, and numerical analysis, the evolution of finite amplitude
disturbances superimposed on an otherwise smooth planar flame. The goal of the
project will be to identify the roles of hydrodynamic and diffusional- thermal
processes and the role of the mixture composition on the stability properties
and complex spatial and temporal dynamics of the process. The first part of the
study will concentrate on the stage of the combustion process prior to when
acoustic disturbances become significant, as manifested by a rapid acceleration
of the flame, shock wave formation ahead of the flame, and transition from
laminar to turbulent gas flow. The second part of the study will involve
examining the fully coupled fluid/acoustic transition process. The National
Science Foundation's mandate to ensure the vitality of the Nation's scientific
enterprise includes concern for the quality, composition, distribution and
effectiveness of the human resource base in science and engineering. Within this
context, the Foundation is committed to enhancing the current rate of
participation of women in science and engineering careers, in general, and as
active participants in all of its programs. Research Plannine Grant awards are
made: (1) to help increase the number of new women investigators participating
in NSF's research programs; and, (2) to facilitate preliminary studies and other
activities related to the development of competitive research projects and
proposals by women who have not previously had independent Federal research
funding. Research Planning Grants are one-time awards that may be used for
preliminary work to determine the feasibility of a proposed line of inquiry,
and/or for other activities that will facilitate proposal development.