* 9509931
* An Integrated Framework for Mechanical Verification of      Fault-Tolerant Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Natarajan Shankar, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Frank D. Anger
* 03/31/1999
* USD 345,147.00

Formal verification is a technique for reducing certain questions about the
requirements, designs, or implementations of computer software and hardware to a
mathematical form that can examined by methods having the character of
calculation. Similar to the way in which questions about the properties of an
aerofoil can be reduced to calculations that can be mechanized by computational
fluid dynamics, mechanized formal verification uses automated theorem proving
and related methods (e.g., model checking) to perform logical calculations about
the properties of computer systems. Whereas testing can examine only some of the
behaviors of a complex system, mechanized formal verification can examine all
the behaviors of a model of the system (again, the situation is analogous to
flight test vs. computational fluid dynamics). Using mechanized formal
verification, suitably realistic models can provide strong evidence for the
correctness of computer systems, and simplified models are often useful for
detecting bugs that testing does not encounter. Mechanized formal verification
is most effective when applied to the hardest and most critical elements of
design. An area where it holds great promise is in the analysis of fault-
tolerant systems, where the presence of faults can produce a complexity of
behavior that defies other forms of analysis. The increased assurance provided
by mechanized formal verification can be of particular value for fault- tolerant
systems because these are generally found in applications that are critical to
safety (such as aircraft and other vehicles) or national infrastructure (such as
the telephone, power-distribution, and banking systems). The objectives of this
research are to reduce mechanized formal verification of fault-tolerant
distributed algorithms from tours-de- force to routine practice, and to develop
a framework for mechanical verification of the architectures of complete fault-
tolerant systems composed from such algorithms. Th e research focuses on
developing systematic methods for the formal specification of classes of fault-
tolerant algorithms, and mechanized strategies for their exploration and
verification. These strategies will build on techniques that combine decision
procedures and model checking within an interactive framework. The algorithms
considered will include those for distributed consensus, synchronization,
diagnosis, and group membership. The work is expected to yield improved
understanding of the assumptions, constraints, and fault models underlying the
algorithms studied, more refined arguments for their correctness, and coherent
arguments for their synthesis into an overall architecture. In addition, the
research is expected to yield new results in the construction and application of
formal verification systems, and improved methods for the formal representation
and analysis of fault- tolerant algorithms. ***