* 9509143
* System Software Support for Input-Output on Parallel        Computing
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1997
* Alok Choudhary, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 04/30/1997
* USD 67,686.00

A large number of applications from information processing as well as science
and engineering require processing large amounts of data. Particularly, in the
science and engineering domain, the so called ``grand challenge applications''
fall in this category. Thus, it has become apparent that I/O performance much
more than CPU or communication performance may be the limiting factor in future
parallel computing systems. Many software and hardware components play a key
role in I/O operations and any one of them can cause severe bottlenecks. The
disparity between the performance of disk systems and CPU (and interconnect)
performance requires the use of large-scale parallelism (and supporting
software) to address the scalability and performance problems in I/O subsystems.
But parallelism in the I/O systems introduces complexities for the system
software including compilers, runtime systems and file systems. This research
addresses many system software problems in the parallel I/O domain. To
ameliorate the I/O bottlenecks, the following are necessary: 1) techniques for
sophisticated runtime systems that incorporate the notion of collective I/O,
data reuse and prefetching; 2) compiler analysis to identify various
optimizations including data access reorganization, opportunities for
overlapping computations and I/O, and data staging to handle limited memory for
out-of-core computations; and 3) file systems optimizations to recognize
collective access patterns for coordinating accesses of processes that are part
of parallel programs, and using these access patterns for prefetching, buffer
allocation and replacement strategies. Traditional interfaces for file systems
lack the necessary semantics to permit the above optimizations. Thus, it is
necessary to develop interfaces between the compiler and the runtime systems,
and the runtime system and the file systems, that facilitate the flow of
semantic information about access patterns to enable optimizations. This res
earch pursues the design and development of techniques for compiler analysis,
mechanisms and algorithms for runtime systems, and interfaces and optimizations
for file systems to enable high- performance I/O in parallel computers. These
techniques are being evaluated by implementing them on parallel systems. ***