* 9509079
* RUI: Hormonal and Body Condition Effects on Natal Dispersal in Birds: Tests of a New Model
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Alfred Dufty, Jr., Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 12/31/1998
* USD 165,005.00

9509079 Natal dispersal, the movement from place of birth to location of first
breeding, occurs in virtually all higher vertebrates. These movements have
important implications for population regulation, mating systems, genetics, and
conservation biology. The goal of this project is to understand the
physiological ecology of natal dispersal movements in birds. A new model of
dispersal, based on interactions among hormonal changes, body condition, and
social stimuli, will be tested using both captive and free-living birds. The
model predicts that level of corticosterone, a hormone known to stimulate
increased locomotor and foraging activity, increases prior to dispersal due to a
combination of endogenous and external events. This stimulates the locomotor
activity that underlies dispersal behavior, and juveniles with sufficient fat
reserves will disperse at that time. Birds in poor body condition will delay
dispersing, but will increase their foraging activity. Dispersal of their
siblings will reduce aggression and/or competition for food, enabling the
remaining juveniles to improve their body condition and disperse. To test this
model, hormone profiles of captive birds will be manipulated and their
subsequent activity levels examined in relation to timing of dispersal. A second
set of experiments will examine the relationship between corticosterone and
timing of dispersal movements by free-living juvenile birds. These experiments
will determine how activity levels, body condition, and hormones interact to
control natal dispersal. This study will provide significant new insight into
the factors controlling natal dispersal. The results will provide a basis for
future studies of hormones and dispersal in vertebrates, and may be of applied
value in managing the dispersal of species whose management is important.