* 9509240
* Effect of Catalyst Acidity and Structure on Polymer Cracking
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Robert White, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/1999
* USD 215,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9509240 This effort examines the use of catalytic cracking to
convert plastic wastes into useful hydrocarbon mixtures. Polymer-cracking
properties of amorphous silica-alumina and of various crystalline zeolites are
compared to ascertain the effects of zeolite channel dimensions on product
distributions; cracking properties of aluminosilicates are compared with those
of a sulfated zirconia superacid catalyst to ascertain the effects of catalyst
acidity; product distribution changes from cracking in oxygen or hydrogen
atmospheres with catalysts containing platinum are also studied. Volatile
cracking products are identified from gas chromotagraphy with a microfurnace
injector and detection by both mass spectrometry and infrared spectroscopy. A
fixed-bed catalytic reactor is used to study catalyst coking processes and the
effects of cracking atmosphere and temperature on product distributions. Overall
activation energies for polymer cracking are obtained from thermogravimetric
(TGA) methods; product-specific activation energies are obtained from TGA-MS
using linear programmed thermal degradation mass spectrometry. Polymers studied
include polyethylene, polypropylene, polystyrene, and polyvinyl chloride. Most
plastics in use today are made of nonbiodegradable polymers; this makes them
undesirable in solid-waste landfills. Although "recycling" programs exist in
some communities, there is, in fact, no economically acceptable technology to
recycle most polymers in a meaningful way. This project lays the fundamental
groundwork for such a technology. ***