* 9509875
* Investigation of Transition Metal Impurities by Weak        Localization and the Anomalous Hall Effect
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Gerd Bergmann, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 380,000.00

9509875 Bergmann This project is concerned with the magnetic properties of nd-
atoms on the surface of noble metals or simple (s,p) metals. The complementary
transport methods of weak localization and the anomalous Hall effect are
employed. These methods detect the magnetic interaction between the magnetic
impurity atoms and bulk/surface conduction electrons. The weak localization
technique allows the detection of less that 10-4 of a monolayer of surface
atoms, and is by a factor of 100 more sensitive than alternative detection
methods. The anomalous Hall effect measurements help to determine the character
of the magnetic atom, ferromagnetic or antiferromagnetic. This project addresses
both experimental and theoretical aspects of the coupling between magnetic
impurity atoms and conduction electrons. Sub-monolayers of 3d atoms, as well as
4d and 5d atoms such as zirconium, molybdenum, technetium, and ruthenium on
metals such as silver and gold will be investigated. The results are of
fundamental interest, but also have potential applications to technological
areas such as the microelectronics industry. %%% The study of magnetism in thin
films and on surfaces belongs to a very active area of materials research with
numerous opportunities to have an impact on technology such as magnetic
recording devises. Individual magnetic atoms form the simplest building blocks
on magnetic structure. Such atoms will be investigated in this study using very
sensitive techniques. On of these can detect less than one ten-thousandth of a
single layer of magnetic atoms which are deposited on a metallic surface another
technique is able to distinguish the direction of the individual magnetic
moments of the deposited atoms. The experiments also probe to what extent the
magnetic properties of surfaces differ from those of the bulk. ***