* 9509608
* Conversion/Recycling of Ethylene-Based Copolymers:  Is it   Feasible in SCF-Water Mixtures (SGER)
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Mark McHugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1996
* USD 44,460.00

9509608 McHugh Recycling polymers and copolymers is a technological problem
that must be addressed if the amount of solid waste being landfilled in the
United States is to be reduced. The challenge is to develop technology that
performs the recycling in an economic manner without the concomitant generation
of solvent waste that would negate any environmental benefits. Many researchers
have suggested decomposing polymers into their building blocks using
supercritical water. a different scenario is suggested in this program where the
copolymer is converted into an alternate structure that potentially has higher
commercial value than the starting material. The envisioned conversion process
would use near-critical water rather than supercritical water which reduces the
thermal energy requirements of the process. The differences in the solubility
characteristics of the various polymers and copolymers in the near-critical
solution would facilitate separating one type of copolymer from another. The
successful development of this new conversion/recycling process to a great
extent depends on a good understanding of these copolymers in the process
solvent solution. However, the focus of this proposed study is to determine the
feasibility of these ideas rather than to develop an in-depth understanding of
the thermodynamics and kinetics of the process. Selected solubility and kinetics
experiments will be performed to highlight the potential of this process. The
successful demonstration of the concepts for this new process would create the
groundwork for the development of a more detailed proposal to determine the
thermodynamic, kinetic, and separations variables that would insure the economic
viability of the process.