* 9509658
* Integrating Reference Data and Accuracy Assessment in       Support of the GLOBE Initiative
* GEO,GEO
* 05/15/1995,08/15/1998
* Russell Congalton, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/15/1998
* USD 441,215.00

Congaltonl In response to an Announcement of Opportunity for the Global Learning
and Observations to Benefit the Environment Program (GLOBE) this project is
designed to meet the GLOBE goals and objectives of linking scientists and
schoolchildren in a global information network with the ultimate goal of better
understanding the Earth's environment and changes that take place within it.
This proposal to GLOBE PHASE II is designed to integrate reference data
collection by K-12 students and accuracy assessment of land cover maps derived
from remotely sensed data into the GLOBE initiative. The specific objectives of
this work are: 1. To develop and implement a protocol for enabling student-
collected reference data to assess the accuracy of remotely sensed information.
2. To incorporate the reference data for accuracy assessment in support of other
GLOBE investigators and for other regional and national mapping efforts to be
identified early on in this effort. The use of GPS equipment for locating ground
points will be coordinated with the P.I. for GPS. The goal of the project will
be to focus the reference data collection to appropriate projects and produce a
show-case result early on. In addition to protocol design, extensive training
and support materials will be developed for the students and teachers working
with this effort.