* 9509277
* Towards Other Planetary Systems -  An Education Workshop;   June 11-18, 1995; Kamuela, Hawaii
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Karen Meech, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 05/31/1998
* USD 25,939.00

9509277 Meech A workshop on the theme of "Toward Other Planetary Systems" (TOPS)
will be held at the Hawaii Preparatory Academy in Kamuela, Hawaii June 11-18,
1995. Sixteen top science teacher-student pairs from high schools statewide in
Hawaii will participate in the workshop. The purpose of the workshop is to
introduce students and teachers to areas of planetary science that are pushing
the limits of ground-based and space-based astronomical technology. There will
be discussions of how astronomers use the Mauna Kea telescopes and space-based
facilities to search for evidence of planet formation in other solar systems.
This, (i) will create a new awareness of the forefront research of astronomical
science in Hawaii, (ii) will provide an exciting basis for young students to
consider careers in astronomy, and finally (iii) will provide a wealth of new
teaching materials to be used by science educators at the high school level. The
workshop will involve collaboration between many research scientists, telescope
support staff, and high school educators. The format of the workshop is arranged
to allow discussions, demonstrations, hands-on activities, an observatory tour,
and night time observing opportunities for the participants. The teachers will
be able to develop astronomy activities, based on the workshop materials, for
use in their classes in the future. This will be the third consecutive year of
the program. Educational materials, for suggested astronomy classroom
activities, will be published and distributed to schools statewide after the end
of the grant period.