* 9509766
* Microvisualization of Pitting Precursor Sites on Metals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Patrick James, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 12/31/1998
* USD 302,745.00

DMR-9509766, PI-Smyrl: The objective is to develop microvisualization methods to
locate and identify precursor sites for pitting corrosion and other forms of
localized corrosion. These methods will be used to monitor the effectiveness of
treatments to remove or passivate the sites and thereby mitigate local attack.
Scanned, gold-coated, optical fibers are employed to carry out combined
photoelectrochemical and electrochemical microscopy (SPECM) to identify
precursor sites on titanium and titanium alloys. This technique has been
successfully used to reveal precursor sites for high purity titanium. The
precursor sites are more highly electroactive than the surrounding surface, but
the sites have lower photocurrent activity. In order to extend the measurements
to higher resolution, tapered optical fiber tips are used. The ultimate
resolution for the latter measurements is on the order of 10-20 nanometers, as
demonstrated by near-field optical microscopy. Studies are performed in the
100-200 nanometer level as a first step before going to the 10-20 nanometer
range. The confocal laser scanning microscope (CLSM) is used to obtain rapid
photoelectrochemical images to complement the above studies. CLSM is also used
for fluorescence microscopy on aluminum alloys to locate copper-rich areas. The
latter are sites for cathodic reduction of oxygen, and their removal from the
surface has been shown to improve the corrosion resistance and pitting
resistance of aluminum alloys. ***This project demonstrates the capability of
fluorescence microscopy with the CLSM to monitor the surface treatment processes
designed to remove cop per inclusions that cause pitting corrosion on aluminum.
The combination of the techniques will enable a study of nonuniform reactivity
on metal surfaces over lateral dimensions from tens of nanometers to tens of
micrometers and will extend understanding of the nature of pitting precursor
sites on titanium and other metals.***