* 9509790
* The Role of Hydrogen in Controlled Growth and Design of     Low-Temperature Electronic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* John Boland, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/1999
* USD 289,437.00

9509790 Boland This research project aims for fundamental understanding of the
chemistry of low temperature chemical vapor deposition(CVD), with emphasis on
the role of hydrogen in silicon CVD. The application of variable temperature
scanning tunneling microscope (VT-STM) and inherent atom-resolved capabilities
of STM with different operation and temperature ranges will provide access to
real-time dynamics on the growth surface. Basic mechanisms of silicon-hydrogen
surface chemistry and its role in promoting low temperature growth as well as
the activities of hydrogen atoms in controlling surface diffusion and related
processes at reduced temperatures to enhance epitaxy will be studied. %%% The
primary goal of this research project is to establish greater basic
understanding of particular phenomena critical to thin film synthesis and
processing of electronic materials, and to relate this understanding to the
development of advanced microelectronics devices through modifications in
processing methods. Additionally, an important feature of the program is the
training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. The knowledge and understanding gained from
this research project is expected to contribute generally to improving the
performance of advanced devices used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications. ***