* 9509780
* California Current Sensitivity to Pacific Climate:          Interdecadal Changes Reconstructed From Tree Rings and      Varves
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Daniel Cayan, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 231,388.00

Abstract ATM-9509780 Berger, Wolfgang University of California, San Diego Title:
California Current Sensitivity to Pacific Climate: Interdecadal Changes
Reconstructed From Tree Rings and Varves Instrumental oceanic and atmospheric
parameters along the American West Coast contain substantial decadal
variability, but the record is too short to resolve temporal and spatial details
at time scales greater than a few years. Observational studies of the climate
"shift" in the North Pacific basin during the late 1970's suggest that decadal
fluctuations may be linked to the Tropical Pacific perhaps via the frequency and
intensity of El Nino versus La Nina events. An understanding of inter-decadal
variability is crucial to evaluate global change phenomena. This award supports
a project using proxy records for describing the decadal-to-century variability
of the California Current at it relates to the Aleutian Low/West Coast Ridge
complex and to warm and cool episodes in the Tropical Pacific. Since low-
frequency temporal fluctuations usually have large spatial effects, this project
will exploit an array of proxy climate records for the last millennium provided
by tree-ring chronologies over the Western U.S. and by varve sediments in the
Barbara Basin. This study will clarify whether recent decadal changes in the
eastern North Pacific are a reflection of low-frequency natural variability or
whether they represent a unique episode wit no analog. The proposed research is
an interdisciplinary project involving the Geological Research Division and the
Climate Research Division of Scripps Institution of Oceanography, together with
the Laboratory of Tree-Ring Research of the University of Arizona.