* 9509089
* EROC:  Comparative Effects of Elevated Atmospheric Carbon   Dioxide Within Two Multiple Trophic Level Systems
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* David Karowe, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 06/30/1998
* USD 105,000.00

. 9509089 Karowe When plants are grown under elevated carbon dioxide, their
leaves usually contain less nitrogen but may contain more, less, or the same
amount of defensive chemicals. This research asks two main questions: !) Do
CO2-induced changes in plant quality affect higher trophic levels (e. g.
caterpillars that consume plants, parasitoid wasps that develop inside and
consume caterpillars, and hyperparasitoid wasps that develop inside and consume
parasitoid wasps), and 2) Does association of host plants with nitrogen-fixing
bacteria buffer all trophic levels against the direct effects of elevated CO2?
To answer these questions, the effects of elevated CO2 on plant nutritional
quality and defensive chemistry, and subsequent effects on herbivores,
parasitoids, and hyperparasitoids will be compared between a four trophic level
system based on crucifer (non-nitrogen fixing) host plants and one based on
legume (nitrogen fixing) host plants. This research will expand our
understanding of the ecological consequences of elevated CO2 to include the
third and fourth trophic levels, and to begin to assess the mechanisms
responsible for variability among different multiple trophic level systems in
their susceptibility to the direct effects of elevated CO2. Because our
economically important agricultural crops include both legumes and non-legumes,
and support multiple trophic levels, this information may enhance agricultural
productivity under the future, i. e., elevated CO2 atmosphere.