* 9510297
* Onset and Nanoscopic Consequences of Atomic Motion Induced  by Electronic Excitation of Wide-gap Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Richard Williams, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 156,653.00

9510297 Williams The program combines femtosecond lasers with atomic force
microscopy (AFM) to study the energy conversion of light into atomic
displacements in bulk solids and surfaces. Time and space resolved detection of
electronic excitation of insulator surfaces by induced change in chemical
interaction potentials between the surface and the AFM tip will be investigated.
Synchronized short laser pulses with the tip scan are expected to improve
aspects of nanomachining with features that introduce chemical specificity into
AFM. In addition, high energy, six electron-volt photon pulses of two hundred
femtoseconds duration, are used to conduct ultrafast spectroscopy and supporting
studies on technologically useful classes of materials that exhibit self-
localization of excitations in pure crystals. Materials which have the
additional technological advantage of being the best new fast scintillator
crystals for high-energy electromagnetic calorimeters and medical imaging will
also be investigated. %%% This is a multidisciplinary proposal which spans a
broad area of research such as basic studies of the interaction of atoms with
light in bulk solids and surfaces, photochemistry, micromachining, and medical
imaging. The program combines femtosecond lasers with atomic force microscopy to
study the energy conversion of light into atomic discplaments in solids and
surfaces. The program has a strong university-industry component and provides
opportunity for training students in the basic sciences as well as applied
research. The core industrial research collaboration is with AMP Incorporated.
***