* 9510435
* Mathematical Sciences:  Methods for Smoothing Bivariate,    Irregularly Spaced Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Karen Kafadar, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 12/31/1996
* USD 30,000.00

9510435 Kafadar Abstract The research under this project will develop methods
for smoothing bivariate, irregularly spaced data such as environmental,
geological, or health-related data with geographically-defined coordinates.
Because such data often arise from non-Gaussian distributions with potentially
non-stationary noise (e.g., highly skewed values in barometric pressure data,
exotic values due to earthquakes in geophysical data, discontinuities due to
faults in geological data), linear smoothers, or smoothers derived assuming
stationary white noise, may not perform as well as more robust, nonlinear
smoothers in capturing the underlying trend. This research will attempt to
identidy (1) those situations where nonlinear versus linear smoothers should
yield good performance; (2) how smoothed values at the border should be defined
(often a source of significant bias in estimating the trend); and (3) how the
resulting smoothed trend can be displayed. In 1974, the National Cancer
Institute published the Atlas of Cancer Mortality for U.S. Counties: 1950-1969.
It consisted of U.S. maps, one for each of 35 sites of cancer, where counties
were shaded according to the level of the mortality rate for the cancer site
being depicted. These maps illustrated, for example, high rates of lung cancer
around the Gulf of Mexico and high rates of bladder cancer around Delaware and
New Jersey; subsequently, environmental causes for these high rates were
identified. Further atlases of cancer mortality were published, and an atlas of
mortality from causes other than cancer is forthcoming from National Center for
Health Statistics. Because some counties have very small populations, reported
mortality rates are very uncertain; regions of elevated risks may be difficult
to detect. The objective of this research is to develop methods which will
highlight geographical patterns in data such as cancer mortality in U.S.
counties. Geographical movement of populations often is responsible for
spreading the risk around. Thus it is important to identify not just isolated
counties of elevated risk but broad regions which may indicate environmental
causes for concern. Conversely, regions of low risk may serve as models for
measures of disease prevention and control. These methods can be applied to
other sorts of data to answer similar questions, such as which regions indicate
significant seismic activity, or in which places the ozone layer is depleting
most rapidly.