* 9510092
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center in          Ergonomics
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/1995,08/31/2002
* Carter Kerk, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 08/31/2002
* USD 305,341.00

9510092 Congleton This award provides funding for the establishment of an
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center in Ergonomics at Texas A&amp;M
University. The research activities of the Center will contribute to the
technology and information base necessary to evaluate and redesign existing
workplace environments and work methods and to provide the leadership for the
effective design of future work systems. The Center will provide an opportunity
for industry to coordinate and direct research objectives in response to safety,
health, and ergonomic guidelines and standards that are being adopted. A focused
research program will span interdisciplinary fields aimed at reducing
injury/illness rates; reducing cumulative trauma disorders; reducing costs;
increasing productivity; and developing responses and research for increased
regulatory activity. These technical programs are well developed and aimed at
solving key problems of both academic and practical importance that will enhance
and extend the reputation of the Center and encourage growth in membership. The
Principal Investigators are competent researchers, actively engaged in research
within the area of interest to the Center and it is their reputations that have
resulted in the commitment of 10 companies to support the new Center. Their
proven leadership skills should help ensure the success of the Center. The
Program Manager recommends that Texas A&amp;M University be awarded $50,000 for
the first year of a five-year continuing award. Near the end of each 12-month
period the Program Manager and/or the Division Director of the Engineering
Education Centers Division will review the progress of the Center on a number of
renewal criteria, including the following: 1) the extent to which the
university/industry interaction is developing; 2) the extent to which the
support base is developing; and 3) the extent to which a robust research is
developing. If the review is satisfactory, the Program M anager will recommend
support for the next period of this continuing award.