* 9510511
* GIG:  Center for Statistics in Science and Technology Group Infrastructure Grant
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Robert Shumway, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 07/31/1999
* USD 305,625.00

9510511 Rocke Center for Statistics in Science and Technology Group
Infrastructure Grant. The Center for Statistics in Science and Technology (CSST)
is anewly-formed research and training center at U.C. Davis, whose purpose is to
support and facilitate interdisciplinary research and graduate training
involving statistics and related areas of mathematical sciences together with
physical, biological, and earthsciences. The initial faculty membership includes
statisticians, researchers in continuous and combinatorial optimization methods,
and researchers from other scientific areas (Geology and Toxicology) in which
there are existing collaborations. Other investigators will be included in the
Center as it develops, and as its interdisciplinary activities increase. The
establishment of CSST was prompted by the observation that, increasingly,
successful attacks on scientific problems involve cooperation between
investigators with different specializations. A particularly attractive type of
collaboration is between mathematical scientists, and researchers in areas of
application of mathematical methods. A major activity of the Center under this
project will be to support graduate students in statistics and related areas of
the mathematical sciences to work on interdisciplinary projects with
geosciences, toxicology, and other scientific areas. This is important because
the ability to work in such cross- disciplinary partnerships is an attribute
highly valued both in university and industrial settings, and because the skills
needed to contribute to such teams do not develop of themselves, but need to be
consciously nurtured as a part of graduate education. Other activities of CSST
under this project will be to conduct seminars and symposia, and provide a
computational facility for cross-disciplinary research projects using equipment
previously acquired with NSF and NIH support.