* 9510329
* Robotic Observation Microscope (ROM)
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Jarold Bartz, BARTZ Technology Co
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1998
* USD 299,950.00

*** 9510329 Bartz This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
design, build and field test a Robotic Observation Microscope (ROM) System able
to gather, name, and store the root images in digital format in the field. The
system will be designed to return to each location within plus or minus 0.1mm
for rapid comparison of images with no loss of data because edges do not match.
Provisions will be incorporated to enable interaction with field operators for
quality verification of data, and to allow operators to input comments and add
data, while the program continues to perform all normal repetitive tasks, only
requiring approval to proceed to the next step. The system will also be designed
to reprogram index depth intervals, sample points, magnification, and other
research project features, to fit the future needs of different scientists and
automatically transfer images from the field system to a laboratory database,
and backup archive storage system.. It will provide easy location indexed, then
time indexed, retrieval of all images. The target is to produce a system that
can be purchased for less than $25,000 total system price. These developments
would enable savings of 30% to 50% of the time presently required for
MiniRhizotron research and add new observational capabilities. Root research is
conducted to study root growth, to breed drought resistance of food crops, to
study root response to soil conditions and contamination, and for research on
disease mechanisms. Improving food production is of major importance in the
United States and it is a matter of survival in many third world countries. This
method of root study is the primary accepted non-destructive approach around the
world. The firm specializes in development of this method, and manufactures the
equipment for export world wide. There are about 100 manual systems now in use.
***