* 9510644
* Multistrategy Constructive Induction:  A Theory and         Methodology for Task-Oriented Improvement of Knowledge      Representation Spaces for Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Ryszard Michalski, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 01/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

This research concerns a fundamental problem of machine learning, which is how
to learn when the originally given representation space is of low quality. Most
machine learning methods search for desirable knowledge in the same
representation space in which training examples are presented (that is, use the
same attributes or terms as those employed in the training data). If the
original representation space is inadequate, that is, the given attributes or
descriptive terms are insufficiently relevant to the present learning task, such
methods do not perform well. This project investigates several novel ideas and
methods for learning in such situations. In particular, we are investigating a
constructive induction approach to the problem, in which a learning system
performs a double intertwined search - one for an improved knowledge
representation and one for the "best" hypothesis in that space. In the
multistrategy constructive induction methodology, a combination of strategies is
employed for transforming the initial representation space into the new task-
oriented space. the space transformation operators are divided into
"constructors" that expand the space by inventing new attributes and
"destructors" that reduce the space by removing or abstracting the current
attributes, guided by "meta rules" that are initially provided, but
incrementally improved by a secondary learning process.