* 9510706
* Grammatical Logics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Michael Moortgat, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/1999
* USD 128,946.00

The general problem this research addresses is the nature of multi-dimensional
linguistic composition. Natural language expressions display properties in a
variety of dimensions: they have properties linking them to the physical world;
they are syntactically categorized; they support pragmatic and semantic
interpretation. The properties of basic expressions may be assumed to be
finitely stipulated or listed, as in a dictionary or its mental counterpart. The
properties of complex expressions cannot be assumed to be encodable this way,
but must be derivable in a way that depends both on the correlative properties
of their component parts and on their mode of combination. This question of
linguistic composition arises with regard to each dimension; moreover, it arises
in a generalized form across dimensions, since composition in one dimension may
affect or depend on composition in another. Although there are a variety of
solutions to this problem instantiated in existing grammatical architectures,
the question deserves to be studied more sys- tematically, since the
interrelation of properties of different kinds forms the basis of the unbounded
creative character of natural language and its expressive power. The
investigation here views linguistic composition as a problem of resource-
sensitive grammatical inference in a system of labeled deduction: the component
parts of an utterance are taken to be a structured set mf premises from which a
coherent global structure for the utterance is sought within a particular system
of deductive postulates. This point of view connects directly with two recent
trends in logic: the rise of interest in substructural logics and the
investigation of labeled deduction. The research will exploit the results in
these areas for applications to the study of grammatical architecture and the
dynamic flow of grammatical information within and across different dimensions
in the course of composition. The principal research goals are: 1) to gain
insight into the nature of multidimensional composition through the construction
and systematic study of appropriate models based on logical principles; 2) to
connect these insights to the analysis of a broad range of linguistic phenomena;
and S) to show that the resulting framework offers a unifying perspective on
current grammatical theories. The expected results of the research include a
monograph describing the range and power of the known landscape of grammatical
logics and a computer implementation of such a system with robust empirical
coverage of English.