* 9510380
* Proteases and Pattern Formation in Xenopus Embryos
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Gerald Thomsen, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1998
* USD 269,999.00

9510380 Thomsen These studies will address the biochemical and embryological
function of a set of proteases that regulate, by an unknown mechanisms, the
activity of growth factors in the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-beta)
superfamily. The proteases under investigation are BMP-1 and closely related
factors which belong to a group of metalloendoproteases, the astacins (named
after the first isolate of the group, a crayfish digestive protease). Genetic
studies in Drosophila suggest that an astacin related protease called tolloid
affects the activity of decapentaplegic (dpp), a ligand in the TGF-beta family.
Members of the TGF-beta family have a wide variety of developmental functions in
embryos of vertebrates and invertebrates. In the development of the amphibian
Xenopus, TGF-beta related factors (e.g. activin, Vg-1 and bone morphogenetic or
BMPs) induce mesodermal tissues and influence body pattern formation. There is
also evidence that the activity of these growth factors can be regulated at the
level of protein processing. Proteases such as tolloid and a BMP-1 might
proteolytically process and thus activate TGF-beta related proproteins, or
indirectly affect the activity of TGF-beta ligands by proteolytically
inactivating a ligand inhibitor. In Xenopus embryos, BMP-2 and BMP- 4 induce
ventral mesoderm (e.g. erythroid blood) and antagonize the development of dorsal
mesodermal tissues. Ectopic expression of BMP-1 in Xenopus embryos similarly
antagonizes the development of dorsal mesoderm, perhaps by activating BMP
ligands which then exert a ventralizing affect. This grant will focus on the
physical and biological characterization of Xenopus BMP-1 and perhaps other
related astacins. The studies will a) describe the primary cDNA structure and
the expression patterns of Xenopus BMP-1 and potentially other astacins, b)
determine the embryological activities of BMP-1 and other astacin related
factors by ectopic expression of wild-type (functional) and mutat ed dominant
negative (functionally competitive) versions of the proteins in embryos, and c)
attempt to understand the interaction of astacins and the TGF- beta related BMPs
at the biochemical level, by measuring protease activity and testing for the
formation of protein complexes. The studies are anticipated to reveal how
astacins regulate TGF-beta ligand activities and whether this is a mechanism to
regulate mesoderm induction and embryonic pattern formation in vertebrates. ***