* 9510598
* The Electro-Enzymatic Reduction of Dioxygen to Water Using  Laccase and a Redox Mediator
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1997
* G. Tayhas Palmore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* R. Kenneth Marcus
* 12/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

This project, supported as a Research Planning Grant in the Analytical and
Surface Chemistry Program, is directed towards the development of a biofuel cell
based on the enzymatic reduction of dioxygen to water. During the tenure of this
18- month standard grant, Professor G. Tayhas R. Palmore and her students at the
University of California at Davis, will attempt to couple the redox enzyme
laccase, which catalyzes the four electron reduction of dioxygen to water, to
the carbon cathode of a fuel cell via use of chemical mediators, such as iron
sulfate. The enzymatic facilitation of dioxygen reduction is accomplished near
its formal potential, and should therefore result in a higher efficiency fuel
cell than that possible using synthetic platinum metal catalysts. Professor
Palmore has designed a prototype fuel cell which allows her to monitor the
"turnover" of the enzyme and mediator using an in-line diode array
spectrophotometer and the overall efficiency of the cell by measurement of the
passage of charge across the cell using a coulometer. The success of this effort
will culminate in a new family of low cost, high power, and environmentally safe
fuel sources. A biological fuel cell is a device which converts chemical energy
into electrical energy with minimal energy losses by the use of enzymatic
catalysts. Typical fuel cells require the use of corrosive solvents and precious
metals which can be costly to produce and/or dispose. In addition, the power
output of a fuel cell is limited by the energy and rate at which electrons are
shuttled through the various redox agents and across the anode and cathode
compartments. With the use of a natural product, Professor Palmore has presented
an elegant design for the generation of higher efficiency fuel cells that are "
environmentally friendly".