* 9510496
* Experimental Studies of Superfluid Helium Three
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Christopher Gould, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9510496 Gould This project is a study of materials at ultralow temperatures and
the development of ultralow temperature techniques. The experiments are carried
out at temperature substantially below 1K. Several areas research are
represented. One addresses the magnetic properties of superfluid 3He. The
experiments are of interest because they will provide important test of extant
theories, and address fundamental issues related to low temperature magnetic
measurement methods. The second is the magnetism of thin films of 3He. The thin
film magnetism differs in interesting ways from bulk magnetic properties of 3He.
The third area is the transport properties of thin metal films and the
development of instrumentation based on superconducting quantum interference
devices (SQUIDS). This includes important research in a new area of mesoscopic
physics. The various research projects are of a fundamental nature, but may have
technical relevance in the context of advanced materials and devices operating
at cryogenic temperatures. For example, ultrasensitive SQUID devices have been
employed in clinical studies of the weak magnetic fields originating from brain
wave activity. %%% This project is a study of materials at ultralow temperatures
and the development of ultralow temperature techniques. The experiments are
carried out at temperature substantially below 1K. Several areas research are
represented. One addresses the magnetic properties of superfluid 3He. The
experiments are of interest because they will provide important test of extant
theories, and address fundamental issues related to low temperature magnetic
measurement methods. The second is the magnetism of thin films of 3He. The thin
film magnetism differs in interesting ways from bulk magnetic properties of 3He.
The third area is the transport properties of thin metal films and the
development of instrumentation based on superconducting quantum interference
devices (SQUIDS). This includes important research in a new area of mesoscopic
physics. The various research projects are of a fundamental nature, but may have
technical relevance in the context of advanced materials and devices operating
at cryogenic temperatures. For example, ultrasensitive SQUID devices have been
employed in clinical studies of the weak magnetic fields originating from brain
wave activity. ***