* 9510063
* Late Quaternary Dynamics of the Labrador/Foxe Sectors of the Laurentide Ice Sheet, Eastern Caradian Artic
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2000
* USD 277,865.00

9510063 Miller Our concepts concerning the stability of the Laurentide Ice Sheet
(LIS) and its role in the global climate systems have been revised dramatically
in the past five years, as high-resolution records have been compiled from the
sea floor, ice cores, and from deposits around the margin of the former ice
sheet. Collectively, these records document rapid reorganization of oceanic and
atmospheric circulation on time scales of a few years to a few decades, and
rapid fluctuations of the ice margin that resulted in massive transfers of ice
into oceans on time scales of decades to centuries. The rapid delivery of large
volumes of ice from the land to the ocean may have altered thermohaline
circulation with subsequent reduction in high-latitude precipitation,
effectively coupling the three systems. The INSTAAR research effort of the last
decade has focused on the glacial history at the mouth of Hudson Strait, the
most direct connection of the ice sheet to the ocean. We have provided field
evidence for rapid advance and retreat of the ice margin in Hudson Strait
(sustained advances in excess of 100 km/century), and for ice movement
independent of topography, with major advances sourced in Labrador/Ungava rather
than Hudson Bay. A consequence of these advances was a major flux of icebergs
into the Labrador Sea and subsequently the North Atlantic, providing the first
direct glacial geologic evidence of a mechanism to produce Heinrich layers
observed in the North Atlantic. In this proposal funding is requested to test
three questions: 1) Are observed rapid icestream advances triggered by inherent
instabilities at the bed of the LIS, or are they climatically driven? 2) Did an
ice stream in Cumberland Sound contribute substantial
sediment/meltwater/icebergs to the Labrador Sea. If so, were fluctuations in
phase with the Hudson Strait advances? and 3) Are the reconstructions
interpreted from the field evidence compatible with glaciological theory? We
proposed to address these questions by field observations of the glacial geology
at the mouth of Cumberland Sound and by applying a 3-D glaciological model to
the Labrador/Baffin region using our field-based boundary conditions. The
Cumberland Sound region should preserve evidence that will clarify the timing
and magnitude of a Foxe Basin ice stream, and to the north, provide an
independent record of local glacier activity. Comparing the timing of advances
for these ice masses with that in Hudson Strait will indicate whether forcing is
primarily climate or ice sheet instability. Modeling our field-base glacier
reconstructions will test whether they are compatible with ice physics and
provide additional insights into ice sheet dynamics.