* 9510712
* MOCVD Precursors to Binary and Ternary Transition Metal     Nitrides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Charles Winter, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 07/31/1998
* USD 256,000.00

This award is made by the Office of Special Projects in the Chemistry Division.
The research will explore the range of ligand intermediates that may be formed
in Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) of thin films of important binary and ternary
metal nitrides with the formula MN, where M is an early transition metal. CVD
routes will be developed using volatile metal halides and nitrogen compounds. A
major goal of the work is to identify structures that serve as single-source
precursors and to try to understand the chemistry involved in their
transformations to binary materials. All new compounds will be characterized by
various analytical and spectroscopic techniques. Among the systems to be studied
are precursors with hydrazido ligands, monomeric titanium nitrido complexes,
amorphous titanium-silicon-nitrogen and tantalum-silicon-nitrogen films as
barriers in microelectronics devices, and CVD routes to ternary metal nitrides,
which possess properties superior to those of the binary materials. %%% Thin
ceramic films made by CVD processes are of growing technological importance.
Films of early transition metal nitrides of the type studied in this project
possess a number of useful properties, including extreme hardness, excellent
chemical resistance, desirable optical characteristics, and good electrical
conductivity. The research supported in this project will lead to new precursors
and processes for CVD which will solve problems with current methods, such as
high deposition temperatures, and will develop paths to new ternary metal
nitrides for which no CVD routes are currently available.