* 9510126
* Genetic Relatedness and Successional Structure in Polistes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Joan Strassmann, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 09/30/1999
* USD 230,000.00

9510126 Queller Drs. Queller and Strassmann will work on several species of
Polistes paper wasps, each chosen for characteristics that make it particularly
suitable for studying one kind of conflict. . They have developed DNA
microsatellite loci that will provide an unusually clear picture of the genetic
structure of colonies. This research should reveal much about the expression and
resolution of genetic conflicts of interest. It will test elements of kin
selection theory that are relevant to a wide range of species. It may provide
general insights into the evolution of other kinds of cooperative entities, from
the eukaryotic cell to multicellular organisms. On the practical side, the
research will utilize and contribute to the new technology surrounding
microsatellite genes, a particular method of genetic fingerprinting important in
many areas, including evolutionary studies, conservation genetics, forensics,
and gene-mapping studies for agricultural and medical needs. It will also
provide test data sets for new methods of estimating relatedness being developed
in the same laboratory. Besides contributing to the training of postdoctoral and
graduate students, Queller and Strassmann encourage participation of
undergraduates, high school students, and teachers who take the knowledge they
gain back to the classroom.