* 9510135
* Control and Quantification in Modern Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Lawrence Principe, Johns Hopkins University
* Fixed Price Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 10/31/1998
* USD 71,000.00

An amazing proportion of Americans from all walks of life believe in what
scientists call "pseudo-science." Very few newspapers, for example, do not carry
an astrology column. Timing of significant events in certain Asian countries are
determined by astrologers. Even a recent first lady consulted an astrologer in
order to find the most propitious timing for state events. While scorned by many
scientists, there is a long tradition of interaction among the "pseudo-sciences"
and the "real" sciences. Johannes Kepler and Tycho Brahe both practiced
astrology. Robert Boyle and Isaac Newton both practiced alchemy. The research
that Drs. Principe and Newman are undertaking examines the relationship between
what we now call pseudo-science and the development of "true" science during the
scientific revolution. In particular, they are examining the influence of
alchemical traditions as practiced in America on the rise of modern chemistry.
They are examining the laboratory notebooks of George Starkey, a graduate of
Harvard, who undertook experimental testing of alchemical theories. His emphasis
on control and quantification became a hallmark of modern chemistry. This
research is not aimed to undermine the standards of contemporary science.
Rather, its aim is to show how scientific method growing out of pseudosciences
can lead to legitimate scientific results if properly pursued. One might wish
that current practitioners of astrology would apply the same methods of control
and quantification pursued by Starkey and his colleagues. In the long run, the
true efficacy of such belief in extra-terrestrial influences on human lives
could then be discerned.