* 9510339
* (ESH) The Most Severe Glaciations in Earth History:  By     Presaged Greenhouse Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Paul Hoffman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 01/31/1997
* USD 95,979.00

9510339 Hoffman The most extreme glaciations in Earth history occurred near the
end of the Proterozoic eon, when ice margins extended at sea level to within 10
degrees of the equator. The glaciogenic sediments in many regions are intimately
intercalated with typical warm-water carbonates, implying very abrupt climatic
oscillations. Carbonates preceding the glacial deposits are extraordinarily
enriched in 13 C (13C&gt;+6% PDB), signifying extreme rates of proportional
organic carbon burial, whereas those directly following the glacial deposits are
high depleted ( 13C&lt;-4% PDB). This implicates a drawdown of atmospheric CO2
as the cause of glaciation and a corollary increase in pO2 as enabling the
initial radiation of metazoans. In contrast to the state of continental
emergence that presaged Cenozoic and late Paleozoic glacial epochs,
stratigraphic and radiogenic isotope evidence suggest that Neoproterozoic
glaciations occurred in response to continental inundation. Accordingly, the
Neoproterozoic glaciations may have had more in common with the short-lived
Ashgill (late Ordovician) glacial event. These ancient occurrences illustrate
the importance of considering the entire geological record, which reveals events
and processes not predicted by current models nor expressed in the 1.4% of Earth
history represented by the Cenozoic. Funding is requested to investigate two
outstanding questions central to Neoproterozoic global change: (1) Do the
glacial deposits represent globally synchronous events of diachronous products
or rapid continental drift? (2) Do the observed shifts in 13Ccarbonate reflect
purely secular variations in ocean surface waters or in part the spatial effects
of differing water masses? The proposed study will be piggy-backed on ongoing
field projects by the P.I. and by Anthony R. Prave (City University of New York)
on the sequence stratigraphy, structural geology and regional tectonics of the
Damara orogen in Namibia, considered a keysto ne for the Neoproterozoic tectonic
reorganization of Gondwanaland. The ongoing projects have identified volcanic
horizons potentially suitable for U-Pb zircon chronology within or bracketing
three separate glaciogenic formations. Single-grain U-Pb zircon analyses will be
done by thermal ionization mass spectrometry at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology under the direction of Samuel A. Bowring, whose recent
chronostratigraphic work has dramatically refined the early Cambrian time scale.
The ongoing projects have already gone far towards establishing the sequence
stratigraphic framework and regional facies variations for carbonates above and
below the glacial deposits in northern Namibia. Sampling and interpretation of
carbon isotopic variations will be grounded on this work and on follow-up
diagentic studies. The isotopic and diagenetic studies will be undertaken by
Alan J. Kaufman at Harvard University, who has published extensively on
Neoproterozoic isotopic chemostratigraphy , including reconnaissance studies in
Namibia. Funding is requested to support the U-Pb and C isotopic analyses, and
salary and travel to the field for Kaufman. The cost of field operations in
Namibia and support for other personnel will be borne elsewhere.