* 9510543
* Dissertation Research:  Settlement, Environment, and        Political Economy in the Northeast Syrian Steppe
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Frank Hole, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 11,340.00

Under the direction of Dr. Frank Hole, Mr. Nicholas Kouchoukos will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an archaeology survey in a
roughly 2000 km square stretch of semi-arid steppe lying between the Bilikh and
Khabur rivers in northeastern syria. This area lacks sufficient annual rainfall
for predictable dry-farming but provides extensive grazing land for livestock.
Preliminary archaeological survey during the summer of 1994 revealed extensive
traces of ancient settlement at scales ranging from temporary camps to towns
nearly 30ha in size. Analysis of pottery and other artifacts collected from the
surfaces of these sites indicates that periods of settlement were episodic and
often separated by more than a millennium. With National Science Foundation
support, Mr. Kouchoukos will extend his survey. He will use satellite
photographs to map geology and ground cover and on this basis devise a sampling
design. He will collect information on current land use practices, land cover
types and soil and water conditions. Once sites are discovered systematic
collections of surface artifacts will be made and complete topographic mapping
of sites will proceed simultaneously with surface collection. Ceramics and other
materials will be analyzed. Site and environmental information will be plotted
on satellite photographs and these data will permit the analysis of human use of
this region over a long span of time. The goal of Mr.Kouchoukos' research is to
understand how both environmental and social factors affect human settlement
patterns and land use. Although little is known about the survey region itself,
a broader archaeological context has been established. Using this as a base, it
is then possible to determine how under different forms of social organization
and environmental conditions, groups utilize this marginal area and how these
different uses are reflected on the ground. This research is important for many
reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will
increase understanding of human-environment interactions and will contribute to
the training of a promising young scientist.