* 9510560
* Dissertation Research:  The Optimal Speed of Privatization, Unemployment and Fiscal Policy in Post Socialist Economies
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Nobuhiro Kiyotaki, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 09/30/1996
* USD 4,000.00

In countries of Central and Eastern Europe, privatization of state owned
enterprises is the central element of transition to a market economy. The
objective of this research is to investigate the relationship between speed of
privatization and changes in output, with particular emphasis on the role of
unemployment and fiscal policy. The issue can be stated as: how should
government choose the downsizing of the state sector and the path of taxation to
achieve a desirable resource allocation in the transition economy. The
theoretical part of the research consists of developing a consistent
macroeconomic framework for a transition economy with a job matching process in
order to analyze the effects and welfare implications of alternative
privatization and taxation schemes. The model is a general equilibrium model,
i.e. it captures the interaction of all variables in the model. By incorporating
the job matching process, the model takes into account the regional and skill
mismatch between unemployed workers and available vacancies that currently
exists across countries of Eastern Europe and, thus, provides a suitable
framework for studying the optimal speed of privatization. The empirical part
involves collecting data on output, employment, unemployment, fiscal
expenditures, and taxes for each country and then estimating the general
equilibrium model. ***