* 9510431
* Collaborative Research:  Perception of 3D Objects in        Dynamic Visual Scenes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* George Andersen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1998
* USD 213,350.00

9510431 ANDERSEN The ability of human observers to perceive and recognize
objects in a three-dimensional scene involves several different levels of
analysis, including the perception of the overall depth of the scene, the
perception of the relative positions of objects or layout of the scene, and the
perception of the shapes of objects within the scene. At each level of analysis
the observer may gain information from a number of different sources, some
informative about distances from the observer to parts of the scene or to parts
of objects (viewer-centered) and others informative about depth relationships
within the scene or within objects, independent of the position of the observer
(object- centered). Three series of experiments will be conducted to determine
how information at each level, scene, layout, and object, and information of
each type, viewer-centered and object- centered, combine to provide an
integrated perception of the three-dimensional environment. The first series of
experiments will examine the relationship between simulated layout and perceived
layout as information for scene depth is manipulated. The second series of
experiments will assess the effect of layout information on the perception of
object properties (relative depth, surface orientation, and overall shape). The
third series of experiments will use selected conditions from the first two
series to examine the combined effects of scene depth and layout on the
perception of object properties. Within each of these series, the type of
information (viewer-centered or object-centered) for each level under
consideration will be manipulated. Several different cues for the specification
of viewer-centered and object-centered information will be examined including
accommodation, linear perspective, motion parallax, disparity, relative size,
texture, structure from motion, and shading. The majority of the experiments
will involve computer-generated displays. Some experiments invo lving real
scenes will also be conducted. This will be the first comprehensive study of the
integration of visual information at multiple levels for the perception of the
three-dimensional environment. An understanding of the perception of objects in
three-dimensional scenes is important in any situation in which an observer
moves through a scene or must recognize or manipulate objects in a scene. For
this reason there is a close relationship between basic research on human visual
perception in dynamic scenes and technological developments involving both human
and artificial visual systems, ranging from improving visual displays for the
training of pilots in flight simulators to developing more effective robotic
visual systems. ***