* 9510376
* Mathematical Sciences:  Self-Consistent Estimators,         Bootstrap and Censored Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Jian-Jian Ren, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 11/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9510376 Ren Abstract The proposed research is concerned with the statistical
inference problems using various types of censored data, including right
censored, doubly censored, interval censored, left truncated - right censored,
and bivariate censored data. Estimation, tests and confidence intervals with
incomplete date are all under consideration. One objective of the research is to
investigate a new resampling method, called the Leveraged Bootstrap, so that the
difficulty of extending the usual estimation and testing procedures for complete
data to incomplete data in certain situations or certain complicated models can
be avoided. So far, the procedures developed for incomplete data are constructed
on an ad hoc basis. The leveraged bootstrap does not rely on these ad hoc
extensions. The research will focus on the investigation of the consistency of
the leveraged bootstrap in a number of important statistical inference problems
with incomplete data, such as empirical likelihood inference, nonparametric
likelihood confidence bands, linear regression models, tests of independence for
two random variables, tests in some semiparametric change point models, mixture
models and biased sampling problems. Another objective of the research is to
investigate the consistency of the m out of n bootstrap, i.e., resampling fewer
than n observations, in the hypothesis testing problems using various censored
data. It is known that the usual nonparametric bootstrap (the n out of n
bootstrap) fails when one tries to estimate the distribution of test statistics
under a semiparametric (restricted nonparametric) hypothesis and ignores the
restrictions imposed by the hypothesis. Since the distributions of test
statistics for censored data are often unknown and very complicated due to the
unknown distributions of the censoring variables, it is of great interest to
investigate possible remedies of the usual bootstrap in order to provide the
critical values for the tests. Examples show that in certain situations, there
are no obvious general remedies except the m out of n bootstrap. This research
is primarily motivated by statistical inference problems using incomplete data
which are frequently encountered in medical and reliability studies. In
particular, doubly censored data and interval censored data occur in breast
cancer research and AIDS research, respectively. The usual estimation and
testing procedures for complete data are not directly applicable to such
complicated incomplete data, and statistical analysis is lacking. The objective
of this research is to investigate some general methods which will directly
facilitate research in other fields, such as medicine.