* 9510387
* Ultrafast Spectroscopic Studies of Semiconducting Polymer Blends: The Route to High Efficiency Photoluminescence
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Alan Heeger, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

Heeger 9510387 The discovery of polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with
relatively high quantum efficiency has opened an important new direction for
research and has expanded the possible applications for conducting polymers in
the area of active light sources. With a goal of achieving high quantum
efficiency electroluminescence in polymer LEDs, this research program addresses
the basic physics of pi-electrons in conjugated polymers. The experimental
methods focus on the use of ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopy (resolution
less than a pico- second), including sub pico-second time-resolved photoinduced
absorption, sub pico-second time-resolved luminescence and pump-probe
experiments to characterize the possible role of stimulated emission. The
research will focus on dilute blends of semiconducting luminescent polymers. %%%
The discovery of polymer light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with relatively high
quantum efficiency has opened an important new direction for research and has
expanded the possible applications for conducting polymers in the area of active
light sources. The potential importance of this area had been recently
highlighted in President Clinton's report on Science in the National Interest
("Polymers that Glow"). With a goal of achieving high quantum efficiency
electroluminescence in polymer LEDs, this research program addresses the basic
physics of pi-electrons in conjugated polymers through studies of photoinduced
luminescence and photo-induced charge/energy transfer. The experimental methods
focus on the use of ultrafast time-resolved spectroscopy resolution (less than a
pico-second). ***