* 9510269
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Adoption of Advanced   Manufacturing Technology by U.S. Firms:  A Microeconomic    Study of Manufacturing Technology
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Bronwyn Hall, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 07/31/1996
* USD 9,275.00

Many US manufacturers have been slower to adopt advanced manufacturing
technology than has their foreign competitors. This fact has been cited as a
leading cause of the decline in the global competitiveness of US manufacturers.
The objectie of the research to be undertaken with this grant is to explain this
puzzling behavior by US firms. This project is innovative in at least two ways.
First, it will not concentrate on just one industry and one technology, but will
examine many advanced technologies and many industries. Second, the project will
replace the standard neo-classical theory of investment with one developed by
Avinash Dixit and Robert Pindyck that explicitly assumes: (1) investment is
irreversible, (2 firms are uncertain about both costs and benefits of
investments in advanced technology and are constantly updating their estimates
of these costs and benefits using new information, and (3) the investment can be
deferred. The Dixit-Pindyck model will be tested using data from the Census
Bureau s Survey of Manufacturing Technology for 1 988, 1991, and 1993. This data
set provides information on the adoption of new technologies by plants, and
includes variables that measure the level of uncertainty and the degree of
irreversibility of the intestment.