* 9510643
* Dissertation Research:  Experimental and Analytical Studies of East African Plio-Pleistocene Artifact Assemblages and   their Bearing on the Earliest Technology
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* John W. Harris, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 11,450.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jack Harris, Mr. Brian Ludwig will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will study stone tool assemblages from a series of
East African sites which date to between 2.5 and 1.5 million years ago. He will
examine materials from the Gona and Omo sites in Ethiopia, Foobi Fora in Kenya
and Olduvai Gorge in Tanzania. Measurements will be recorded on 29 variables
based on strictly technological features found on flakes, angular fragments,
cores and other reworked pieces. Mr. Ludwig is an experienced stone worker and
he will also use replicative techniques to determine the processes by which
these objects were produced. On this basis he will gain insight into the
cognitive and manipulative abilities of the hominids who produced them and trace
how these developed over time. The period between 2.5 and 1.5 years ago marked a
major advance in hominid capabilities. At 2.5 million the archaeological record
begins with the first flaked stone tools. A million years later hominids were
producing standardized forms. The goal of this research is to determine how this
process developed over time. Previous archaeological studies of these materials
have focussed on `tool types` and attempted to sort materials into named
categories. However such an approach gives little insight into their makers'
cognitive and manipulative abilities. Mr. Ludwig's work will help to alleviate
this situation. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
information of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the
development of human cognitive abilities and assist in the training of a
promising young archaeologist.