* 9510658
* RPG: Molecular Mechanisms of Regulation of GAP-43 Promoter  by bHLH Transcription Factors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Anne Chiaramello, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 01/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9510658 Chiaramello The molecular mechanisms underlying mammalian neurogenesis
are still elusive. However recently, a number of neuronal genes that specify
neuronal cell fate has been identified. Some of them encode transcription
factors that contain a basic-helix-loop-helix (bHLH) motif. These neuronal genes
are grouped in two specific categories: the proneural genes and the neurogenic
genes. The proneural genes define a state that makes cells competent to become
neuronal precursors, whereas neurogenic genes form a functional network that is
thought to convey regulatory signals from one cell to the next to allow the
development of mature neuronal cells. These genes are activated in a precise
spatial and temporal manner in order to orchestrate this complex series of
events leading to neuronal differentiation. These genes encode various basic-
helix- loop-helix transcription factors that regulate tissue-specific
transcription of various neuronal target genes. These bHLH proteins form various
dimers through the helix-loop-helix (HLH) motif and bind to a specific cis
acting element referred as E-box through their basic domain. They have been
classified into distinct classes, based on their structure and pattern of
expression. Class B can only form heterodimers with a class A bHLH protein and
exhibit a restricted spatio-temporal expression. The variety of heterodimeric
complexes formed between two bHLH proteins provides a molecular mechanism
responsible for differential transcriptional regulation of target genes in
different cell types and developmental stages during neurogenesis. A wealth of
data demonstrates that bHLH transcription factors critically contribute to the
events of determination, differentiation, and maintenance during neurogenesis.
However, no specific neuronal target gene have yet been identified. This
proposal deals with the detailed study of the events determination,
differentiation, and maintenance during neurogenesis. However, no sp ecific
neuronal target gene have yet been identified. This proposal deals with the
detailed study of the transcriptional regulation of the mammalian neuronal gene,
GAP-43, which is the first neuronal gene to be modulated by developmentally
regulated bHLH transcription factors. Therefore, the elucidation of the
molecular interactions between the neuronal bHLH transcription factors and the
GAP-43 promoter region will lead to a better understanding of mammalian neuronal
differentiation and the functional roles of bHLH proteins at orchestrating gene
expression at different stages of brain development.