* 9510623
* RUI:  Atomistic Studies of Diffusion and Growth of Materials for Field Emission Technology and the Effect of Alkali     Adsorption
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Lyle Roelofs, Haverford College
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9510623 Roelofs The Principal Investigator will apply powerful, recently
developed, atomistic methods to problems in growth and diffusion on surfaces of
tungsten and molybdenum. This work will provide a theoretical basis for a better
understanding of the reduction of the work function in these materials. The
project includes the investigation of self diffusion via both direct and
concerted modes using extended embedded atom potentials. Using molecular
dynamics the investigator will simulate the fabrication method used to produce
dense arrays of sharp field emitter tips. Such calculations will provide an
important basis for applications to the development of active illumination flat
panel displays. %%% The Principal Investigator will apply powerful, recently
developed, atomistic methods to problems in growth and diffusion on surfaces of
tungsten and molybdenum. Such calculations will provide an important basis for
applications to the development of active illumination flat panel displays (as
in lap-top computers, for example) to replace liquid crystal technology. This
Research in Undergraduate Institutions activity continues the excellent training
that the investigator has provided previously. An active collaborative
arrangement with Sandia National Laboratory in Livermore, CA will continue. ***