* 9510373
* GIG:  Multidisciplinary Research in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Samuel Buss, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9510373 Buss This grant will enable the acquisition of computer equipment and
enhancement of infrastructure for mathematics research by a group of researchers
and students at the University of California, San Diego to support research and
research-related instructiolal activities. The multidisciplinary projects
include research in combinatorics and combinatorical algebra, computer algebra,
parallel algorithms in computer algebra, harmonic analysis and graph theory,
control theory, automated theorem proving, and other areas of mathematics. The
grant will fund computer laboratory and computer equipment for general use by
faculty. students and visiting researchers at the mathematics department at the
University of California. San Diego. The primary purposes of the laboratory will
be for research and for graduate student training. The grant will contain funds
for the acquisition and installation of computer equipment. It contains no
salary funding for investigators or staff. It includes directly matching funds
of $50,000 from the University of California, San Diego and additional
substantial support from UCSD in the form of networking and cabling. In
addition, the University of California, San Diego has just committed an
additional $31,000 per year in permanent funds to the mathematics department
budget to be used for hiring computer support personnel (this is contingent on
the details of the forthcoming California state budget). ~ f