* 9510876
* Wages, Productivity, and Worker Characteristics
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* David Neumark, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1999
* USD 241,069.00

9510876 Neumark Lack of data on worker productivity plagues numerous areas of
empirical research related to issues of wage determination and productivity:
life-cycle earnings, wage discrimination, returns to education, effects of
marriage, job-specific human capital, industry rents, etc. For example, with
data only on wages and worker characteristics over the life cycle, it is
difficult to distinguish human capital models of wage growth from models of
long-term, incentive compatible contracts. Typical wage regressions reveal
positive effects of age on wages, conditional on a variety of covariates, but
these positive effects neither prove nor disprove that mature workers are more
productive than younger ones. This project will be the first to use U.S. data to
estimate and compare plant- or firm-level estimates of wage and marginal
productivity differentials. The productivity and wage estimates will be analyzed
in the contexts of such commonly debated topics as race and sex discrimination
in wages, the causes of rising wage profiles over the life cycle, and the
returns to education and marriage. This project takes a production function
approach to plants technologies, in which workers with different characteristics
are treated as substitute labor inputs in the plant, but with potentially
different marginal products. The modeling and estimation strategy permit a
direct comparison of estimates of relative wages of workers with different
characteristics with estimates of relative marginal productivities. he approach
is applied to U.S. data using a match between long-form respondents to the 1990
Decennial Census, uho work in the manufacturing sector, and data on their
employers from the Longitudinal Research Database. The employer-employee matched
data set, the Worker-Establishment Characteristics Database (WECD), combines
information with which to estimate production functions (such as value of
output, cost of materials, capital, and employment), with information on
earnings and demographic characteristics of the workers. This is a unique data
set. Previously available U.S. plant-level or firm-level data sets only contain
breakdowns of workers into production and non-production workers, and previously
available worker-level data sets contain little information on the employers.