* 9510378
* Improvement of a Research Program in Flavor Chemistry by the Addition of Chiral Gas Chromatography
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Mary Chisholm, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 07/31/1998
* USD 51,460.00

This Career Advancement Award for Women in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program is in support of an ongoing research program in the flavor chemistry of
wines. During the tenure of this one year standard grant, Professor Mary G.
Chisholm will spend nine months at the Lord Zuckerman Research Centre in
Reading, UK to gain exposure to new technology in food science to support her
research program. Upon her return she will train undergraduate students at the
Penn. State Erie-Behrend College in multidimensional gas chromatography (MDGC)
to isolate flavor bodies in wines. Chirality is known to play a major role in
taste and odor perception, although few methods exist to date to quantitate this
effect. Prof. Chisholm will investigate use of chiral gas chromatography using
modified cyclodextrin columns to study the role of enantiomeric components in
determining the flavor and aroma in wines and other foods. Results from this
work should allow a more objective means of correlating the chemical composition
of foods to their sensory evaluation. In the past, the evaluation of color in
food, clothing, paints, etc. was solely a subjective visual evaluation fraught
with variability and misinterpretation. Today, a modern system of spectroscopic,
computational, and sensory evaluations are made for quantitative color
comparison. A comparable system does not yet exist in flavor testing. Flavor
perception involves a combination of taste, odor, and texture and the interplay
of these factors is not well- understood. To date, flavor evaluation in foods
and beverages is still a very subjective test. Out of the hundreds of compounds
that may exist in a food ingredient, only a few may contribute to the observed
flavor. In many cases the "aroma-active" component may have the same chemical
formula, but may differ only in the spatial orientation of chemical functional
groups. A combination of analytical testing, sensory evaluation, statistical and
computational methodology may be needed to id entify the flavor contributing
species in food. Prof. Chisholm and her undergraduate students at PA St. Erie-
Behrend will use a combination of CHARM analysis (sensory evaluation of volatile
food components from a gas chromatograph) and MDGC (controlled concentration and
high resolution separation of gaseous analyte) to better define those factors
contributing to flavor in various wines. In addition, Prof. Chisholm will spend
a nine month sabbatical in one of the top Food Science institutions in Europe
studying the application of these techniques to wines.