* 9510259
* Theoretical Study of Dislocation Processes in B2            Intermetallic Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,12/31/2000
* Murray Daw, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 170,000.00

9510259 Daw This work investigates the fine structure of dislocations in the
FeAl and NiAl pseudobinary systems. Specifically, it studies the details of
dislocations and dislocation reactions in these compounds, using both atomistic
(embedded- atom and tight-binding/density-matrix methods) and anisotropic
continuum calculations. The investigator will explore four key features: (1) the
core structure and mobility of a<111> dislocations; (2) the source of the yield
strength anomaly; (3) the mechanism of the slip transition; and (4) deformation
mechanisms above the slip transition. He is closely coordinating this
theoretical work with the experimental efforts of Prof. Mike Mills of The Ohio
State University. Such work will help to determine strategies for obtaining
improved low-temperature ductility and high- temperature strength in these
compounds. %%% This project theoretically investigates the properties of a class
of intermetallic compounds, namely, iron-aluminum and nickel-aluminum. These
materials are of considerable technological interest due to their attractive
high- temperature properties and excellent oxidation and corrosion resistance
(that is, they keep from rusting or breaking down). Applications include
aerospace turbines, semiconductor coatings, and automotive components. In
particular, the investigator will look at linear defects in these materials
called dislocations that are responsible for many of the properties of interest.
Once scientists better understand the dislocations, then they can develop better
strategies in obtaining improved properties. The investigator is closely
coordinating this theoretical work with the experimental efforts of Prof. Mike
Mills of The Ohio State University. ***