* 9510299
* Morphotropic Phase Boundary Systems in Ferroelectric        Tungsten Bronze Family
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Ruyan Guo, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 12/31/1999
* USD 221,976.00

9510299 Guo This research project will explore the synthesis and processing of
selected solid solution compositions in the ferroelectric tungsten bronze
materials family that contain morphotropic phase boundary regions. Single
crystals in fiber form of small dimensions (&lt; mm in diameter) will be grown
using the laser heated pedestal growth technique. Material characterizations
will be carried out that include measurements of structural, chemical, thermal,
ferroelectric (dielectric and pyroelectric), and electrooptic properties. The
primary goal is to assess the characteristics of such phase boundaries and to
gain fundamental understanding of property-structure-composition relations.
Various morphotropic phase boundary systems are potentially available in this
materials family, and provide possibilities for new materials with enhanced and
switchable properties. The project expects to provide guidelines for the
selection, synthesis, and modification of the morphotropic phase boundaries of
ferroelectric tungsten bronze materials with desired and controllable properties
for ferroelectric and electrooptic device applications. %%% Systematic studies
will be conducted to obtain an overall grasp of the characteristics of
morphotropic phase boundary systems in oxide ferroelectric tungsten bronzes, and
a fundamental understanding of the interrelation among physical and chemical
properties, the macro- and micro-structure, and the chemical composition. An
important feature of the program is the training of graduate and undergraduate
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area of materials
and processing research, and to improve diversity in science through the support
of women. This research will contribute to improving the general performance of
advanced optical devices used in information storage and processing. ***