* 9510936
* Incarceration and the Welfare State: Patterns of Social Control in Capitalist Democracies
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* John Sutton, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 11/30/1999
* USD 49,982.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 6m D C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t 4 O b j e c t
P o o l < D < D 4 @ * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 8 (e (A K ? p '~? 9510936 Sutton This project examines the
interactions among the system of prisons and mental health hospitals,
institutions of social control, and welfare politics in a sizable sample of
capitalist democracies. It will describe and test theories about these
interactions using dynamic, diachronic models placed into a historical and
political context. Two basic questions underlie the analysis. First, are the
inmate capacities of prisons and mental hospitals related to each other? Second,
how are these patterns of incarceration related to patterns of social welfare?
Esping-Anderson s typology of social welfare regimes is used to develop
hypotheses about the links between welfare and social control. Quantitative
analyses will be placed in historical context using data drawn from secondary
studies and government reports. %%%% This project examines the interactions
among the system of prisons and mental health hospitals, institutions of social
control, and welfare politics in a sizable sample of capitalist democracies. It
will describe and test theories about these interactions using dynamic,
diachronic models placed into a historical and political context. Two basic
questions underlie the analysis. First, are the inmate capacities of prisons and
mental hospitals related to each other? Second, how are these patterns of
incarceration related to patterns of social welfare? Esping-Anderson s typology
of social welfare regimes is used to develop hypotheses about the links between
welfare and social control. Quantitative analyses will be placed in historical
context using data drawn from secondary studies and government reports. **** ;
Oh +' 0 ( L p $ H l N:\WW60\NORMAL.DOT 95-10936 C. Neal Tate C. Neal Tate @ D @
@ D S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ) @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 e = e 4 l l l
l l l l h C * J T 5 h l h l l l l l l l l e 9510936 Sutton This project examines
the interactions among the system of prisons and mental health hospitals,
institutions of social control, and welfare politics in a sizable sample of
capitalist democracies. It will describe and test theories about these
interactions using dynamic, diachronic models placed into a historical and
political context. Two basic questions underlie the analysis. First, are the
inmate capacities of prisons and mental hospitals related to each other? Second,
how are these patterns of incarceration related to patterns of social welfare?
Esping-Anderson s typology of social welfare regimes is used to develop
hypotheses about the links between welfare and social control. Quantitative
analyses will be placed in historical context using data drawn from secondary
studies and government reports. %%%% This project examines the interactions
among the system of prisons and mental health hospitals, institutions of social
control, and welfare politics in a sizable sample of capitalist democracies. It
will describe and test theories about the