* 9510015
* (ESH) The Interpretation of Climate from Leaf Forms:        Application to the Miocene of Africa
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Bonnie Jacobs, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 07/31/1997
* USD 41,469.00

9510015 Jacobs The proposed research aims to define the statistical
relationships between modern leaf form and climate in equatorial Africa, and
from them, to estimate paleoclimate for middle to late Miocene (14 to 5 Ma) leaf
assemblages from Kenya. To achieve these goals, herbarium sheets of species from
30 living plant communities across Africa will be videotaped and leaf images
will be analyzed using Optimas. Information on leaf area, length, breadth,
perimeter, and margin (entire or not, presence or absence of compound teeth,
presence or absence of drip tip) will be recorded. Monthly climate data obtained
from published sources, the U.S. Data Center, and the Ulited Nations
Environmental Program Global Resource Information Database (GRID) will be mapped
as contours on a base map of Africa using GSMAP and related utilities. Climate
data for each plant site will be read from the map and interpolations will be
checked by consulting local station records where possible. The leaf and climate
data will be analyzed by appropriate statistical methods depending upon
distributions and relationships among the variables. For example, multivariate
methods such as correspondence analysis and canonical correspondence analysis,
which are intended for nonlinear data, may be appropriate. The resulting
statistical relationships will be calibrated. The calibration will be tested for
accuracy by applying it to modern sites not included in the analysis. If
climatic parameters of modern assemblages are estimated accurately, then the
technique can be used to reconstruct climate for Miocene leaf assemblages. The
middle to late Miocene is a significant time interval because the human family
originated in Africa during that time. Further, modern atmospheric circulation
patterns, most importantly the Asian monsoon, are thought to have originated in
the Miocene (Quade et al., 1989; Prell et al., 1992). Monsoonal circulation is,
in part, responsible for the distribution of modern plant communities, including
savannas and grasslands. The origin of these biomes, perhaps coincident with the
origin of the monsoons and the origin of hominids, remains a controversial
subject (Retallack, 1992; Cerling et al., 1991; Kingston et al, 1994; Wheeler,
1991; Lovejoy, 1981). Similarly, hypotheses that explain disjunct distributions
of modern forest species in East and West Africa suggest fragmentation of middle
Miocene continuous forest as a causal factor (Lovett, 1993). The paleobotanical
record for this time period offers a direct test for these hypotheses. In
addition, the fossil record of most equatorial plant species is poor. The study
of paleobotanical sites offers an opportunity to make contributions regarding
phylogenetic relationships and biogeographic history of the living flora.