* 9510017
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Polymeric Photorefractive Materials   for Optical Image Processing
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Lian Li, Molecular Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 292,106.00

*** 9510017 Li This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop practical polymeric photorefractive materials based on conjugated
polymers for optical image processing. The proposed research will focus on
design, synthesis, and processing of conjugated polymer-based photorefractive
materials with large optical nonlinearities, high photoconductivity and large
charge carrier mobilities. The results obtained from Phase I demonstrated that
polythiophene-based conjugated polymers with nonlinear optical (NLO)
functionalities can exhibit the photorefractive effect. Large two beam coupling
(TBC) gain coefficient has been measured. Based on the Phase I effort, the Phase
II research will concentrate on the enhancement of the photorefractive
properties of conjugated polymer-based materials. Several approaches are
proposed to boost up the electro-optic coefficients and the photoconductivity of
the materials. In addition, the intrinsically large charge carrier mobilities in
the conjugated polymers are expected to provide an edge over currently existing
polymeric photorefractive materials. These conjugated materials will be
characterized for their linear optical and NLO properties, photoconductivity, as
well as the charge carrier mobility. TBC and degenerate four wave mixing (FWM)
experiments will be carried out to study the photorefractive properties of the
materials. These novel materials are expected to surpass the polymeric
photorefractive materials so far reported both in speed and sensitivity. To
demonstrate the application of the novel photorefractive materials for
information storage and image processing, holographic image recording and
retrieval experiments will be performed on these materials. Development of
practical polymeric photorefractive materials would yield an inexpensive and
efficient holographic recording medium for waveguide photorefractive
technologies, with applications in the areas of real-time image processing,
high-density optical data sto rage, holographic optical interconnects,
associative memories, phase conjugation, optical incoherent to coherent
converters and beam steering. Also, such materials are suited for devices for
industrial control and automation, based on real-time optical interferometry.
***