* 9510954
* Intertemporal Choice for Health and Money
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Gretchen Chapman, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 06/30/1998
* USD 155,986.00

The PI proposes eight studies designed to compare temporal discounting for
health and money. In Experiment 1 the PI will test the hypothesis that previous
research found different discount rates in the two domains because subjects were
unfamiliar with the hypothetical medical scenarios. In this study patients with
one disease will be given two scenarios--one pertaining to a medical condition
they actually have and one pertaining to an unfamiliar medical condition.
Experiment 2 will use real monetary outcomes rather than hypothetical scenarios
to investigate participants' financial decisions. In a third experiment the PI
will manipulate the extent to which health can be traded for money. The
principle being examined here is that different discount rates in the two
domains may be due to the fact that in some situations the money cannot readily
be traded for health. Experiment 4 investigates whether health and money have
different discount rates because savoring or dreading impending health or
financial consequences may distort traditional temporal discounting. Experiment
5 examines the potential role of anticipation and regret in temporal
discounting. In Experiment 6 the PI will test the hypothesis that health and
money have different discount rates because health is considered to be less
replaceable than money. In Experiment 7 the PI will compare the discount rates
for exercise class members and non-members. The hypothesis is that class members
will have a lower discount rate, particularly in the health domain. An attempt
will also be made to examine the relation between discount rates and self-
reported health behaviors. In Experiment 8 an attempt will be made to alter
discount rates by framing a scenario either in terms of a loss or a gain. The
primary goal of the research is to evaluate various reasons why decision makers
use different discount rates for health and money. A second goal is to examine
the relationship between discount rates and various preventive health behaviors.
The r esearch has important implications for the formulation of social policy
with regard to health outcomes.