* 9510888
* Abstract Case, Morphological Case, and the Minimalist       Program
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Howard Lasnik, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 08/31/1997
* USD 17,619.00

A recent trend in generative syntax has been the development of a minimalist
program. This minimalism shows up in two distinct ways. First, derivations and
representations conform to an 'economy' criterion demanding that they be
minimal; no extra steps in derivations and no extra symbols in representations
are allowed. Second, the theory itself is developing in the direction of
minimality. Thus, in place of a variety of distinct earlier transformations we
have Affect a; conditions on transformations and representations avoid
redundancy by not overlapping in their effects, etc. Chomsky (1993) has recently
suggested carrying this minimalist program still further with a proposal that a
syntactic representation consists not of the familiar four levels, D-structure,
S-structure, Phonetic Form, and Logical Form, but rather, only the latter two -
the apparently irreducible 'interface levels', which provide instructions for
the articulatory-perceptual and conceptual-intentional performance systems.
Since virtually every module of the theory appears to display strong S-structure
effects, the success of the minimalist program depends on the reduction of all
such requirements to LF and PF well-formedness conditions, and/or to general
economy considerations. The goal of this project is to explore the possibility
of such a reduction in Case theory and the form that the resulting minimalist
theory of Case might have. The emphasis will be on two types of Case standardly
treated as polar opposites: 'inherent' Case, which has thematic import, and
'exceptional' Case, which by definition has no thematic import. The possibility
of unifying the two Case types will be explored. Data from Serbo-Croatian, a
language which due to its rich overt Case-marking provides more accessible data
pertaining to Case theory than English, will be used in the investigation of
inherent Case. The conclusions reached during the investigation are expected to
have considerable theoretical importance, si nce Case theory plays a central
role in the grammar and crucially interacts with a number of other modules.