* 9510731
* Current Enhancement by Fission-Induced Columnar Defects in  High Temperature Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* James Thompson, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 80,000.00

9510731 Thompson This project will investigate the effect of fission-induced
columnar defects on vortex pinning in a variety of high-Tc materials, such as
practical Pb-doped Bi-2223/Ag composite wire or tapes, Hg-based cuprate
epitaxial films and bulk materials, and Bi-2212 single crystals. The goal is to
develop practical ways to enhance the critical current density, Jc, in these
materials via deliberate introduction of extended defects with GeV range light
particle irradiation, with potential for scale-up to large prefabricated
structures. The project incorporates a focused joint effort of groups at the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and at IBM T. J. Watson Research Center,
with demonstrated expertise in studies of superconductors and in various
magnetic and transport methods. The project also draws on the expertise and
irradiation facilities at Los Alamos National Laboratory and on fabrication of
wires and tapes at the American Superconductor Corporation. %%% Large-scale
applications of high temperature superconductors are not yet possible due to
difficulties in manufacturing wires or tapes capable of carrying large currents,
that is, having large critical current densities, Jc, sustainable in high
magnetic fields. The problems are related to dissipative motion of current
"vortices" which are intrinsic to the high-Tc materials in the presence of
magnetic fields. This project employs radiation induced damage centers, or
columnar defects, which act to "pin" the vortices so they are unable to move,
and, as a result, greatly enhance the current carrying properties of the
materials. The project incorporates a focused joint effort of groups at the
University of Tennessee, Knoxville, and at IBM T. J. Watson Research Center,
with demonstrated expertise in studies of superconductors and in various
magnetic and transport methods. The project also draws on t he expertise and
irradiation facilities at Los Alamos National Laboratory and on fabrication of
wires and tapes at the American Superconductor Corporation. ***