* 9510976
* Investing in Justice:  The Nature and Process of Contingent Fee Legal Practice
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Herbert Kritzer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/1999
* USD 151,018.00

9510976 Kritzer Contingent legal fees are a central feature of the American
civil justice system. The persistent controversy surrounding them pits those
concerned about access to justice, especially for the disadvantaged, the poor,
or deprived, against those concerned about excessive litigiousness and its
effects on economic costs and productivity. Existing research has focused on the
contingent fee at a case level and has focused on the potential conflict of
interest that arises between lawyer and client as well as the lawyer's
incentives in individual cases. This project will seek to enhance our
understanding of the consequences of contingent fees by shifting the focus from
the individual case to the contingent fee practice. The empirical research to be
conducted, cast in a portfolio theory perspective, will help determine whether
conclusions about contingency fees and their consequences should be revised when
placed into the actual contexts of contingency fee practices. The research will
be based on a survey of, at work observation of, and semi-structured interviews
with contingent fee lawyers. This multi-method approach will provide breadth and
depth to our understanding of contingent fee practice. %%%% Contingent legal
fees are a central feature of the American civil justice system. The persistent
controversy surrounding them pits those concerned about access to justice,
especially for the disadvantaged, the poor, or deprived, against those concerned
about excessive litigiousness and its effects on economic costs and
productivity. Existing research has focused on the contingent fee at a case
level and has focused on the potential conflict of interest that arises between
lawyer and client as well as the lawyer's incentives in individual cases. This
project will seek to enhance our understanding of the consequences of contingent
fees by shifting the focus from the individual case to the contingent fee
practice. The empirical research to be conducted, cast in a portfolio theory
perspective, will help determine whether conclusions about contingency fees and
their consequences should be revised when placed into the actual contexts of
contingency fee practices. The research will be based on a survey of, at work
observation of, and semi-structured interviews with contingent fee lawyers. This
multi-method approach will provide breadth and depth to our understanding of
contingent fee practice. ****