* 9510139
* Growth and Characterization of MOVPE III-V Semiconductors   Doped With Rare Earths
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Kevin Bray, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1999
* USD 450,550.00

9510139 Bray This collaborative, interdisciplinary research project focuses on
the preparation and characterization of rare earth doped III-V semiconductors;
these materials provide the potential of combining the convenience of electrical
excitation offered by semiconductors with the temperature stable sharp line
luminescence features of rare earth ions. The goal of MOVPE film growth studies
is to identify the conditions necessary to obtain optimal concentrations of rare
earth ions without dopant precipitation or degradation of materials quality or
properties. Characterization studies will emphasize the relationship of the
optical and electrical properties of the proposed systems to the growth process.
Optical studies will include photoluminescence, electroluminescence,
luminescence lifetime, luminescence excitation, absorption and near field
scanning optical microscopy measurements. These studies seek to elucidate
mechanisms of rare earth excitation and thermal quenching. High pressure studies
will be conducted to study the effect of band structure on the luminescence
properties of the proposed systems, and will also be used to determine the
alignment of rare earth energy levels relative to the band edges of the proposed
semiconductors. Systems found to be promising in electroluminescence studies
will be fabricated into diode and waveguide structures and tested for their
suitability in these applications. %%% The primary goal of this program is to
develop a fundamental understanding of the electronic and photonic properties
and the epitaxial growth and processing of rare-earth doped semiconductor
materials so that they can be exploited in the realization of a variety of
advanced electronic and photonic devices. An important feature of the program is
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area of materials and processing research. This
research will contribute to improving the general performance of advanced
devices and integr ated circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications. ***