* 9510464
* Vortex Dynamics in Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Christopher Lobb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9510464 Lobb Vortices in type-II superconductors move in response to external
forces, causing a measurable electric field in the superconductor. In spite of
significant research on conventional superconductors the advent of high-
temperature superconductors has shown that vortex motion is not very well
understood. The initial evidence for this was provided by measurements of the
Hall effect in the vortex state, which showed motion opposite to the direction
predicted by conventional theory. Subsequent measurements have shown anomalies
in the Nernst effect, as well as surprising non-linear effects. The proposed
work will extend our earlier work in this field, studying Hall and longitudinal
conductivity, the dynamics of strongly-driven vortices, vortex motion in ultra-
thin superconducting films, vortex motion induced by temperature gradients, a
modified Giaever flux transformer experiment, and the effect of order-parameter
symmetry on vortexdynamics. . %%% When a magnetic field is applied to type-II
superconductors such as high-temperature superconductors, it penetrates the
material in the form of vortices containing a quantum of magnetic flux. Motion
of these vortices creates an electric filed in the superconductor, which leads,
for example, to non-zero resistivity when current is present. Since most
applications of superconductors rely on zero resistivity, understanding of
vortex motion is important. The research proposed here is aimed toward
understanding vortex motion resulting from a number of different driving forces.
The resistance and Hall resistance of superconductors will be measured, with
emphasis on nonlinear effects as the current is varied, to understand the effect
of pinning, vortex-vortex interactions, quantum states in vortex core, and
possible effects of order-parameter symmetry. The motion of vo rtices in
response to temperature gradients will also be measured, which provides an
alternative area for testing theories of vortex motion, as well as providing a
unique probe for studying the internal structure of vortices. . ***