* 9510434
* Neutron and Synchrotron Radiation Scattering Studies of     Multilayered Structures Based on Europium Chalcogenides and other Magnetic Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Tomasz Giebultowicz, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 179,834.00

9510434 Giebultowicz The objective of the proposed research is to use neutron
diffraction, neutron reflectivity, and synchrotron radiation reflectivity for
investigating magnetic and structural properties of novel superlattices composed
of mangetic/non-magnetic semiconductors. Most research on artificial magnetic
heterostructures and multilayers has been done on metallic systems; experimental
and theoretical results for low carrier concentration systems have only recently
begun emerging. Studies of such systems are of fundamental importance because
the interaction mechanisms underlying their magnetic properties differ from
those of metals. Also, heterostructures and multilayers composed of insulating
or semiconducting compounds are interesting in that many of these materials are
antiferromagnets, frequently having layered structures, thus offering
opportunities for "engineering" the superlattices. Systems to be studied will be
based primarily on europium and manganese chalcogenides, with samples prepared
by molecular beam epitaxy at the Johannes Kepler University, Linz, Austria.
Neutron scattering studies will be conducted primarily at the National Institute
of Science and Technology, and X-ray measurements at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. Complementary measurements of magnetic properties will be made at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. %%% The objective of the proposed
research is to use neutron scattering and synchrotron X-radiation techniques to
investigate the magnetic and structural properties of multilayer atomic
"superlattices" built up from magnetic and non-magnetic semiconducting
materials. Studies of such systems are of fundamental importance because the
physical mechanisms by which the atoms in one magnetic layer interact (i.e.,
communicate) with those in another magnetic layer through an intervening non-
magneti c layer are poorly understood and differ significantly from the
mechanisms which apply in the case of metallic multilayer superlattices. The
materials to be investigated will be based primarily on magnetic europium and
manganese selenides and tellurides and non-magnetic lead selenide and telluride.
This is a multidisciplinary project, with samples being prepared at the Johannes
Kepler University, Linz, Austria, and experimental work carried out at the
National Institute of Standards and Technology and at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory. In addition, complementary measurements of the magnetic properties
will be made at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. ***