* 9510492
* Mathematical Sciences: Mathematical Studies of Wave         Propagation
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Cheryl Hile, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 11/30/1996
* USD 17,934.00

9510492 Hile This work is supported by a Research Planning Grant for Women
Scientists and Engineers Award. The goal of the research is two-fold: (i) to
understand which higher-order dispersive and nonlinear effects cause the
asymmetry apparent in certain one-dimensional solutions of Maxwell's equations
describing ultra-short optical soliton-like pulses, and to determine if a
corresponding extended nonlinear Schroedinger equation can be developed to
describe the asymmetric pulses produced in pulse- compression experiments; and
(ii) to determine the physical parameters responsible for the divergence or
collapse of two-dimensional ultra-short spatial solitons propagating in a planar
waveguide. The project will also involve planning activities in collaboration
with a senior mathematician from industry to determine the feasibility of
developing an innovative technique for efficiently predicting high-frequency
radar cross-section statistics for realistic, complex targets. Over the last
decade, optical fiber communication systems have played a vital role in
revolutionizing the telecommunications industry. Though this technology has
progressed very rapidly, advances continue to be made in the design of these
systems. Areas of current research in the field, which hold great interest and
challenge for mathematicians, involve physical phenomena and processes that
exploit the nonlinear effects in optical materials. These physical phenomena and
processes include optical solitons, optical pulse compression, and optical
switching. This project will involve goals and planning activities that include
developing and analyzing mathematical models of these nonlinear phenomena and
processes in order to improve the design of optical communications systems. The
National Science Foundation's mandate to ensure the vitality of the Nation's
scientific enterprise includes concern for the quality, composition,
distribution and effectiveness of the human resou rce base in science and
engineering. Within this context, the Foundation is committed to enhancing the
current rate of participation of women in science and engineering careers, in
general, and as active participants in all of its programs. Research Planning
Grant awards are made: (1) to help increase the number of new women
investigators participating in NSF's research programs; and, (2) to facilitate
preliminary studies and other activities related to the development of
competitive research projects and proposals by women who have not previously had
independent Federal research funding. Research Planning Grants are one-time
awards that may be used for preliminary work to determine the feasibility of a
proposed line of inquiry, and/or for other activities that will facilitate
proposal development.