* 9510460
* Propagation of Light in Colloidal Crystals:  Photonic Band  Structure and Localization
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1995,08/31/1999
* George Watson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 188,434.00

9510460 Watson Colloidal crystals, fabricated from microsphere dielectric
particles, can be tailored to satisfy the Bragg condition for visible and near
infrared light. The interaction of light with the optical lattice results in
photonic band structure that is analogous to electronic band structure in atomic
crystals. Spectroscopic and interferometric determination of photonic band
structure will be extended from the visible to the near infrared. In addition to
continued investigation of photonic band structure in theses crystals and its
implications for photon localization, new initiatives include the study of (1)
impurity modes in photonic stop bands and (2) interaction of band structure
effects and nonlinear optical properties. %%% The technological developments of
the past 50 years, initiated with the invention of the transistor, were possible
only by the extensive and continued research of the physical properties of
semiconductor materials. Future photonic analogs of today's electronic devices,
where light action replaces that of the electron, may sustain these
technological advancements at the current rate. The behavior of light in
photonics crystals wil l be experimentally studied by numerous optical methods
in an attempt to understand the issues of photon transport and localization in
future devices, and its relationship to electron transport and localization in
current devices.***