* 9510241
* Neutron Scattering Studies of Magnetic Semiconductors and their Superlattices
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Jacek Furdyna, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 195,000.00

9510241 Furdyna The objective of the proposed research is to investigate
magnetic ordering and magnetic interactions in cubic manganese telluride and
manganese selenide, as well as in their multilayers and alloys, by means of
neutron scattering techniques. These materials, which do not occur naturally but
can be fabricated in this crystal phase by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), hold
great fundamental interest because their manganese sublattices consititute
frustrated Heisenberg antiferromagnets governed by short-range interactions. MBE
provides the opportunity to vary in a controlled fashion various degrees of
freedom which directly affect their magnetic behavior, such as strain, magnetic
layer separation, dilution, and dimensionality, thus accessing a variety of
fundamentally new problems in magnetism. The research will focus strongly on
investigating the coupling between magnetic layers in order to understand the
nature and range of manganese-manganese interactions beyond those involving
nearest neighbors. New neutron scattering experiments will be initiated, using
ultrathin layers of these materials, in an effort to observe the crossover from
three to two dimensions, and ultimately to investigate magnetic interactions in
the two-dimensional limit itself. Samples will be prepared at Notre Dame
University, and the neutron scattering experiments will be conducted primarily
at the Missouri University Research Reactor. %%% The objective of the proposed
research is to investigate magnetic ordering and magnetic interactions in thin
layers of cubic manganese telluride and manganese selenide, as well as in
multilayers and alloys thereof, using neutron scattering techniques. These
materials, which do not occur naturally but can be grown in this structural form
by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) hold great fundamental interest because the
manganese ions form "frustrate d" antiferromagnetic structures governed by
short-range interactions between the ions. The growth technique permits the
controlled variation of factors that directly affect the magnetic behavior, such
as strain, separation of the magnetic layers, dilution of the magnetic ions,
etc., thereby providing access to a range of fundamentally new problems in
magnetism. The research will focus strongly on investigating the coupling
between magnetic layers in order to understand the nature and range of
interactions between the manganese ions. New neutron scattering experiments will
be initiated, using ultrathin layers of these materials, in an effort to observe
the crossover from three to two dimensional magnetic behavior. Samples will be
prepared at Notre Dame University, and the neutron scattering experiments will
be conducted primarily at the Missouri University Research Reactor. ***