* 9510521
* GOALI/FSI/Graduate Student Traineeship Site:  Re-engineering Manufacturing Operations
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Celestine Ntuen, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 07/31/1997
* USD 49,726.00

9510521 Ntuen This internship project is focused on graduate students
apprenticeship in industry to improve graduate students skills in analyzing
problems, formulate solution methodology, and identifying critical research
problems which if solved can reengineer a company's processes. This projects
builds on an existing program with the sponsor company. The existing
relationship is an undergraduate apprenticeship program which the PI institution
has with the company. This project will make it possible to expand the
apprenticeship program to graduate students. Under the graduate apprenticeship,
students will conduct research on specific topics jointly determined by the PI
and the industrial partner to foster innovation and creative approaches to the
implementation of the company's production goals. The program will expose the
graduate students to the philosophies of management, research, product
development, operations, manufacturing, and marketing. Specific aspects of the
apprenticeship experience will involve the students to (1) work with company
engineers to analyze the current operating and manufacturing strategies and
identify major areas for re-engineering initiative, (2) develop guidelines for
re-engineering processes, operations, maintenance, distribution, and logistics,
and (3) develop a domain specific in-house simulation model for real time
performance analysis of the company's operations at various phases of
manufacturing. A core element of the project is the creation of an environment
in an actually industrial setting where graduate students can be challenged with
real manufacturing problems. This experience can be used by the students to
enhance their graduate school experiences. This experience can translate to the
generation of industry motivated graduate theses research. On the other hand,
the industrial partner will benefit from the fresh insights of students whose
main objectives are to enhance their problem solving skills and experiences in a
real industrial setting. F urthermore, the algorithms developed as part of the
collaboration can prove very valuable to the industrial partner.