* 9510394
* Dynamics and Scaling in Materials Physics
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Jean Carlson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/1998
* USD 159,000.00

9510394 Carlson This research addresses complex systems far from equilibrium.
New theoretical techniques are developed and exploited to study projects that
have an array of applications, including fracture, earthquakes, friction,
granular flow, and biological systems. The first topic focuses on transport
properties of both models and real systems that the PI and others have studied
in the context of self-organized criticality. The second topic involves
continuing work in the area of modeling earthquake dynamics, as well as the
development of new microscopic models for friction and granular flow. The third
topic addresses the development and testing of prediction algorithms for
spatially extended systems. %%% Many systems that we seek to understand in the
world around us are far from equilibrium. Examples include fracture (breaking of
materials), earthquakes, friction, granular flow, and biological systems. This
project will continue the work of the Principal Investigator in addressing such
phenomena theoretically. One topic involves studying a particular approach
called self-organized criticality that applies to motion in many of these
situations, at least some of the time. A second topic continues work in the area
of earthquake dynamics as well as developing new models for friction and
granular flow. The results of the study will be directly compared with recent
experimental data. The third major topic involves developing and testing new
algorithms that predict the future based on past for such systems. ***