* 9510572
* GOALI/FSI/Postdoctoral Industrial Fellowship:  Damage       Evolution During Manufacturing of Advanced Materials --     Experiments and Modelling
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1996
* John Lewandowski, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 10/31/1996
* USD 42,000.00

9510572 Lewandowski In this GOALI project, one postdoctoral researcher works at
the site of an industrial partner to collaborate on fundamental research related
to advanced materials processing. The composite material chosen for this study
is discontinuously reinforced aluminum alloy. The processing step for focus is
secondary operations and the damage accrued as a result of particle size and
distribution, matrix microstructure and the stress state. In order to assess a
sufficiently broad range of processing conditions and reinforcement sizes,
discontinuously reinforced aluminum (DRA) with average particle sizes of 5um,
15um and 50um will be produced and extruded to extrusion ratios of 1:2 - 1:20 to
study the effects of particle size and processing parameters on the evolution of
damage during manufacturing of a component as well as to relate these to the
final properties of the component. The level of microstructural damage will be
evaluated through measurements of elastic modulus and poisson ratio evolution,
as well as by quantitative evaluation of cracked particles and other damage on
polished sections. In parallel with the experimental program where work is
carried out at the industrial site, a simple model using Monte Carlo simulation
approach will be developed at the university to predict the probability of
significantly large defects arising in the final components via coalescence of
the micro damage. This study will be essential in understanding of the evolution
of microstructures and property changes which accompany various processing
conditions and thereby aid in the manufacturing of reliable DRA components.
Advanced composites using continuous fiber reinforced materials are currently
used in niche applications such as military aircrafts and sporting goods. While
continuous fibers mandate specialized processing, discontinuous fibers offers
the opportunity to fit into conventional processing with minimum capital
implications. Successful completion of this research has the po tential to
expand the composite use into automotive and other high volume applications.
Further, by supporting a researcher from academe to live and breathe in the
industry setting, a greater collaboration between research and practice may be
realized.