* 9510422
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Politics of Inclusion: Natural Resource Rules and Conflict in Indonesian Borneo
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Nancy Peluso, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 12/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9510422 Peluso This research examines the local consequences of extralocal
resource management agendas and the historical roots of conflict between local
user groups in Danau Sentarum, West Kalimantan, Indonesian Borneo. The Danau
Sentarum area is, under Indonesian law, a wildlife reserve that officially
contains no legal human settlement. In fact, however, best estimates number the
permanent residents of the region at 3,000-4,000, and this number is growing.
These residents depend upon fish, forest products, and game, the very resources
the internationally-funded wildlife reserve project is intended to protect. In
addition, the area is important nationally for timber and fish production and
for maintaining hydrologic processes, especially the buffering of downstream
flooding. Thus the region is at the intersection of the interests of numerous
local, regional, national, and international groups. In this setting, the
research will focus on (1) how rules for allocation and management of fish
resources have been developed, (2) why villages with similar cultural traditions
and in similar ecological contexts differ in the resource management rules they
develop, (3) how the increased pressure on the resources has affected the
dynamics of the region's social networks, (4) what new resources management
practices have emerged under conditions of increased resource scarcity and
incongruent rule systems, and (5) what effect have these new practices had. %%%%
This research examines the local consequences of extralocal resource management
agendas and the historical roots of conflict between local user groups in the
Danau Sentarum wildlife reserve in West Kalimantan, Indonesian Borneo. The
region's residents depend upon fish, forest products, and game, the very
resources the internationally-funded wildlife reserve project is intended to
protect. In this setting, the research will focus on (1) how rules for
allocation and management of fish resources have been developed, (2) why
villages with similar cultural traditions and in similar ecological contexts
differ in the resource management rules they develop, (3) how the increased
pressure on the resources has affected the dynamics of the region's social
networks, (4) what new resources management practices have emerged under
conditions of increased resource scarcity and incongruent rule systems, and (5)
what effect have these new practices had. ****