* 9510314
* RPG: Endocytosis of the Receptor for Gastrin Releasing      Peptide:  Characterization, Mechanism and Functional        Significance
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Eileen Grady, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 11/30/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9510314 Grady Peptide hormones bind to their receptors on the cell surface, and
induce diverse activities including secretion, muscle contraction, and growth.
Cells rapidly alter their ability to respond to a given peptide. This study
examines processes that alter the ability of a cell to respond to one peptide
hormone, gastrin releasing peptide. This peptide is interesting since tumor
cells secrete this hormone, and grow in response to it. Thus, information gained
my help develop new cancer therapies. The principal investigator has shown that
binding of gastrin releasing peptide to its receptor causes both the hormone and
its receptor to move into the cell, or internalize. The receptor gradually
returns to the cell surface, a process called recycling. Now, the principal
investigator is studying these processes in cells that grow in response to
gastrin releasing peptide. The intracellular location of the receptor is being
determined by microscopy, using fluorescent peptides and antibodies. How
internalization and recycling occur is being studied using drugs that block
cellular processes, such as protein synthesis. The role of internalization in
changing the ability of a cell to respond to gastrin releasing peptide is being
studied by using (1) agents that block this process, and (2) cells that have
mutant receptors that cannot internalize, and testing the ability to bind and
signal with gastrin releasing peptide. Finally, the ability of drugs that block
these processes to alter the growth response to gastrin releasing peptide is
being determined.