* 9510925
* Internationalization of Legal Practice: Human Rights, Trade, and Transformation of the State
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Yves Dezalay, American Bar Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1997
* USD 65,492.00

9510925 Garth This project examines the connection between the
internationalization of legal practice related to issues of trade and human
rights, the transformation of the rule of law and role of the legal profession
in newly developed and developing countries. It investigates the connection
between the legal professions and the prospects for law and democracy in
different settings. Its central proposition is that the role if law in
regulating the economy and governing the state depends on the structural
position of the legal profession in the economy and the state and the social
capital of prestige, social connections, background, and formal and informal
connections legal professionals can mobilize on their own behalf. It focuses on
three types of countries that vary according to the historical position of their
legal professions. It uses, principally, data from elite interviews that focus
on the individuals and institutions that serve to import and export particular
legal practices related to trade and human rights. %%%% This project examines
the connection between the internationalization of legal practice related to
issues of trade and human rights, the transformation of the rule of law and role
of the legal profession in newly developed and developing countries. It
investigates the connection between the legal professions and the prospects for
law and democracy in different settings. Its central proposition is that the
role if law in regulating the economy and governing the state depends on the
structural position of the legal profession in the economy and the state and the
social capital of prestige, social connections, background, and formal and
informal connections legal professionals can mobilize on their own behalf. It
focuses on three types of countries that vary according to the historical
position of their legal professions. It uses, principally, data from elite
interviews that focus on the individuals and institutions that serve to import
and export particular legal p ractices related to trade and human rights. ****