* 9510562
* The Synthesis of New Compounds Containing Metal Clusters    Using Designed Superlattice Reactants to Control the        Kinetics and Reaction Mechanism
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1995,12/31/1998
* David Johnson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1998
* USD 343,359.00

9510562 Johnson This proposal focuses upon the synthesis of new ternary
transition metal chalcogenides which contain discrete clusters of transition
metal atoms. The ternary molybdenum chalcogenides and the alkali metal
intercalates of the fullerines are both examples of this class of compounds,
containing discrete but interacting cluster entities. Both of these classes of
materials have been found to have a host of unusual properties ranging from
catalytic activity to superconductivity which have been rationalized as
resulting from the unique cluster structure found in these materials. The goal
is to prepare tungsten, niobium and tantalum compounds which are isostructural
analogs of the ternary molybdenum chalcogenides. The preparation of
isostructural and isoelectronic compounds to the ternary molybdenum compounds
will permit the testing of these structure based arguments and will hopefully
extend the range of properties found in this unique class of materials which is
some sense bridges the gap between discrete molecular compounds and extended
structures . %%% Chemical reactions involving solids at low temperatures are
very sluggish even though there is often a large driving force for the
reactions. Previous attempts to prepare new ternary transition metal
chalcogenides which contain discrete clusters of transition metal atoms via
reactions between the elements have only produced mixtures of binary compounds
or other ternary structures. This is probably because the desired compounds are
thermodynamically unstable with respect to the known compounds in these phase
diagrams. Consequently, the key to the success to their synthesis will be
avoiding the formation of stable binary compounds as reaction intermediates.
Towards this end, a kinetically controlled route to solid-state compounds is
developed based upon the design of elemental superlattices as uniquely
tailorable reactants. This approach separates the two key steps of a solid state
reaction - interdi ffusion of the reactants and nucleation of the products.
Since product formation is controlled by the lucleation barriers, one is able to
kinetically control the product formed. The development of synthetic tools to
nucleate desired structures is a significant part of the proposed research.