* 9510991
* The Reconstruction of Early Complex Society in Pacific      Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Michael Love, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 191,188.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Love will conduct two
field seasons of excavation and an additional period of analysis at the
archaeological site of Ujuxte, located near the Pacific coast of Guatemala.
Preliminary investigations indicate that Ujuxte began as a planned city at
approximately 600 BC and grew to reach considerable proportions. Survey has
shown that at its peak, it covered over 4 sq kilometers and dominated a number
of secondary centers which contained smaller copies of its ceremonial
architecture. Through his work, Dr. Love wishes to understand the history of the
site and how its social, economic and political organization developed and
changed over time. To accomplish these goals, he will first conduct an intensive
surface survey and collect pottery and other cultural materials. On this basis
he will select a sample of residential structures for excavation. Through the
analysis of ceramics it will be possible to reconstruct a social profile,
determine the extent of economic differentiation and determine if a hierarchical
form of organization existed. Through hydration analysis of obsidian artifacts,
a detailed chronology will be constructed. Early complex societies are now
recognized as fragile and subject to cycles of integration and decomposition.
Dr. Love will investigate one such cycle in a region which has remains of the
earliest complex societies presently known for Mesoamerica. The evolution of
those societies has basic importance for the understanding of Mesoamerican
culture history and can shed light on the mechanisms of the development of
complex society. During the Middle Preclassic period, from ca. 900-600 BC, the
region's first large regional polity, centered on the site of La Blanca, was
constituted and collapsed. Soon after that collapse the nearly site of Ujuxte
first developed. Dr. Love's research examines the transition from the La Blanca
polity to that dominated by Ujuxte. It will compare the two entities in terms of
social organization, economic structures and ideological basis of power. The
research seeks to understand the extent to which the structures of the Ujxute
polity recreated those of La Blanca. To the extent that the structures are
distinct, the research will then ask what conditions enabled Ujuxte to endure
and grow where La Blanca did not.