* 9510042
* Planning and Logistics for IDEAL
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 08/31/1998
* USD 91,955.00

9510042 Johnson The large lakes of the East African Rift Valley are among the
oldest on Earth, and are vital resources for the indigenous people populating
their basins. They are unique among the large lakes of the world in terms of
their sensitivity to climatic change, their rich and diverse populations of
endemic species, their circulation dynamics and water-column chemistry, and
their long, continuous, high-resolution records of past climatic change in the
tropics. A comprehensive study of the large African lakes is long overdue.
Societal need for the sustainable utilization of these important natural
resources offers a compelling reason for examination of biological food webs,
water quality and past climate variability in East Africa. These scientific and
societal issues have stimulated the initiation of the International Decade for
the East African Lakes (IDEAL). The scientific issues to be addressed by IDEAL
were conceived and discussed at the IDEAL Symposium on the Limnology,
Climatology and Paleoclimatology of the East African Lakes, held in Jinja,
Uganda, February 18-22, 1993. Recommendations from this meeting resulted in the
publication of the IDEAL Science and Implementation Plan. This award provides
funds for further planning, logistical management and workshops for the
paleoclimate initiative within IDEAL. Funds will be used for meetings of the
American Steering Committee of IDEAL, coordination between the paleoclimate
community and the other scientific and training initiatives within IDEAL, and
coordination with European and African components of IDEAL. ***