* 9510505
* GIG:  Problems in Low-Dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Martin Scharlemann, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9510505 Long This award is directed towards the infrastructure needs of the
geometric topology group in the areas of graduate student support and in the
hiring of postdoctoral students in the field. The group has a wide range of
interests within and contiguous to the area of geometric topology. The following
indicates the current directions of the researchers: Cooper, Long and
Scharlemann focus on 3- manifolds. One of Cooper's projects is to utilize the
relationship between finite foliations and geometrically finite surfaces in
hyperbolic 3-manifolds. Another is to continue developing the properties of the
A-polynomial for knots which arise from representation theory. A third involves
the theory of buildings applied to representations of the braid group. Long's
specific projects concern the study of finite foliations and the resulting
dynamical systems as well as the application of these ideas to hyperbolic
3-manifolds. He also is working on problems in algebraic geometry and the use of
the degree conjecture to prove Property P, and the finite dimensional linear
representations of the braid groups. Scharlemann's main interest is the
stabilization problem for Heegaard splittings. Success would have important
implications for the general classification problem for 3-manifolds. There are
connections to knot theory as well, via the notion of "tunnel number" for a
knot.One of the most basic observations about the world around us, apparent
almost from our birth, is that it is 3-dimensional. So it is of interest to
understand objects with precisely this property: anyone living in one would see
his or her world as 3- dimensional. Such objects are called "3-manifolds", and
the project aims to increase our understanding of them. 3- manifolds support
interesting phenomena. One of these phenomena is "knotting", in which a simple
object like a garden-hose (or a string of DNA) can be maneuvered so that its
positioning in space is quite complex. More generally , objects like chemical
molecules, usually though of abstractly as "graphs" (much like tinker toy
models), can be put in a 3-manifold in extraordinarily complex ways if one
thinks of the "sticks" as made of rubber which can be knotted and interweaved.
Tools which are being developed to understand 3-manifolds help us understand
knotting and, conversely, understanding knotting (a second principal aim of the
project) helps us understand 3-manifolds. For example, the "Heegaard splittings"
mentioned above refer to a technique in which all the complexity of a general 3-
manifold is absorbed into a thick graph. Then information about the graph gives
information about the 3-manifolds. A more disciplined type of knotting, called
braiding, occurs, for example, in the trajectories of fluid or plasma flow in a
Tokomak-type torus. Since this knotting is more disciplined, more tools are
available for understanding and classifying such knotting. Hence the intereqt in
braid theory and its connections to dynamical systems.