* 9510096
* Very-High-Spin Polyradicals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/1999
* USD 554,000.00

This award iq made jointly by the Organic Dynamic Program and the Advanced
Materials Program in the Chemistry Division in support of the continuing
research of Dr. Andrzej Rajca. Two major efforts will be supported; (1) the
design, synthesis and characterization of very high spin macrocyclic poyradical
systems, and (2) computational and experimental studies on the synthesis and
properties of new carbon allotropes and highly condensed network solids based on
tetra o-phenylene structural units. In the first research area, polyradicals,
all of the triarylmethyl type will be prepared from the corresponding
triarylmethyl-methyl ethers by alkali metal reduction to the carbopolyanions
followed by iodine oxidation. These elongated macrocyclic polyradicals will have
greater than ten spin-coupled electrons and will be designed to minimize defects
which interrupt spin-coupling. In the second research area, solid-state and
molecular calculations using MNDO, EHT, and MM3 methods will provide
thermodynamic stabilities and band structure-properties of the solids.
Experiments will evaluate the structures of the network solids, including their
response to doping. Molecular and polymeric fragments of the solids will be
synthesized, and their solution redox chemistry investigated. Understanding the
behavior of macrocyclic polyradicals and controlling spin coupling defects will
allow the researcher to use them as building blocks for two and three
dimensional network polyradicals, with the potential to be organic ferromagnets
with high Curie temperatures. Synthesis and doping of highly condensed carbon
networks will facilitate preparation of radical ion-and dianion -based molecular
solids which will lead to promising new materials with conducting properties.