* 9510223
* CRUI: Keratinase-Producing Microflora from Feathers
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Edward Burtt, Jr., Ohio Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 08/31/1999
* USD 803,166.00

This project is for Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions,
involving zoology, microbiology, physics, and chemistry. There are strains of
bacteria found in wild birds that produce an enzyme called keratinase, which
degrades feathers. This project investigates the microbial ecology of the
bacteria, including the interactions with other microbes that occur on the
feathers, determines quantitative rates of feather degradation, and compares the
molecular structures and specificity of keratinases from different bacterial
strains. The project also explores potential agricultural, environmental, and
industrial applications for the enzyme. Keratin is a tough structural protein
found in feathers and hair. A keratin-digesting enzyme could be used not only to
help dispose of the feather waste from the poultry industry, but could be used
to increase production of commercial animal food from feather meal. The
keratinase from bird bacteria selectively degrades feathers, but leaves hair and
wool intact, making it an attractive model for an enzymatic cleaner that could
clean but not damage woolen products. This work has a potential impact on a
range of fields including ecology, microbiology, zoology, and chemistry, and
promises a novel cross-disciplinary experience involving undergraduates in
interesting research with both basic and applied aspects.