* 9510678
* Dissertation Research:  Gender, Child Health, and Urban     Poverty in Northeastern Brazil
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Kathleen DeWalt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Pittsburgh. The research investigates how members of poor,
urban households in Brazil produce child health through the differential
allocation of food, water, and health care to children. The project will examine
how variations in care, especially by gender, can be explained as responses to
larger socio-economic constraints. The student will study a community in a newly
settled area of Amazonian Brazil where rapid urbanization has created a class of
persons with little access to important resources. The hypothesis to be tested
is that differential valuation of male and female children skews the flow of
resources with results apparent in child health. Using ethnographic techniques
of intensive interviews and participant-observation as well as surveys of
households and specific measures of nursing, 24-hour activity recalls and income
questionnaires, the student will attempt to examine the workings of the `black
box` that is intra-household resource allocation. This research is important
because it expands our store of expertise about this critically important region
of the world as well as provides information about a basic process affecting
child health: the dynamics of resource flows within households. Advances in our
knowledge of the specific causes of child health that will result from this case
study will be valuable to planners and decision makers concerned about
children's general health status.