* 9510098
* Convective Rolls and Cells in Lake-effect Snowstorms:       Structures, Mechanisms and Effects
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* David Kristovich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 01/31/2000
* USD 377,273.00

9510098 Kristovich Mesoscale flows within convective boundary layers must be
understood in order to fully determine the link between synoptic-scale
circulations and surface characteristics. Observational evidence suggests that
theoretical criteria are often unsuccessful in predicting the predominant
mesoscale convective organization in the boundary layer. In particular, boundary
layer flow structure knows as rolls are often observed when cellular convection
is predicted. The proposed study seeks to employ both numerical and
observational techniques to: (1) determine factors which control the development
of boundary layer rolls in lake-effect snowstorms; and (2) determine how the
mesoscale organization of convection influences mass overturning rates,
precipitation rates, and boundary layer depth. The first goal will be
accomplished by careful documentation of the three-dimensional structure of
mesoscale convection near the eastern shore of Lake Michigan and how it varies
with upwind atmospheric conditions and evolution of boundary layer winds,
temperature, and moisture (ice, liquid, and vapor) profiles across the lake.
Numerical simulations will be carried out over the range of observed conditions
to give a more complete data set for determining the influence of wind shear,
latent heat release, and other factors, on the organization of boundary layer
convection. The influence of mesoscale convective organizations on mass
overturning rates, precipitation rates, and boundary layer depth will be
accomplished by carefully documenting how these features change near the
downwind shore in both observations and simulations of rapidly changing
mesoscale convective structure. This work is based on observations taken during
the University of Chicago Lake Snow Project. Numerical aspects of this work will
be carried out with the Advanced Regional Prediction System model developed at
the Center for Analysis and Prediction of Storms at the University of Oklahoma .
This research will be a collaborative effort between the Illinois State Water
Survey and the South Dakota School of Mines and Technology. ***