* 9510100
* Dissertation Research:  Regional Settlement Patterns in     Prehistoric Oruro, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,254.00

Under the direction of Dr. Marc Bermann, Mr. Timothy McAndrews will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in the
highland La Joya region in Bolivia. The objects of his project are threefold: to
conduct an intensive survey of this area which is known to contain early
Formative period mound sites; to collect surface materials which will allow the
assessment of variability within each site; to excavate test units at selected
sites to explore stratigraphy and surface/subsurface relationships. In
fulfilling these objectives, the settlement pattern data thus collected will
allow questions of settlement dynamics and sociopolitical and economic
organization will be obtained. To accomplish these goals Mr. McAndrews will
employ a 15% systematic random transect sampling strategy which will permit
generalization to the broader area. At this altitude there is very little
vegetation to obscure prehistoric remains, so survey can proceed rapidly.
Systematic random samples of surfaces remains - mostly potsherds - will be taken
at all sites which date from the Formative period. Judgementally placed test
pits will be excavated at selected sites to provide a relative chronology based
on diagnostic artifacts from distinct occupational levels. A geographic
information system will then be employed to visually display the data, to relate
population distributions to ecological variables and to determine how this
changes over time. The Formative Period (2000 B.C. - 300 A.D.) in the south-
central Andes is characterized by the first sedentary lifeway, the domestication
of plants such as the potato, the earliest pottery and metal technologies and
the emergence of complex social organization. It was during this period that the
stage was set for the development of one of the most complex precolumbian
civilizations in the New World which joined together regions as far separated as
Bolivia and Equador into a single empire. Archaeologists wish to understand the
processes which led to such complexity and Mr. McAndrews research should shed
light on this. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide
data of interest to many archaeologists. It will increase understanding of the
earliest stages in the development of civilization and will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.