* 9510454
* Muon Spin Relaxation Studies in Frustrated and/or Low       Dimensional Spin Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 199,500.00

9510454 Uemura Muon spin relaxation (muSR) measurements are proposed to study
ground state properties and spin fluctuations in geometrically frustrated spin
systems, such as the Kagome lattice and triangular lattice antiferromagnets
strontium chromium (x) gallium (12-x) oxygen (19) and lithium nickel oxygen (2),
as well as in low-dimensional spin systems, including the doped Haldane spin
chain system (yttrium, calcium) (2) barium nickel oxygen (5), the spin-Peierls
system (copper, zinc) germanium oxygen (3), the one-dimensional organic
conductor aluminum carbon (60), and the spin-ladder cuprates, strontium (n-1)
copper (n+1) oxygen (2n). This proposal aims to reveal details of suggested
spin-liquid ground states as well as to elucidate the process of destruction of
the many-body singlet ground state due to the introduction of imperfections or
doped charge carriers. The muSR experiments will be performed at the TRIUMF
facility in Vancouver, Canada. %%% Certain configurations of atomic arrangements
in solids, such as the triangular or Kagome lattice, tend to prevent the
alignment of the magnetic moments of the atoms placed on it, promoting dynamic
fluctuations of the moments (spins). Similarly, magnetic ordering is suppressed
in low-dimensional arrangements of spins, such as a chain of magnetic moments.
In these systems, novel magnetic behavior is expected at low temperatures,
including the possibility for the occurrence of a "quantum spin liquid", which
is a disordered liquid- like dynamic state of the moments due to quantum-
mechanical effects. This proposal aims to reveal the nature of such exotic
magnetic behavior by utilizing a novel technique called muon spin relaxation
(muSR), which probes the magnetism within solids with radioactive elementary
particles, muons, produced at a high-intensity proton accelerator (the TRIUMF
facility in Vancouver , Canada).