* 9510407
* The Genetics of Reproductive Isolation: Co-Evolution,       Polymorphism and Functional Differentiation of Gamete       Recognition Loci in Sea Urchins
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Stephen Palumbi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 05/31/1997
* USD 120,000.00

9510407 PALUMBI Understanding how species originate has been one of the most
important, yet one of the most difficult, challenges in biology. One of the
largest gaps in our understanding of the origin of species concerns the genetic
changes that accompany reproductive isolation. This proposal describes new
experiments in one such emerging model system: hyper-variable gamete attachment
genes in recently diverged sea urchins in the genus Echinometra. These species
are reproductively isolated by the failure of sperm to fuse with eggs of
different species. Our prior work has shown that the sperm attachment protein
bindin has diverged greatly between Echinometra species, and is extensively
variable within species. Because of active work on the molecular biology of sea
urchin fertilization, we can now also examine the gene for the egg receptor, and
for the first time study the co-evolution of interacting genes involved in
reproductive isolation. We will examine bindin/receptor co-evolution by
sequencing the egg receptor gene in Enhinometra and comparing results to our
existing bindin sequences. cDNA sequences of the 4 Indo-Pacific Echinometra
species will be used to test for patterns observed in bindin. The results will
allow us to understand the co-evolution of proteins that are closely involved in
the mechanisms that define species boundaries. Our studies are also important
for basic research on mechanisms of fertilization, and how egg and sperm
successfully recognize one another.