* 9510869
* Holocene Paleoclimatic History of the Rainfall Gradient in  the Southern Great Plains: Evidence from Stable Isotopes in Land Snail Shells
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Glenn Goodfriend, Texas Historical Commission
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 02/28/1999
* USD 111,803.00

SBR-9510869 Glenn A. Goodfriend, Principal Investigator (PI) G.L. Ellis, Co-PI
Texas Historical Commission Holocene Paleoclimatic History of the Rainfall
Gradient in the Southern Great Plains The Great Plains represent the climatic
transition between moist eastern and semiarid western North America. This
project investigates the climate history of this rainfall gradient in the
southern Great Plains over the course of the Holocene (the period following the
end of the last ice age or the last 10,000 years). The paleoclimate
reconstruction is based on the stable isotope composition of the carbonate
fraction of shells of the land snail, Rabdotus, which is abundant in the late
Quaternary record of the region. Samples from four Texas sites spanning the
modern rainfall gradient in the region are analyzed for stable carbon and oxygen
isotope ratios. These ratios serve as proxies for determining plant types and
seasonal variations in temperature. Documenting the recent history (last 10,000
years) of this rainfall gradient is of critical importance in evaluating
paleoclimatic models of the Holocene and understanding how the gradient could
change in the future in response to human-induced modifications. The data also
provides a basis for reinterpreting and refining current understanding of the
patterns of cultural adaptation in the region.