* 9510974
* The Location of Invention and Technical Change:  Industrial Development in the U.S., 1870 - 1929
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Kenneth Sokoloff, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1998
* USD 202,093.00

The purpose of this project is to expand the knowledge of the sources of
technological change by examining patterns in the location of invention in the
U.S. manufacturing sector between 1870 and 1929, a period of integration of
national product markets as well as of radical change in technology and
industrial structure. Location will be analyzed in two different senses. The
first is geographical. Despite the frequent references to cases such as
machinery in nineteenth-century New England and semi-conductors and computers in
today's Silicon Valley, the geographic clustering of inventive activity has
received little in the way of systematic investigation. The core issues are:
whether such centers of invention have been common and persistent and what
conditions or behaviors gave rise to them if they were; whether there were local
externalities in invention, and if so, whether they pertained only to a certain
class of industries or a certain stage in an industry's development; whether
geographic clustering in production has been systematically associated with
geographic clustering in invention; and whether firms located in production
clusters have been systematically associated with geographic clustering in
invention; and whether firms located in production clusters have manifested
higher rates of productivity than those that were more isolated. The second
aspect of the locational question is organizational. It is conventional to think
of invention as an activity that occurs within the bounds of firms, but at
various times in various industries firms have bought or licensed much of their
technology from outside suppliers, and inventors in turn have chosen to extract
their returns by selling off or licensing their inventions. A goal of this
project is to measure the extent of this market for technology and to explore
how it widened and deepened over time, how its mechanisms of exchange evolved,
and the nature of the institutions that mediated between inventors and those
interested in developing and commercializing new technologies. Another goal is
to understand changes in the extent to which inventive activity was located
within the firms that used the technology. Finally, the interaction of the
organizational factors and geographical clustering of invention will be
analyzed.