* 9510985
* Career:  Delay of Gratification
* SBE,SES
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1999
* David Laibson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1999
* USD 100,836.00

Formulating effective social policy requires careful analysis of the
intertemporal decisions that individuals make. For example, responding to social
problems like drug use, criminal activity, teenage pregnancy, and high-school
failure, requires understanding of the intertemporal decisions that contribute
to these outcomes. Enhancing the understanding of intertemporal choices is the
focus of this study. It will emphasize interdisciplinary research projects
motivated by behavioral anomalies in intertemporal decision-making. Each project
analyzes a new model of intertemporal choice suggested by evidence and
experiments in the psychology literature. These psychological models will be
evaluated using standard economic analysis. This study involves three different
research projects. The first project analyzes the behavior of decision-makers
with hyperbolic discount functions. Hyperbolic discount functions suggest a
multiple-self interpretation of intertemporal decision-making, generating an
interesting framework for understanding phenomena like self-control. The second
proposes a physiological microfoundation for environmentally dependent
motivational states or drives. This project uses physiological theories of
homeostasis and Pavlovian conditioning to build a theory of endogenous
motivational states. For example, the model proposed here explains how
environmental cues elicit drives for instantaneous gratification. Finally, the
third project builds on the psychology literature about over optimism. This
project examines the behavior of decision makers with over optimistic priors and
considers the consequences for consumption behavior.