* 9510863
* Early Development of Conscience
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2002
* Grazyna Kochanska, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/2002
* USD 424,922.00

In this comprehensive study of conscience development in the first four years of
life, child temperament and parent-child socialization and relationship will be
studied as two critical sets of influences which, in a complex interplay,
contribute to conscience formation. Children and parents (N=110) will be studied
at age 8-months, 20-22 months, 36-38 months, and 48-50 months. At each
assessment, child temperament (fearfulness and inhibitory or effortful control),
parent-child socialization and relationship, parents' personality, and child
conscience will be measured, using a rich combination of observations in many
naturalistic home and laboratory contexts, parent ratings, parent and child
self-reports, projective methods, and cognitive instruments. Six questions will
be addressed. One, the child's temperamental fearfulness and inhibitory control
will be explored as contributors to the developing conscience. Two, the
qualities of parent-child socialization that promote conscience development will
be examined, particularly discipline deemphasizing power and the mutually
positive, responsive, binding, a cooperative parent-child orientation. Three,
informed by provocative initial data, the child's temperament will be examined
as a moderator of socialization. Specifically, multiple pathways to conscience,
different for children differing temperament, are postulated. Four, the
development and organization of early conscience will be explored, including the
developmentally changing relations among moral affect, conduct, and cognition,
and the role of child temperament as a moderator of these relations. Five, the
role of child early compliance to parent, particularly its one form, committed
compliance, will be examined as an early precursor of conscience. Six, the
effects of parents' personality on child conscience development will be studied.
This work will thus integrate the roles of the child's temperament,
individuality and the relationship with parents in early moral development, and
le ad to a comprehensive model of early conscience formation. Conscience is the
internal guide and monitor of conduct that assures that we distinguish right
from wrong, adhere to societal standards, restrain antisocial impulses, and
engage in prosocial acts even in the absence of surveillance. Individual
consciences are fundamental for the adaptive functioning of individual and
societies. If successfully instilled in the early years, conscience is a more
powerful regulator of conduct than any system of external social control.
Conscience is a hallmark and ultimate goal of human socialization and a classic
topic in human development, and yet, we know little about factors that
contribute to its successful development or its disturbances. My extremely
promising data from the previously sponsored study strongly point to the
critical role of early childhood as the time when the foundations of conscience
are established. They also support the view of conscience as multiply
determined, with the child's biologically-founded temperament and the qualities
of socialization within the family as two major sets of influences that jointly
contribute to the early conscience formation. This study will further highlight
the interplay of these two fundamental sets of influences on adaptive
maladaptive development of conscience. It will elucidate not only how the
child's temperamental individuality and the qualities of the relationship with
parents contribute to conscience development, but, most importantly, how
different parenting styles promote conscience in children differing in their
temperaments. As such, this program of research is highly relevant to the
'fostering successful families' component of the Human Capital research agenda.
In view of the current widespread problems reflecting deficits of conscience,
such as antisocial, cruel, or destructive behaviors detrimental to individuals
and to the social system this research is particularly timely. Ultimately, it
will result in a comprehensive model of early conscience formation that will
inform basic developmental theory, social policy, and parenting and early
prevention programs.