* 9510146
* Individual-Based Competition Theory for Territorial Foragers
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Joan Roughgarden, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mazer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

9510146 Roughgarden Early competition theory is based on the Lotka-Volterra
competition equations, which are widely viewed as inadequate. A problem today is
to develop new models of competition specific to systems where competition is
known to occur. This research will develop and begin to test a new model of
competition, tailored for terrestrial foragers, such as Anolis lizards that are
known to compete. The new model involves processes at four scales, a capture
event scale measured in seconds, an optimal foraging scale in hours, a social
spacing scale in days, and a population-dynamic scale in weeks. The model at the
capture event scale is a behavioral rule that shows how optimal foraging may be
learned in a matter of hours. The model at the optimal foraging scale shows how
the asymptotic outcome of the behavioral rule can be predicted by maximizing net
rate of energy intake. The model for the social spacing scale shows how the
spacing of animal territories is ideally adjusted according to the spatial
distribution of resources. Combining these relatively small-scale models
culminates in a model for population dynamics and interspecific competition. The
counterparts of classic population-dynamic parameters, such as r, and K of the
logistic equation, are derived in terms of measurements defined on individuals,
leading to a so-called individual-based model of population dynamics. It is
proposed to extend this theory beyond the preliminary stage outlined in the
proposal, to make it more realistic in many respects, and to revise it depending
on results of future field studies.