* 9510383
* Energy Pathways in Solids
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Raul Baragiola, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 312,000.00

9510383 Baragiola This project is a university-industry investigation of the
evolution of electronic excitations in insulators. The excitations are formed in
single events by energetic UV photons and electrons, and in dense cascades
induced by keV and MeV ions. The goal is to understand the dynamics of energy
transport in the form of holes, excitons and excited electrons in the
femtosecond to nanosecond time scale, and to understand the mechanisms for
converting the electronic energy in atomic motion (molecular dissociation,
formation of new molecules, the ejection of particles from the surface, and
creation of stable defects and phonons). The strategy is to study condensed
gases as model systems, for which basic cross sections are well known. The
research involves a collaboration with scientists from Bell Labs and the Univ.
of Uppsala. It combines experiments that detect the ejected atoms, molecules,
electrons, ions, and photons, and changes in the bombarded solids, together with
molecular dynamics simulations. %%% This project is a university-industry
investigation of the processes of energy dissipation in solids which are
bombarded by energetic particles or ultraviolet light. The goal is to understand
how energy flows into different channels, like emission of light or damage of
the material, that will allow to find ways to modify the behavior. The research
has applications in many areas, like radiation effects in biological tissue,
lithography for manufacturing microelectronic circuits, radiation detectors and
future generations of flat panel displays and lasers in the far ultraviolet. The
studies incorporate laboratory work and computer simulations. ***