* 9510226
* C-RUI: Use of Three-Dimensional Time-Lapse Microscopy to    Probe the Role of Proteases in Neurite Invasiveness
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Gary Ciment, Lewis and Clark College
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,976.00

This project is for Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions,
involving biology, chemistry and physical optics. When the nervous system grows
during development, one of the key events is the extension of long processes
called neurites from individual nerve cell bodies; these neurites connect cells
to their targets (other nerve cells, muscles, or glands) that may be long
distances away in the adult. There are various barriers between tissues in the
body, and one of these is called extracellular matrix, or ECM, which is largely
made of proteils. It is believed that the growing tip of neurites secrete an
enzyme that is a proteinase, to locally break down the ECM and allow the
neurites to penetrate it. This project utilizes novel fluorescent dyes and time-
lapse microscopic imaging techniques to examine the localization of a particular
metallo-proteinase, degradation of the matrix, and intracellular traffic
carrying the proteins. The project is designed to reveal for the first time the
dynamics of molecules believed to be integral to mechanisms for neurite
elongation. Results will have an impact on developmental biology, cell biology
and imaging technology, and the project provides a novel multidisciplinary
experience involving undergraduates in exciting research over an unusual range
of techniques from biochemistry to optics.