* 9510348
* Mathematical Sciences:  Bayesian Modeling and Inference for Time Series with Stable Innovations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1996
* Nalini Ravishanker, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9510348 Ravishanker Abstract The investigator studies Bayesian modeling and
inference for time series with infinite variance stable innovations, addressing
methodological problems as well as applications to real world data. The
justification for the study of infinite variance stable processes stems from
empirical evidence for its usefulness in several application areas such as
astronomy, economics, engineering, finance and physics. The area of modeling
stable processes has several open and challenging problems that are addressed.
Available classical methods of estimation and inference do not simultaneously
estimate the parameters defining the stable process and the parameters of the
time series model. The investigator develops new methodology for modeling data
generated by autoregressive fractionally integrated moving average processes
with stable innovations that characterize long memory and short memory behavior
in 'infinite variance' time series. Inference and prediction are implemented
using sampling- based Bayesian techniques through Markov chain Monte Carlo
algorithms to generate samples from the target posterior distribution. For
stable processes, the form of the likelihood does not, in general, admit a
closed analytical form. Hence expressions for the complete conditional
distributions of the parameters in terms of the characteristic function of the
stable process are combined with the Gibbs sampling algorithm or its variants to
generate samples from the required posterior by approximating it by a suitable
proposal density. Additionally, the role of algorithms that are useful in
generating samples from stable processes directly is studied, incorporating this
into the Bayesian framework. Various marginal and joint posterior distributions
as well as summary features of these distributions are analyzed, as well as a
characterization of predictive distributions that permit model choice and
forecasting. The investigator studies modeling and forecasting for time series
data assumi ng that the data can take on more extreme values than would usually
be the case. There is considerable empirical evidence for this behavior in
diverse areas of application such as telecommunications, hydrology, physics,
economics and finance and for modeling quantities such as gravitational fields
of stars, temperature distributions in nuclear reactors, stresses in crystalline
lattices, annual rainfall, stock prices etc. Currently available methods for
modeling and forecasting are few and inefficient . The investigator develops new
innovative methodology for modeling under the assumption that the data are
generated by a popular and useful time series process and by incorporating prior
information into the modeling as well.