* 9510661
* Dynamic Nuclear Polarization Studies of Empty and Metal     Caged Fullerenes: Structure and Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Harry Dorn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* George M. Rubottom
* 06/30/1998
* USD 214,190.00

This grant from the Organic Dynamics Program is a new grant to Professor Harry
Dorn of Virginia Polytechnic Institute. The objectives are to prepare and
characterize large fullerenes and metallofullerenes. Through the use of various
magnetically active nuclei and the technique of Dynamic Nuclear Polarization,
the principle investigator will characterize a novel group of large fullerenes
with endohedral and exohedral metals. These unique hydrocarbon systems are
reported to have relevance in applications such as nonlinear optics and high
temperature superconductivity. Studies such as those funded in this grant will
enhance the understanding of nuclear-electron interactions in these interesting
molecules which is germane to both of the above mentioned scientific areas. The
investigation of novel materials which have reported properties of value to
optical and magnetic systems will serve the public sector very well. This
proposal is such an investigation. These types of complexes are reported to have
promise in the areas of nonlinear optics and high temperature superconductivity.
A detailed plan to prepare and characterize these unique complexes is well
thought out and described by the principal investigator.