* 9510212
* CRUI: Chararacterization of Catalytic Antibodies from       Germinal-Center B Cells
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Patricia O'Hara, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/2000
* USD 849,676.00

This project is for Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions,
involving organic chemistry with biochemistry and cell biology. The immune
system contains a class of B-cells which produce antibodies as part of the
immune response. There are clusters of these cells in areas called germinal
centers, which are sites of high mutation rates for these cells, and so add to
the diversity of antibodies that can be produced. Some antibodies have catalytic
activity, breaking down proteins by hydrolysis, for example. It is an attractive
goal to try to induce formation of novel antibodies that will have highly
efficient catalytic activity toward particular specific proteins, allowing
production of powerful biochemical probes and tools. This project utilizes novel
immune challenges by particular organic compounds and their transition-state
analogs, and "capture" of the B-cell repertoire to assay for efficient catalytic
antibodies. The antibodies obtained will be characterized for properties
including binding site variation, affinity, catalytic activity, and molecular
sequence of their variable regions. Results of this work will be important to
biochemistry, to the chemistry of catalysis, and potentially to broad biomedical
applications. This project provides a novel multidisciplinary experience
involving undergraduates in exciting research with potentially exciting
applications.