* 9510246
* Experimental Studies of Metal-Insulator Transitions and     Superconductivity
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Paul Chaikin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 293,000.00

9510246 Chaikin Superconducting arrays in very high magnetic field, anisotropic
superconductors, as well as normal metals and two dimensional heterostuctures
will be studied. The ultimate goal of these studies is to test for the existence
of extended, localized and commensurate states in different controllable
potentials, to image these states, and to study their dynamics. Superconducting
wire networks designed to interact with a penetrating flux lattice will be
fabricated using lithographic techniques. This work will focus on the effect of
anisotropy where striking theoretical predictions have been made, about
localization, anisotropic commensurability, and temperature dependent flux
lattice configurations. The pinning and dynamics of Josephson vortices in bulk
superconductors will be further investigated. The exciting theoretical
prediction of magnetic field induced one dimensionalization of the electrons and
the resulting re- establishment of superconductivity at high magnetic field will
also be experimentally tested using high purity organic superconductors. In
another experiment, novel lithographic techniques based on self assembly of
block copolymers, will be used to fabricate "nano" periodic potentials (~ 300Ao
spacing) on normal metals, superconductors and quantum Hall devices. This will
allow the study of a new regime where the periodic potential is comparable to
magnetic lengths and much shorter than many characteristic dephasing and
scattering length. %%% Superconducting arrays in very high magnetic field,
anisotropic superconductors, as well as normal metals and two dimensional
heterostuctures will be studied. Specifically this research will address the
question of how the well understood periodic potentials can be extended to
quasi-periodic potentials where there are competing length scales and different
types of anisot ropy. Superconducting wire networks designed to interact with a
penetrating flux lattice will be fabricated using lithographic techniques. This
work will focus on the effect of anisotropy where striking theoretical
predictions have been made, about localization, anisotropic commensurability,
and temperature dependent flux lattice configurations. The pinning and dynamics
of Josephson vortices in bulk superconductors will be further investigated. The
exciting theoretical prediction of magnetic field induced one dimensionalization
of the electrons and the resulting re- establishment of superconductivity at
high magnetic field will also be experimentally tested using high purity organic
superconductors. In another experiment, novel lithographic techniques based on
self assembly of block copolymers, will be used to fabricate "nano" periodic
potentials on normal metals, superconductors and quantum Hall devices. This will
allow the study of a new regime where the periodic potential is comparable to
magnetic lengths and much shorter than many characteristic lengths. ***