* 9510037
* Dissertation Research:  A Spatial Analysis of Classic Bonito Phase Chacoan Great House Communities
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* R. Gwinn Vivian, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

Vivian Under the direction of Dr. R. Gwinn Vivian, Ms. Ruth Van Dyke will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will examine site plans for 9
Bonito-style prehistoric sites which are located in New Mexico in the Chaco
Canyon region. At seven of the sites, extensive surface remains and
architectural ruins have already been mapped and Ms. Van Dyke will digitize the
site plans. This will facilitate spatial analysis. At the remaining two sites
Ms. Van Dyke and assistants will use a laser transit system to produce
comparable data. With this information she shall search for similarities and
differences between sites and compare these to central Chaco Canyon ruins.
Within sites she will attempt to determine social relations among occupants and
learn whether a hierarchical system existed. Factors such as room size,
arrangement and accessibility will provide a means to address this question. In
the centuries immediately preceding contact with the Old World, Southwest Native
American societies developed complex social systems and built sites with multi-
story architecture which accommodated hundreds of individuals. A center for such
development was Chaco Canyon in New Mexico. It is clear that a strong
relationship existed between Chaco Canyon and over 100 outlying communities
since a system of prehistoric roads connects many of these sites. However
archaeologists do not understand how the Chaco system functioned. They do not
know whether the Chaco "center" is responsible for the establishment of the
outlier or whether essentially independent communities cooperated and that the
periphery, in effect, created the core. It is also not known whether these
communities were essentially equalitarian or hierarchial. The question is
important because it will shed light on the social processes which gave rise to
this well known society. Through architectural analysis Ms. Van Dyke can address
both of these issues. This research is important for several reasons. It will
provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the
development of social complexity and will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist.