* 9510240
* Accquisition of A Gamma Detector for Studies Tracing Fine   Sediment Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Peter Whiting, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/1997
* USD 24,319.00

9510240 Whiting This grant provides partial support for the acquisition gamma
detector for use in research to trace fine sediment moving through watersheds.
How fine sediment moves from the landscape to the channel and to downstream
points is both a fundamental scientific question whose answer is necessary for
modeling landscape evolution and a practical question whose answer is critical
in land management decision-making. The PI's will employ the detector to measure
fallout radionuclides including, 7Be, l37Cs and 2l0Pb in order to follow fine
sediment as it moves through watersheds. These radionuclides are washed from the
atmosphere by precipitation and quickly adsorbed onto sediment, which permits
their use as tracers of sediment. The relative activities of these radionuclides
with different half-lives should allow the distinction between "new" sediment
washed off the landscape during storm events and "old" sediment which has been
stored in the stream bed and bank and has been resuspended by the increased flow
associated with storm runoff. The activity of radionuclides in sediment relative
to these two end-member components can be used to establish the relative
delivery of landscape sediment to downstream points in the drainage network, to
estimate mean travel distances and transit rates of fine sediment, and identify
sources of sediment in the watershed. This innovative research has great
potential to improve our understanding of fine sediment and pollutant transport
in watersheds and thus is directly applicable to a variety of environmental
problems. ***