* 9510026
* Equipment Upgrade for the Cameca SX-50 Electron Microprobe  at the University of Oregon
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Jack Rice, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 10/31/1996
* USD 40,000.00

9510026 Rice The Department of Geological Sciences at the University of Oregon
will upgrade their present Cameca SX-50 electron probe microanalyzer (EPMA).
This instrument forms the core of their analytical facilities and is crucial for
research currently being conducted by nearly half of their department. The
upgrade will include the purchase of a SUN SPARCstation 5 as part as part of a
"SXPACK" upgrade offered though Cameca, image processing software and two x-ray
diffracting pseudocrystals used for the precise analysis of light elements. The
SUN computer will replace a DEC PDP-11 minicomputer that is at the end of its
useful life, and more importantly is no longer supported in terms of software
development. Without this upgrade, the PI's scientific creativity and
productivity would be severely limited by an antiquated computer system.
Additionallly, the SUN-based computer system will provide a modern computing
platform that is fully compatible with existing machines on their network and
will enable access to recently developed software packages designed to fully
utilize the capabilities of the SX-50. Recent advances in pseudocrystal
technology and analytical techniques have resulted in the capability of
analyzing elements in the range from boron to oxygen with precision and accuracy
approaching that commonly associated with heavier elements. Ongoing and planned
research projects require relatively precise analyses of oxygen and boron in a
variety of bulk compositions. ***