* 9510161
* Decomposition of Gender Earnings Differentials in Korea
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Yana Rodgers, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Catherine C. Eckel
* 01/31/1998
* USD 18,000.00

With their tremendous economic growth, the Asian Tigers serve as an excellent
laboratory for examining the effects of rapid industrialization on women's labor
market status. Beginning in the 1970's, East Asia experienced rapidly rising
real wages, with Korean real wage growth outpacing its regional neighbors.
Understanding how women's earnings in Korea performed relative to men's will
provide extremely useful lessons for other developing countries seeking to
follow the east Asian example. The purpose of this planning grant research is to
collect additional data and provide a detailed assessment of earnings gap
determinants between men and women using two decomposition procedures. The
first, a level analysis, decomposes the earnings gap in individual years into a
portion explained by observable, gender-specific skill differences, and a
residual portion which is commonly attributed to discrimination. The second
procedure evaluates the contribution of changes over time in gender-specific
factors and in the overall wage structure to the evolution of gender earnings
gaps. Using the latter technique to examine the Korean experience will provide a
more detailed analysis of gender earnings gap determinants than earlier
developing country studies. The planning Grant results will form an excellent
basis for preparing the subsequent NSF full research proposal. The future
proposal will examine the ability of Korea's labor policies to generate
reductions in gender earnings inequality. This research will contribute valuable
new evidence on whether the Asian Tigers' labor reforms, designed to emulate the
labor market policies of industrialized countries, have actually helped female
workers to obtain higher relative earnings. ***