* 9510453
* Muon Spin Relaxation Studies of Heavy Fermion Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 189,500.00

9510453 Luke Muon spin relaxation will be used to study the interplay between
various interactions and phenomena in rare earth and actinide compounds. Many of
these systems exhibit interesting magnetic behavior due to the combination of
the Kondo effect, Rudman-Kittel-Kasuya Yosida interaction and the effect of
crystalline fields. In materials where these interactions are present, such
phenomena as heavy fermion superconductivity and quadrupole Kondo effect are
observed. Superconductivity and antiferromagnatic ordering coexist in
uraniumplatinum-three compound. This antiferromagnetism contributes to multiple
superconducting phases. This research will help elucidate the microscopic nature
of the different superconducting states. In another compound, cerium-
copper2-silicon2, superconductivity and magnetism do not coexist but compete for
the ground state. This work will investigate the competition between the two
states. The competition between Kondo screening and exchange interactions will
be studied in cerium-copper-two- tin-two. The relative importance of the
crystalline electric fields, Kondo screening and exchange interactions will be
determined in uranium doped yttrium-palladium- three. Theoretical models based
on the anomalous low temperature linear specific heat in neodymium-cerium-
copper- oxygen compound will be tested by way of the measurement of spin
fluctuations in this compound. %%% Muon Spin Relaxation experiments will be
conducted on a number of rare earth and actinide compounds which exhibit a rich
interplay between various interactions and phenomena such as superconductivity
and magnetic ordering. Five different studies will be conducted: (1) the
coexistence between antiferromagnetic ordering and the microscopic nature of the
resulting multiple superconducting phases, (2) the competition between magnetic
ordering and superconductivity in a compound where they do not coexist, (3) the
competition between Kondo screening and exchange interaction, (4) the relative
importance between crystalline electric fields, Kondo screening and exchange
interactions, and (5) fluctuation effects in materials which exhibit anomalous
thermodynamic behavior. Each of the above study will be conducted on the
appropriate compound. ***