* 9510099
* Chemical Sensors for CVD Processing
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1999
* Arthur Ellis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 11/30/1999
* USD 440,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9510099 This effort is directed to the understanding and design of
novel photoluminescent chemical sensors based upon adsorption onto a compound
semiconductor surface. Previous work has established the feasibility of this
approach. Changes in the near-surface region of the semiconductor due to
reversible chemisorption form the basis of the sensor; modulation of the
depletion width of the surface region of the semiconductor leads to changes in
the photoluminescence intensity observed from these structures. The thrust of
this project is concerned with sensing materials and materials structures with
high sensitivity and high detectivity. The use of modern epitaxial techniques
such as metalorganic vapor-phase epitaxy (MOVPE) allows production of engineered
materials structures tailored to enhance the response of the semiconductor to
the specific adsorbed species. New chemical approaches to sensing a wide variety
of technologically important substrates, including silanes and group III and
group V CVD precursors, are explored. New sensing devices in which electron
transport as well as photoluminescence is used as the sensor signal are
developed and modeled. Causes of long-term degradation of the sensor structures
and means to inhibit such changes are also explored. New approaches to sensor
design and implementation are badly needed; in some cases, such as semiconductor
processing, sensors may be the limiting factor in improving quality and
advancing design implementation. This effort applies semiconductor device
technology to the production of small, inexpensive, robust sensors without
mechanical components. The specific systems under study are applicable to the
production of compound semiconductors and solid-state devices. The basic
approach has a much broader applicability. ***