* 9510344
* Self-Assembled Monolayers from Alkanethiolate-tethered      Osmium and Ruthenium Complexes. Properties and Applications in Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Fred M. Hawkridge
* 01/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

This Research Planning Grant project is in the broad area of materials chemistry
and has significant implications for biotechnology. During the tenure of this
eighteen-month standard grant, Professor Tam-Chang and her students at the
University of Nevada, Reno will carry out preliminary experiments necessary to
implement a major research program in biosensor technology based on molecular
recognition by self-assembled monolayer-resident receptors and complementary
luminescence detection. Alkanethiolate-tethered ruthenium and osmium complexes
will be prepared and incorporated into self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of
alkanethiols on gold surfaces, and their chemiluminescence and
electrochemiluminescence properties characterized. Mixed SAMs in which tethered
methylphosphonate oligonucleotide analogs of DNA sequences of interest are also
incorporated will be prepared and the extent to which double-stranded DNA
interacts with the tethered analog and alters the luminescence from the
ruthenium and osmium complexes will be determined. The objective of this
Research Planning Grant project is to explore the luminescence properties of
SAMs containing ruthenium and osmium complexes, and to utilize that experimental
platform as the basis for new sequence-specific DNA sensors. This
interdisciplinary project could give rise to sensor technology with important
biotechnological, environmental, and clinical applications.