* 9510625
* GOALI:  "Run-to-Run Feedback Control of Semiconductor       Manufacturing Processes"
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Bruce Krogh, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 03/31/1997
* USD 31,925.00

9510625 Krogh The objective of this project is to develop methods for using in-
line measurements from semiconductor manufacturing processes to adjust process
operating points from run to run to compensate for sources of systematic drift
in the process variables. Semiconductor manufacturing processes are typically
monitored using statistical process control (SPC) techniques, and adjustments
are made in operating setpoints only when out-of- control conditions are
detected. This approach cannot effectively compensate for systematic parameter
variations such as drifts in the process operating environment, material
properties, or equipment conditions. Consequently, methods for adjusting the
process operating point from run to run are needed to improve the quality and
yield of semiconductor manufacturing processes when it is too costly or
physically impossible to eliminate systematic variations. This project will
combine techniques developed for system identification, parameter estimation,
and feedback control, with methods for statistical and physical modeling to
perform effective run-to-run control for key processes in a commercial
photovoltaic cell manufacturing facility. Parameterized models will be developed
to characterized the input-output relations for each process, and so-called
gray-box parameter estimation, Kalman filtering, and constrained optimization
will be applied to update the process setpoints for each process run based on
post-process measurements from previous runs. A primary emphasis of this work
will be to develop methods for incorporating process knowledge from physical
models and empirical data into the on-line computations to more effectively
compensate for the process variations. The key trade-off to be explored is the
complexity of the models versus the efficiency and effectiveness of the on- line
parameter estimation and control computations. In addition to these immediate
technical objectives, this one- year project sponsored under the NSF GOALI
program will enable the principal investigator, who is currently working in the
area of semiconductor process control, to gain valuable experience working with
industrial scientists and engineers in a commercial semiconductor manufacturing
facility. The research will be conducted at - and supported in part by - EBARA
Solar, Inc. Models will be obtained using process data from EBARA, and the run-
to-run feedback control techniques will be implemented on actual production
equipment to evaluate their effectiveness. This experience will contribute
significantly to the definition of future theoretical and applied research
directions in model- based control of complex manufacturing processes. ***