* 9510031
* Genetically Controlled Syntheses of New Polymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,11/03/1998
* Maurille Fournier, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 11/03/1998
* USD 755,000.00

9510031 Tirrell This project will develop methods for the preparation of
architecturally well-defined artificial proteins carrying reactive olefinic,
dienyl, acetylenic and pyrrolyl functional groups. A key aspect of the project
is the use of artificial genes to direct the synthesis of uniform polymer
chains, which will acquire reactive functionality either directly (through the
incorporation of unnatural amino acids), or indirectly (through post-
translational modification reactions). In either approach, the fidelity of
bacterial protein synthesis will be exploited to produce polymeric materials
characterized by precise control of chain length, sequence, and stereochemistry.
The direct approach will explore the translational activity of six artificial
amino acids (and several variants thereof) related to isoleucine, phenylalanine,
histidine or tyrosine. There is increasing evidence that the bacterial protein
synthesis machinery can utilize a braoder range of amino acids than the twenty
that are normally encoded by messenger RNA templates. The amino acid analogues
chosen for this study are of particular interest owing to two facts: i). none of
the natural amino acids carries olefinic, dienyl, acetylenic or pyrrolyl groups,
and ii). such functional groups can be used to endow polymeric materials with
interesting and potentially useful chemical and electrochemical properties. The
approach to be used for direct incorporation involves: i). synthesis of an
artificial gene encoding the sequence of interest, with the natural analogue
encoded in place of the target unnatural amino acid, ii). cloning of the
artificial gene in an appropriate auxotrophic bacterial strain, and iii).
induction of target protein synthesis in a medium containing the unnatural amino
acid (and generally depleted of the natural analogue). This strategy has been
demonstrated successfully with several unnatural amino acids, including
selenomethionine, p-fluorophenylalanine, 3- thienylalanine, trifluoroleucine,
azetidinecarboxylic acid, dehydroproline, and thiaproline. Complementary
strategy involving post-translational modification will also be explored. In
this approach, protein biosynthesis will be used to prepare appropriately
designed "base polymers," which will be modified with reagents carrying
olefinic, dienyl, acetylenic or pyrrolyl groups. Polymers prepared by either
route will be subjected to careful analyses of molecular structure,
supramolecular organization, and functional properties. Particular attention
will be given to the prospects for creating electrochemically switchable protein
films containing pyrrolyl side chains. Such films would be of potential
practical use as components of sensors, actuators and controlled delivery
devices. %%% This research aims to carry out the synthesis of amino acid
polymers with highly controlled structures, through the use of artificial genes.
The polymers selected do not occur in nature and will be designed to have
interesting electrical and other properties. ***