* 9510353
* Coherent Spectroscopy of Vortex-State Electrodynamics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Joseph Orenstein, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9510353 Orenstein The optical response of high-Tc cuprate superconductors has
been the subject of intense investigations since their discovery. It appears
that a consistent picture of the responses, from microwave to infrared is
finally emerging. However, the understanding that has been achieved is largely
confined to zero magnetic field. The proposed research seeks to develop a
thorough understanding of the optical response in the vortex-state which arises
in response to magnetic field. The study focuses on the terahertz frequency
range, which is the crucial one for vortex dynamics in the cuprates because it
corresponds to the gap for quasi particle excitations in the vortex core. The
key experimental tool is terahertz time-domain spectroscopy, which is the most
successful approach to measuring broad band response of the media in the
spectral range between the microwave and infra-red domains. In this technique
the complex response function is measured directly by resolving the transmission
coefficient of nearly-single-cycle picosecond electric field pulses. These
pulses are generated and detected optoelectronically through the use of a
femtosecond mode- locked laser. %%% The spectacular property of superconductors
is the vanishing of the dc resistance. However, above zero frequency,
superconductors develop measurable resistance, whose properties are a
distinguishing feature of superconductivity in different materials. The
resistivity of high temperature cuprate superconductors in zero applied magnetic
field, from microwave to visible frequencies, has been studied intensively. This
project investigates the fundamentally and technologically important regime of
under magnetic field. The proposal seeks to develop a thorough understanding of
the response of cuprate superconductors in the "vortex state" which arises in
the presence of large magnetic field. The research focus es on the terahertz
region of the spectrum, which is the crucial range for the cuprates, and uses a
powerful new spectroscopic tool, terahertz time-domain spectroscopy. A broad
range of high quality films will be synthesized and investigated . The results
will test and stimulate theoretical work, which is evolving rapidly as evidence
emerges for unconventional origins of superconductivity in HTS. ***