* 9510735
* Systematics and Taxonomic Revision of Chimaeroids: Towards  an Understanding of the Radiation of Jaws in Vertebrates
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Dominique Didier, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 09/30/1999
* USD 154,125.00

9510735 Didier The purpose od this research is to determine phylogenetic
relationships among fossil and living chimaeroid fishes. This research focuses
on musculoskeletal features of the jaws, skull, gill arches, and dentition. The
analysis will examine 29 living taxa, plus a presently unknown number of
unidentified species, and 9 fossil taxa of chimaeroids in addition to two
outgroup tax, one shark and one skate. Data is obtained using a variety of
morphological preparations including dissection, skeletal preparation, cleaning
and staining, and histology. Morphological characters are analyzed and scored in
living and fossil taxa, and phylogenies generated and analyzed using the
computer algorithm PAUP (Phylogenetic Analysis Using Parsimony). %%% The
synthesis of morphological and paleontological information is the first species
level phylogenetic analysis of this lineage. The description of at least 10 new
species and a long overdue taxonomic revision of chimaeroid fishes are two
important results of this work. Within this phylogenetic context, the discovery
of new suites of characters related to jaw, skull and gill arch morphology will
contribute important baseline anatomical information towards understanding the
evolution and radiation of jaw suspensory mechanisms among early vertebrates.
***