* 9510312
* Analytical Methods for Photoinitiated Chemistry in          Microscale Structures
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Joel Harris, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 06/30/1999
* USD 449,807.00

This project, supported under the Optical Science and Engineering initiative in
the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, involves the continued development
and application of time resolved photocalorimetric and Raman spectroscopic
methods for the characterization of the kinetics, energetics, and molecular
structure of short-lived photochemical species within microscale domains. A
variety of novel methods will be pursued which will detect very fast reactions
occurring within micron to nanometer dimensions, such as may be evident in
monolayer, thin film, and colloidal systems. Pulsed-laser Raman spectroscopy
will be used to probe free-radical chain initiation reactions; optically
launched surface acoustic waves (SAW) will allow the detection of polymerization
reaction kinetics within the monolayer region of thin films; a new `photon
burst` spectroscopic method which involves the laser excitation of fluorescent-
labeled particles and the laser-induced rupture of analyte encapsulated
liposomes will allow the determination of particle size distribution and
reaction chemistry within colloidal media. These techniques are `cutting- edge`
and will offer technology not currently available for probing these
environments. Next generation advances in the information, manufacturing, and
medical technologies will require the ability to engineer and/or probe
microscopic areas at nanosecond timescales. Professor Harris and his students at
the University of Utah will pursue several cutting-edge laser spectroscopic
techniques that will allow the characterization of processes occurring within
single cells, at `stress-fracture` interfaces in materials and/or inside other
miniaturized structures.