* 9510963
* Confluence of Space and Language in ASL
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Karen Emmorey, The Salk Institute for Biological Studies
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 02/28/1999
* USD 321,038.00

To linguistically represent and encode the visual world (i.e., to talk about
what we see) requires a crucial interface between language and spatial
cognition. Signed languages can provide unique insight into this interface
because physical space is used directly to encode linguistic and spatial
relations. American Sign Language (ASL) differs from spoken languages in that it
is expressed with the hands in space and perceived by the visual system. Thus,
ASL also presents an opportunity to explore how the modality in which a language
is conveyed affects the nature of grammatical encoding (e.g., how languages
express different linguistic relations) and the nature of language processing
(how people interpret and produce language in real time). Currently, very little
is known about language processing in ASL, and the proposed studies will be some
of the first to investigate how a visual language is perceived and understood
on-line. The studies explore the ramifications of using space for expressing
linguistic contrasts in referential and spatial domains. Specifically, the
experiments focus on the use of space to express coreference relations, frames
of reference, and spatial information. The major goal of the research is to
explore the grammaticization of space in sign language and its impact on
language processing. The project contains two primary lines of inquiry: 1) on-
line tracking of spatial anaphora and 2) the use of space to represent space.
The first group of experiments explore how signers understand and maintain the
association between referents and their spatial loci during real time
processing. The results of these experiments will provide insight into the
nature of the processing mechanisms required for sign language and will help
determine what aspects of referential processing hold across language
modalities. The second line of experiments investigate the consequences of using
space to represent space by investigating how deaf signers create spatia l
mental models from signed discourse, how signers chose a spatial reference
frame, and how signers integrate physical signing space with a mental
representation of space. These experiments will illuminate how physical space is
manipulated linguistically to communicate locative information and will clarify
how such spatial structure is interpreted during processing. Together, these
results will elucidate the nature of the interface between language and spatial
cognition.