* 9510322
* (ESH) Collaborative Research: Pliocene &amp; Early Pleistocene  Continental Paleoclimate Records from the Eastern Great     Basin, Utah -- Kansas State University Component
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Charles Oviatt, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 06/30/1997
* USD 19,307.00

9510322 Oviatt The middle Pliocene to early Pleistocene was a period of major
global climate change. Few long and continuous of records of non-marine climate
changes have been reported from this period in the continental United States,
and those that exist are from the far west of the Great Basin where marine
climate processes would be expected to significantly affect the records. New
data have been obtained by the Principal Investigators from two recently drilled
lacustrine sediment cores in the eastern Great Basin. Preliminary data suggest
that these cores represent important geological records of paleoclimate (from
0.75 Ma to about 3.1 Ma) which will provide much-needed data to determine the
relationship, and degree of coupling, between marine and continental climate
processes. The goals of this study are to acquire environmental magnetic,
lithostratigraphic, and sedimentologic data from these two cores in order to
decipher the history of paleoclimate variations in this part of the Great Basin.
Detailed documentation of the timing, temporal variation, and magnitude of
Pliocene and Pleistocene climatic events will provide fundamentally important
data concerning continental climate change. It is proposed to compare the data
with other, less detailed, records from the Great Basin as well as marine
paleoclimate records. This will help to constrain models of land-ocean
interaction and models of global environmental change. The project is
multidisciplinary and multi-institutional and will be carried out in close
collaboration with colleagues from the U.S. Geological Survey and the University
of Utah.