* 9510183
* Extratropical Climate Variability in the Coupled Ocean-     Atmosphere System
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Zhengyu Liu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1997
* USD 361,824.00

Abstract ATM-9510183 Houghton, David D. University of Wisconsin Title:
Extratropical Climate Variability in the Coupled Ocean- Atmosphere System This
research is focused on understanding and isolating key physical mechanisms
related to: 1) the effects of tropical- extratropical interactions on
interannual variability in the extratropical North Pacific region, 2) decadal
climate variability in the North Pacific, and 3) abrupt shifts in the
extratropical atmospheric flow in the transition seasons. Simulations from a
hierarchy of numerical models with validation from observations provide the
basic data for analysis. Careful diagnostics will enable isolation of specific
processes. Such isolation is critical for developing theory and for
understanding results from fully coupled models. Observations from global data
sets will be used not only for model parameter specification and validation, but
also for diagnostic analyses parallel to those that are found useful in the
model studies. A strong point for this research project is the close
collaboration of scientists representing both the oceanographic and atmospheric
science communities. This will enable them to adequately incorporate the key
mechanisms of the ocean-atmospheric system important to the various time scales
of variability.