* 9510437
* Conference on Recent Advances in Mechatronics, Istanbul,    Turkey, August 14-16, 1995, Support of U.S. Scientists'     Participation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Sabri Tosunoglu, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/1996
* USD 16,493.00

*** 9510437 Tosunoglu Description: This project is to support US participation
in an international meeting "The Conference on Recent Advances in Mechatronics"
planned to be held August 14-16, 1995 in Istanbul, Turkey. The meeting is
scheduled to bring Turkish, US, Japanese, and European scientists and engineers
to share research results and identify areas for future research, and for joint
work in the area of mechatronics. Topics to be covered will include: development
of mechatronic machines; production automation; intelligent manufacturing
systems, robotics and motion control, and education and training in
mechatronics. The plans call for special sessions and tutorials to be led by
Japanese experts. The Turkish organizer is Dr.Okyay Kaynak, UNESCO Chair on
echatronics at Bogazici University in Istanbul. It is expected that a
proceedings of the plenary lectures and presented papers will be published and
made available before the meeting. Scope: This meeting is the first in its type,
and is sponsored by, among others, the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,
the IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, the IEEE Robotics & Automation Society,
The Institute of Electrical Engineers of Japan, the Japanese Society of
Mechanical Engineers, the Robotics Society of Japan, and the Society of
Instrument and Control Engineers of Japan. The participation of US scientists is
important to the success of this meeting. It is expected that they will benefit
from the interaction with the strong Japanese delegation as well as the European
participation. The Turkish organizer hopes to have this meeting held bi-
annually, rotating the host country between Europe, the USA, and Japan. The
increasing emphasis in Turkey on this scientific topic, as evidenced by the
establishment of the UNESCO chair at Bogacici University, will benefit from
having the meeting held at that university. ***