* 9510243
* Development of Minimum Life-Cycle cost Design Criteria
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Y. Wen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/1999
* USD 168,563.00

9510243 Wen Design procedures for civil infrastructure systems under
environmental loadings have gradually changed from largely judgments/experience-
based, semi- probabilistic, to probabilistic. Procedures based on optimization
of long-term risk and benefit, however, have not been developed. Such a
procedure is specially needed in evaluation and repair/retrofit of existing
facilities whose hazard exposure time is short but whose failure may still cause
serious consequences. A large number of the nation's civil infrastructure
systems are aging and many are in need of replacement. The repair/retrofit
problem will become more acute. Rational life-cycle cost based design criteria
are needed in which effects of loading and resistance uncertainty, hazard
exposure time, costs of consequence of failure and operation and maintenance,
and discount of cost/loss over time are all taken into consideration. The
objectives of this project are: (l) development of methodology for determination
of design criteria based on life-cycle and (2) application to new and
retrofitted facilities not covered by regular codes an standards. The problem is
formulated as that of minimization of expected total life-cycle cost with
respect to the design variables, i.e., design loads and resistance of the
facility or corresponding load and resistance factors in a LRFD format. The
required research tasks are to: (1) formulate the design as a constrained
minimization problem considering uncertainties in the load and resistance
including random load occurrence time, intensity, and correlation, costs of
failure consequences, and discounting cost/loss over time; (2) develop of
optimization algorithm for solution; (3) study the effect of load and resistance
uncertainty and resistance deterioration over time; (4) model cost functions and
examine sensitivity of design and (5) determine the design loads. The research
will impact the development of new concepts and metho dologies of design that
have important implications in the next generation codes and standards. The
results will also have more immediate benefit in development of guidelines for
repair/retrofit. ***