* 9510173
* Measurement and Prediction of Parallel Program Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Thomas LeBlanc, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 07/31/1999
* USD 149,467.00

The goal of this research is to develop a set of tools and techniques for
performance analysis and tuning of parallel programs that bridges this gap
between measurement and modeling, and theory and practice. The approach to
performance measurement and modeling is called "lost cycles analysis", and is
based on the observation that the distinction between productive computation and
parallel overhead is useful both for performance diagnosis and for performance
prediction. This approach decomposes all parallel overhead into mutually-
exclusive, yet comprehensive categories (such as load imbalance and
communication overhead), each of which can be measured and modeled separately.
These categories express overheads in common units, called "lost cycles", and
together represent the portion of the total execution time not devoted to useful
computation. This research effort's goal is to build a lost cycles toolkit,
integrating empirical model-building techniques from statistics with the
measurement and modeling techniques of lost cycles analysis to generate accurate
models of application performance. The toolkit will use a priori knowledge of
the sources and characteristics of overhead in parallel systems to guide and
constrain the modeling process. It will incorporate techniques for optimum
experimental design into an experiment generation tool that will generate a
"script" of representative program executions. During these executions it will
use a measurement tool to record the lost cycles for each overhead category as a
function of the variables of interest (including, but not limited to, the number
of processors and the problem size). It will use the measurement results
obtained from the executions to select from a database of standard models for
overhead categories. In addition, it will use a tool for fitting models of
overhead categories to experimental data to establish the constants associated
with a particular hardware and software system. By automating perfo rmance
modeling as much as possible, this effort intends to make lost cycles analysis
practical for everyday use by parallel programmers. ***