* 9510274
* Poly(alkylbithiazoles):  A New Class of Variable-Band Gap   Conjugated Polymer
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1998
* M. David Curtis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/1998
* USD 301,442.00

9510274 Curtis Highly conjugated polymers are promising materials for use as
electrodes in batteries or sensors, as the light-emitting semiconductor in LEDs,
and as anti-corrosion or anti-static coatings. This research opens the
possibility of producing new polymers with tunable properties. %%% Curtis'
research group has recently synthesized a new class of conjugated polymers, the
poly(alkylbithiazole)s, PABTs. These new polymers have alkyl side chains that
render them soluble in common organic solvents, and thin films may be cast from
these solutions. These new polymers are regioregular and show unprecedented
polymorphism with attendant polychromism. Thermal of solvent annealing of the
films induces solid state phase transformations that are characterized by large
increases in the conjugated length and decreases in the band gap. This research
seeks to determine the structures of the polymorphic phases and to determine how
the molecular structure of the polymer side chains influences the solid-state
packing, phase- transformation energetics, crystallinity, conductivity, and
photo- or electroluminescence efficiency. Model oligomers will be synthesized
and their 3-dimensional structures determined by X-ray diffraction. These model
studies will aid the interpretation of X-ray and EXAFS data on the high MW
polymers. The polymers and model oligomers will be doped with a variety of
oxidants and the structures and spectroscopic properties (UV-VIS, ESR, magnetic
susceptibility, etc.) of the doped systems will be determined and compared with
the neutral precursors. This systematic study of structure-property
relationships will provide new data for optimizing polymer structure for
specific properties, e.g. high conductivity, high electroluminescence
efficiency, thermal- or photo-stability, etc. The PABTs have a basic nitrogen
functional group in the chain backbone that can be alkylated or used to form
metal complexes. These reactions alter the potential along the chain. Such
changes may be used to alter conductivity or to act as exciton traps to increase
luminescence efficiency and alter the wavelength of the emitted light. ***