* 9510069
* Dissertation Research:  Comparative Study of Gender and     Disease Patterns Among Mexican Women in Atlanta and Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Constance Nathanson, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1997
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a student of demographic
anthropology from Johns Hopkins University. The project studies the connections
between gender, and reproduction by comparing the experiences of recent Mexican
immigrant women in Atlanta, GA and a similar group of women living still in
their town of origin in Mexico. Differences in patterns of contraceptive use and
sexually transmitted disease (STD) prevention will be studied in relation to the
broad differences in social and cultural context. Using ethnographic techniques
of in-depth interviews and participant observation the student will examine the
reproductive and disease histories of a small sample of women in Atlanta for six
months, then repeat the study in the village in Mexico for another six months.
Then a survey will be designed to be administered to a larger population in both
sites, to test hypotheses about causes of variations in contraceptive use and
STD prevention. This study will advance discussions about the nature of
transitional communities, and the social construction of gender. The knowledge
to be gained will be very important to planners concerned with population growth
and with STD prevention, as the combination of in-depth ethnography and
extensive surveys will produce an understanding of patterns of variation in
fertility and disease that will be valid and representative for this population.