* 9510607
* Colloidal Particle Growth in Silica Xerogels
* NONE,NONE
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Simeen Sattar, Bard College
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1997
* USD 59,993.00

Abstract 9510607 Simeen A new strategy is devised for making colloidal particles
dispersed within an inorganic or organic matrix. The sol-gel process is combined
with methods for making colloidal particles by homogeneous precipitation from
electrolyte solutions. The feasibility of this approach has been demonstrated by
successful preparation of a material consisting of large numbers of 0.1-1
micrometer chromium hydroxide spheres embedded within a silica xerogel.
Homogeneous precipitation offers the possibility of making a wide variety of
particles and the means for exercising systematic control over particle
morphology. The goals of the proposed research are to determine whether this
technique can be extended to generate particles with different compositions
within gels; whether it is possible to create crystalline particles; and whether
the metal salt particles can be reduced to metal. Other experiments will
investigate the role of the gel matrix in controlling particle size. %%%
Synthesis of composite materials consisting of colloidal particles dispersed
within an inorganic or organic matrix is of considerable interest because of
applications in catalysis and optics, among other areas. A new strategy for
making such composites has been devised that combines the sol-gel process with
methods for making colloidal particles by homogeneous precipitation from
electrolyte solutions. The feasibility of this approach has been demonstrated by
successful preparation of a material consisting of large numbers of 0.1-1
micrometer chromium hydroxide spheres embedded within a silica xerogel.
Homogeneous precipitation offers the possibility of making a wide variety of
particles and the means for exercising systematic control over particle
morphology. The goals of the research described in this proposal are to
determine whether this technique can be extended to generate particles with
different compositions within gels; whether it is possible to create crystalline
particles; and whether the metal salt particles can be reduced to metal.