* 9510679
* Synthesis and Characterization of Cadmium and Zinc Model    Compounds of Biological Relevance
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1997
* LeRoy Peterson, Jr., Francis Marion University
* Standard Grant
* Brian J. Rappoli
* 12/31/1997
* USD 17,582.00

Dr. LeRoy Peterson, Jr., Department of Chemistry and Physics, Francis Marion
University, is supported under a Research Planning Grant for Minority Scientists
and Engineers by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division for the study of zinc and cadmium complexes
which model the action of these metals in biological systems. To this end a
series of zinc and cadmium compounds utilizing poly(pyrazolyl)borate, nucleic
acid, and carboxylate ligands will be prepared and characterized. The structures
and properties of these complexes will be used to understand the interactions of
the metals with complex biological molecules. Zinc plays important roles in a
diverse series of enzymes and is involved in many biochemical processes
including DNA replication, recognition, rewinding, and degradation. Chemically
cadmium is closely related to zinc, but, in contrast to zinc, is quite toxic.
The major goal of the research is to establish the important aspects of the
chemistry of zinc and cadmium that govern their behavior in biological systems.
A significant portion of this planning grant will involve the establishment of
collaborative arrangements with nearby laboratories, which will allow Dr.
Peterson and his students access to instrumentation not available at Francis
Marion University.