* 9510206
* CRUI: The Impact of Land-Use Legacies on Forest Soil-Plant- Atmosphere Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Charles McClaugherty, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 742,122.00

This project is for Collaborative Research at Undergraduate Institutions,
involving interactions between soil, plants and atmospheric gases, and their
dependence on the history of land use by humans. An important question in
ecology is how the history of land use has a long-term impact on a local
ecosystem. While studies often address interactions of physiology with an
organism, or of an organism with its community, we know little about the
interactions across the whole range of levels from cellular chemistry to
ecosystem for a single defined locale. This collaboration brings together
investigators from three different small colleges, representing atmospheric and
soil chemistry, plant productivity, and plant ecophysiology. Using the NSF Long-
Term Ecological Research (LTER) site at Harvard Forest, they address key issues
of local spatial heterogeneity in chemical resources and fluxes, nutrient
cycling, microclimatology, plant growth, and population patterns and species
diversity. Incorporation of the historical aspects of human land usage in the
past century adds a dimension of social science. Novel questions about the role
of local heterogeneity and the unique approach to interactions between
hierarchical levels raise important issues for ecosystem models. Results will
provide perspective on many issues related to global change of ecosystems, and
human effects on global change. This project also promises to immerse
undergraduates from all three colleges intensively in an unusual breadth of
multidisciplinary field and laboratory research.