* 9510892
* An Attributional Analysis of Peer and Family Aggression
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Bernard Weiner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2000
* USD 314,787.00

An important instigator of aggression is the thought that others are responsible
for aversive events that impact on the self. This cognitive appraisal produces
anger, which, in turn, gives rise to antisocial responses. In this program of
research, a series of interrelated investigations will elucidate these cognitive
and affective determinants of aggression, suggesting methods to foster changes
in overt hostility. The proposal incorporates laboratory and field
methodologies; examines a range of aggressive populations, including abusive
caregivers and incarcarated youths; and considers a variety of aggression-
related phenomena. One series of investigations examines whether thoughts that
others are responsible are particularly salient among aggressive school-aged
boys. A second set of studies investigates how inferences of responsibility are
influenced by group membership and ingroup versus outgroup status. A third set
of studies then examines the impression management skills of aggressive youths,
particularly their understanding, use, and acceptance of accounts (such as
confession and legitimate excuses) that might mitigate perceptions of
responsibility and reduce anger. These basic processes and mechanisms are then
incorporated into the study of abusive caretakers and incarcarated adolescents.
Among the former population, we examine their propensity to hold young children
responsible for negative actions (i.e., see them as undertaken with negative
intentions), the intensity of anger as a result of this inference, and the
manner in which stressors in the environment affects these judgments and
emotions. Finally, an intervention that incorporates principles about inferring
responsibility in others, a full understanding and use of accounts, and the long
term consequences of inferring outgroup responsibility is devised, with
incarcarated adolescents as targets of this 40-lesson program. The intervention
also incorporates principles of self-responsibility for achievement-related
outcomes. Thus, principles from laboratory research are used in an attempt to
improve both the social and academic behavior of delinquent adolescents.
Aggressive behavior undermines the goals of family cohesion, student education,
and neighborhood attachment. In this program of research, we examine some of the
thoughts and emotions that give rise to aggressive behaviors. The research
includes a variety of aggressive populations (aggressive children in school,
incarcarated youths, and abusive caregivers); takes place in the laboratory as
well as in natural settings (such as the school); and concludes with an
intervention program attempting to reduce subsequent aggression among
incarcarated adolescents. The basic idea guiding the research is that aggression
is in part instigated by the tendency to hold others responsible for negative
events that impact on oneself. This, in turn, gives rise to anger and antisocial
responses. Furthermore, inferences of responsibility and negative affects are
particularly expressed toward outgroup members, and are in part fostered by
shortcomings in the understanding, use, and acceptance of legitimate excuses and
confessions. In laboratory research, the salience of the propensity to hold
others responsible for negative events is examined, and the impact of ingroup-
outgroup distinctions as well as the function of communicating confessions and
legitimate excuses are studied. These determinants of aggression also are
considered in abusive caretakers, where the possible exacerbating effects of
environmental stressors on aggressive thinking and emotions are investigated.
Then, an intervention that incorporates principles about inferring
responsibility in others, a full understanding and use of accounts such as
confession and legitimate excuses, and the long term consequences of inferring
outgroup responsibility is devised. Incarcarated adolescent offenders are the
targets of this 40-lesson program. The intervention also incorporates principles
of self-responsiblity for achievement-related success and failure. Thus,
understanding gained from laboratory research is used in an attempt to improve
both the academic and social behaviors in a population of delinquent
adolescents.