* 9510065
* Phytolith and Carbon Isotopic Evidence for Early Holocene   Grassland Dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Glen Fredlund, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1997
* USD 30,000.00

9510065 Fredlund This research will provide a baseline technique to test the
hypothesis that the Great Plains grassland is currently, and has been throughout
most of the Holocene, in dynamic equilibrium with long-term climate fluctuations
on the regional scale. Under this hypothesis, the dominant grasses of the region
should have been able to rapidly adjust to climatic change during the
Pleistocene-Holocene transition. This project will begin to test that hypothesis
through the analysis of the late Pleistocene and early Holocene fossil record
from the region. The first stage of this process is to calibrate and validate
the tools that will be used to measure grassland response in the fossil record:
phytolith and stable carbon isotope analysis. Current interpretations of these
methods are based on theoretically sound but imperfect relationships with grass
taxonomy and community composition. This study will analyze soil samples from an
array of over 50 modern prairie sites from across the region. Grass phytolith
assemblages, (13C of soil organic matter, and (13C or organic carbon occluded
within opal phytoliths will be analyzed for each sample. If the technique can be
calibrated in this fashion, a direct relationship can be determined between (13C
in fossil phytoliths and the general C3/C4 ratio of community composition. This,
in turn, can be related directly to climate. This project will provide an
important assessment of the ability of (13C analysis of phytoliths to address
vegetation-climate relationships over the Holocene in grasslands. Although much
is known about forest dynamics during the Pleistocene and Holocene, there is
very little detailed information on the regional dynamics of the Great Plains in
response to climate change.