* 9510078
* (ESH) Miocene Concentrations and 13C of Atmospheric         Carbon Dioxide Inferred from Stomatal Density and   13C     of Fossil Leaves
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Peter Larson, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/1998
* USD 191,611.00

9510078 Marshall Stable carbon isotope ratios and stomatal characters of Miocene
leaves will be compared to those of modern leaves from nearest living relatives
(NLR) Herbarium specimens of the NLR's will be analyzed to calibrate isotopic
composition and stomatal characters against the 30% increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration and the 1.2% decrease in isotopic composition since
the industrial revolution. Using the calibrations, we will obtain from the
fossil data ten to twenty independent, taxon-specific estimates of the isotopic
composition and concentration of carbon dioxide in the Miocene atmosphere. The
fossil leaves are of subtropical and temperate trees deposited ca. 15 million
years ago in anoxic lake sediments near clarkia, Idaho. The dominant trees in
the flora included species of Quercus, Castanea, Pseudofagus, Metasequoia , and
Taxodium. These remarkably preserved fossils have previously yielded DNA, taxon-
specific flavonoid profiles, and are sometimes still pigmented when first
removed from the sediments. They are, to our knowledge, the best preserved
specimens of this age in the world. Nonetheless to minimize the influence of
diagenesis on isotopic composition all comparisons will rely on lignin extracted
from the modern leaves and the fossils. Stomatal density (# stomata per m2 of
leaf surface) and stomatal size will be measured on replicate samples of all
leaves; stomatal index (#stomata/(#stomata + epidermal cells)) will be measured
where possible. New collections of the nearest living relatives will also be
made to quantify the effects of canopy position and altitude above sea level.
The middle Miocene was a time of rapidly falling temperatures and CO2
concentrations. Published estimates of atmospheric composition rely on isotopic
data from ocean sediments, which are uncertain because they are several steps
removed from the atmosphere. We propose an alternative means of reconstructing
atmospheric composition based on land plants, which are better coupled to the
atmosphere. Because individual genera can be analyzed separately, the work will
provide an independent estimate of atmospheric composition from each genus. If
successful, this work may eventually lead to analyses of Miocene terrestrial
photosynthesis, one of the major biogeochemical processes removing CO2 from the
atmosphere, and may constrain our estimates of terrestrial ecosystem responses
to the ongoing increase in atmospheric CO2.