* 9510375
* GIG:  Infrastructure  Improvement for a Research Group for  the Study of the Algebra and Geometric of Quantum Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Lev Kapitanski, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 02/28/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9510375 Yetter A focus on mathematical problems arising from or related to
quantum physics has become the over-riding theme of much of the mathematical
research carried out in the Kansas State University Department of Mathematics.
This project addresses the infrastructure needs of the group engaged in
mathematical research in this area, specifically enabling the group to hire a
postdoctoral research assistant whose presence will improve research
productivity through the injection of fresh perspectives and ideas and the
cementing ties between members of the group and providing for improvements to
the computing environment available to the group.Research interests in the group
range from very classical applications of mathematics to quantum theory---
solution of equations of Schroedinger type (L.V. KAPITANSKI), quantum scattering
problems (both direct and inverse) (A.G. Ramm and K. VANINSKY), and continuum
statistical mechanics (K. Vaninsky)---through general quantization problems (Y.
SOIBELMAN) and non-commutative geometry (F. WU and G. Nagy) to recent
developments relating algebra, topology and quantum field theory--- quantum
groups (Z. LIN and Y. Soibelman), topological and conformal field theories (L.
CRANE, Z. Lin, and D.N. YETTER), applications of gauge theory to differential
topology (F. Miller), and sigma models (L.V. Kapitanski).(The first mention of
each co-PI for the project is in upper-case.)