* 9510456
* GOALI/Faculty and Students in Industry:  Rapid Development  of Computer Aided Process Planning Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Chun Zhang, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 11,694.00

9510456 Zhang This research aims to prove the concept of rapid development of
manufacturing planning software by building a prototype infrastructure for
modular computer-aided process planning (CAPP) systems. Data will be collected
from industry through the collaboration of NIST and industry during an
internship at NIST. Two modules of the CAPP system, process selection/sequencing
and intermediate machining tolerance allocation, will be developed and
integrated with the infrastructure of rapid development of manufacturing
planning software proposed by NIST researchers. The NIST contribution will be to
build an open software object library, functional and data requirement
specification mechanisms, a knowledge-based mapping mechanism, an automated
object composition mechanism, and automated software validation procedures.
Software systems play a key role in the implementation of an agile manufacturing
concept. However, it is difficult to modify existing manufacturing application
software systems to suit a user's dynamic needs, so currently available software
systems are not useful for agile manufacturing. This research should result in a
general framework as well as specific methods that the manufacturing application
software industry can use in developing the next generation of manufacturing
planning software for agile manufacturing.