* 9510156
* Object-Sharing Technology for Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Kevin Jeffay, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 01/31/1999
* USD 210,037.00

The objective of this project is to develop an object-based framework for
synchronization and interprocess communication in real-time computer systems.
This framework will integrate work on scheduling theory with work on delay-
resilient shared objects. The term ``scheduling'' refers to the problem of
sequencing tasks on a shared execution unit such that it is possible to
determine a priori if the timing requirements of tasks are respected. A variety
of scheduling policies will be considered in this project, spanning the spectrum
from hard to soft real-time systems. By focusing on delay-resilient shared
objects, this project represents a significant point of departure from past work
on real-time synchronization. Delay-resilient objects are distinguished by the
fact that they are not locked. The notion of a delay-resilient shared object
builds upon recent promising work on wait-free and lock-free synchronization in
shared-memory multiprocessors. Although such work has been ongoing for several
years, this project represents the first comprehensive effort to integrate such
objects within an object-sharing framework for real-time computing. From a real-
time perspective, the key advantage of delay-resilient objects is that they do
not give rise to priority inversions. Traditional object-sharing approaches for
real-time systems rely on significant operating system support to deal with this
problem. The proposed approach does not require such support, and thus entails
lower synchronization overhead than traditional approaches. Another advantage of
the proposed approach is that it can be applied across a variety of diverse
platforms. Target platforms for this project include uniprocessors, shared-
memory and message-passing multiprocessors, and workstation clusters. ***