* 9511368
* The Historical Syntax of Middle English from a Comparative  Perspective
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Anthony Kroch, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 01/31/2000
* USD 229,468.00

9511368 Over the past decade, interest in historical syntax has grown
substantially among generative grammarians as it has become clear that the study
of successive stages in the historical development of languages provides useful
results to the field of comparative grammar. Historical data adds two dimensions
to investigations into the specification of the parameters of universal grammar:
(1) the minimal character of the grammatical differences between successive
stages in a historical development allows for more controlled comparison than do
comparisons of unrelated languages; (2) the sequential order and temporal
coincidence of linguistic changes allows hypotheses regarding the correlation of
superficially disparate features to a single abstract underlying property to be
tested by the way these features appear and disappear in the historical record.
The nature of historical data (surviving texts) requires the use of a
methodology different from that of synchronic syntax if it is to be exploited to
its full potential. To this end, the investigators have constructed three
corpora, one of Middle English, one of Yiddish, and a smaller one of Early New
High German. In the next period of research, they will double in size the Middle
English corpus, taking it from its current 510,000 to 1.1 million words. The
need for this work is created by the wide range of dialect variation in Middle
English and the important syntactic changes which take place in this period.
Proper study of this variability requires more and larger text samples than the
current corpus contains. Prior work on the syntax of verb movement and verb
complement order in Middle English and Early Yiddish using moderate size corpora
and recent theoretical work in West Germanic has opened up a number of avenues
of inquiry which the planned research will address: 1) the historical processes
by which grammars change, including the contribution of dialect and language
contact; 2) the proper analysis of V2 in Middle English, taking into account
dialect data, and the insightful but opposing theories of Pintzuk (1991) and van
Kemenade (1992); 3) the comparative grammar of the variation between head-
initial and head-final verb phrase structures; 4) the potential contribution to
the analysis of historical Germanic of recent proposals by Kayne (1993) and
Zwart (1993) regarding the proper grammatical treatment of variation in
directionality.