* 9511362
* Contributions of Lower Brainstem Auditory Pathways to SignalProcessing in the Midbrain
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Ellen Covey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

Processing by the auditory pathway in the brain passes through several stages.
In mammals, information from the auditory nerve from the ear is transmitted to
clusters of nerve cells (neurons) in the brainstem; these clusters are called
nuclei. These cells in turn pass their output to the major auditory center of
the midbrain, called the superior colliculus. Complex sound patterns present a
range of important features for the brain to analyze, including timing
properties that can include duration, and rate of modulation of either amplitude
or frequency. Within the brain, networks of nerve cells produce excitation and
inhibition in particular ways that produce effective "filters" to enhance or to
eliminate signals with particular timing patterns. This work uses a novel
approach of reversible, specific pharmacological blockade of individual nuclei.
Such targeted blockade of the brainstem inputs, while physiologically recording
neuronal activity in the superior colliculus, allows a novel way to study how
"tuning" for particular dynamic auditory properties can arise by combining
excitatory and inhibitory inputs. Results of this analysis of auditory circuitry
will provide an advance in understanding auditory processing, but also will have
an impact beyond auditory neuroscience to studies of brain circuits in general,
and the way in which complex information processing can emerge in complex
networks.