* 9511890
* Economic Approaches to Crime Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Steven Levitt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1997
* USD 58,621.00

9511890 Levitt Crime is an important social and economic issue in the United
States. The cost of crime to victims is estimated at approximately $200 billion
per year. In addition to that figure, government outlays on the criminal justice
system totaled $74 billion in 1990 and private expenditures on protection are
the same order of magnitude. Given the scope of the crime problem, the empirical
economics literature addressing the issue is surprisingly small. This project
focuses on finding creative apppoaches to identifying the effects of policy
changes in the presence of simultaneity between crime and the policy variables
of interest. More specifically, it considers 1) the effect of police on crime;
2) the impact of prison populations on criminal activity; and 3) relationship
between arrest rates and crime. For example, previous empirical studies have
typically uncovered little evidence that additional police officers reduce
crime. One problem with those studies is a failure to adequately deal with the
simultaneity between policy and crime: while police may or may not reduce crime,
there is little doubt that expenditures on police forces are an increasing
function of the crime rate. This study uses the timing of mayoral and
gubernatorial elections as an instrument to break the simultaneity between
policy and crime. Increases in the size of police forces disproportionately
occur in election years, but there is little reason to expect that elections
affect crime except through changes in the police force.