* 9511843
* The Internal Legal Culture of Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Sally Riggs Fuller, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/2000
* USD 124,932.00

95-11843 Fuller Contemporary laws impose substantial responsibilities upon
employers to adhere to and enforce government policies designed to protect civil
rights and other aspects of the employer-employee relation. Despite this, the
laws regulating the employment relation tend to be broad and ambiguous, leaving
organizations wide latitude to interpret and decide how to comply with them.
Previous research indicates that organizations respond to these laws by creating
internal legal structures that serve as symbols of attention to law. But
research give few clues concerning a number of important questions concerning
how these structures shape the internal legal culture of their organizations or
whether (how much?) they influence employees to assert their legal rights when
they perceive them to be infringed or pacify employees by creating the
impression that the employer must be obeying the law. Drawing on organization
theory, this study is a broad investigation of the creation and characteristics
of internal legal cultures within organizations and the extent to which laws
designed to protect employees actually change organizational culture and affect
the work lives of employees. It is based on interviews with general, legal, and
personnel administrative officials in six organizations and on a survey of 200
employees in each of these organizations. At the intraorganizational level, it
will investigate employees views of the realization of rights in organizations
and of the likelihood of their opting for legal solutions to employment
problems. At the organization level, the study will elucidate officials'
conceptions of law and enactment %%%% The laws regulating the employment
relation tend to be broad and ambiguous, leaving organizations wide latitude to
interpret and decide how to comply with them. Previous research indicates that
organizations respond to these laws by creating internal legal structures that
serve as symbols of attention to law. But research give few clues concerni ng a
number of important questions concerning how these structures shape the internal
legal culture of their organizations or whether (how much?) they influence
employees to assert their legal rights when they perceive them to be infringed
or pacify employees by creating the impression that the employer must be obeying
the law. Drawing on organization theory, this study is a broad investigation of
the creation and characteristics of internal legal cultures within organizations
and the extent to which laws designed to protect employees actually change
organizational culture and affect the work lives of employees. It is based on
interviews with general, legal, and personnel administrative officials in six
organizations and on a survey of 200 employees in each of these organizations.
At the intraorganizational level, it will investigate employees views of the
realization of rights in organizations and of the likelihood of their opting for
legal solutions to employment problems. At the organization level, the study
will elucidate officials' conceptions of law and enactment of internal legal
culture. ****