* 9511410
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research: Fundamental Studies of     Matter at Short Distance
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* John Peoples, Universities Research Association Inc
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1998
* USD 25,620.00

9511410 Grannis This award provides funds to permit Drs. Paul D. Grannis,
Department of Physics, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Hugh E.
Montgomery, Scientist, Fermilab, and John Peoples, Director, Fermilab, to pursue
with Drs. Joo Sang Kang, Department of Physics, Korea University, Sun Kee Kim,
Department of Physics, Seoul National University, and Yeong Mouk Park,
Department of Physics, Kyeong Seong University, for 24 months, a program of
cooperative research on the DO Experiment at the Fermilab antiproton-proton
Collider. The DO experiment will study the interactions among fundamental
constituents of matter at the highest energy available in the world today,
seeking to elucidate the basic structure of matter and forces at the shortest
distance scales possible. The DO experiment is a large cooperative project
involving many U.S. institutions and scientists from several foreign countries,
as well. The PIs hold that the Korean physicists' expertise with particle
tracking devices will benefit the DO collaboration in the development of such
devices for the DO upgrade. Thus, the collaborative project is beneficial to the
U.S. The collaboration in a world class experimental program also will benefit
the Korean physicists and strengthen Korea's technical capabilities and
infrastructure. This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea
Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation
between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of
scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration
on problems of mutual interest and benefit. The present project adds an
international cooperative dimension to the PI's ongoing research under NSF Grant
No. PHY-9420671. Korean participation in the project is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***