* 9511201
* Mechanisms of the Yan Protein-Mediated Inhibition of Cell   Fate Determination
* BIO,IOS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Zhi-Chun Lai, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1998
* USD 290,000.00

9511201 Lai A long term objective of Dr. Lai's research is to elucidate the
inhibitory mechanisms of cell fate determination and cellular differentiation.
Inhibitory signal transduction plays a critical role in development, but little
is known about the mechanisms. Using the Drosophila eye system, a negative
nuclear regulator of photoreceptor cell specification, the product of the yan
gene, has been previously characterized. Dr. Lai hypothesizes that Yan normally
acts to maintain photoreceptor precursor cells in an undifferentiated state, and
such inhibition can be overcome by proneural signalling, for example, the
Sevenless tyrosine receptor kinase and Ras1 protein that promote the development
of photoreceptor cell. To understand how Yan acts to maintain precursor cells
undetermined, and to reveal the functional significance of negative control in
nuclear signal transduction, Dr. Lai's team will use a combination of genetic,
molecular and cellular approaches. The specific aims include: 1) a genetic
screen for Enhancers of yan, 2) genetic characterization of E(yan) mutations,
and 3) molecular cloning of E(yan) genes. To accomplish these aims, a sensitized
and efficient assay has been devised by Dr. Lai for identifying mutations that
interact with yan. Selected E(yan) genes will be genetically and molecularly
characterized. Methods to be used include mutagenesis of the Drosophila genome,
phenotypic analysis of isolated mutations, molecular cloning and a P transposon
mediated transformation. The Drosophila photoreceptor cell provides an amenable
system for molecular genetic studies of key regulators of development. The work
proposed here will lead to the identification of key inhibitory regulators of
cell fate determination, whose structural information can be used for
identifying their vertebrate homologues. It will yield valuable information on
how negative control is integrated into the regulatory hierarchy of signal
transduction in the nucleus. ***