* 9511340
* The Role of Contrast Sets in Processing Natural Language    Focus Constructions
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Gregory Carlson, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/1999
* USD 139,877.00

This project examines the real-time processing of sentences with focus
constructions within the framework of a representational theory of the semantics
of focus. We will concentrate primarily on sentences and discourses exhibiting
contrastive focus, with special emphasis on the theoretical notion of a contrast
set, the group of alternative entities, properties, etc., that something in the
assertion in the sentence implicitly stands in contrast to. Existing literature
clearly establishes that readers and listeners devote extra attention to focused
words and phrases. However, to our knowledge, there has been little
psycholinguistic work to date conducted within the context of an explicit
representational theory of focus. Consequently, fundamental questions about the
informational contribution of contrastive focus, and its consequences for on-
line language processing, have not yet been explored. The research that we are
planning investigates the processing of sentences and discourses exhibiting
contrastive focus, as understood within the context of current semantic theory.
The most basic question is whether contrast sets are indeed computed during the
course of understanding an utterance marked with focus against the background of
a discourse context, and, if so, when are they computed, and how are they
computed (that is, what factors govern their determination). We will also
examine how they are used in managing attention (and salience of entities) in
discourse processing and interpreting referential expressions. Most of these
questions will be examined using a new experimental paradigm in which subjects
follow spoken instructions to manipulate objects in a workspace while their eye-
movements are monitored using a video-based camera system. Preliminary work
using the visual world paradigm has demonstrated that listeners seek to
establish reference incrementally, making eye-movements to relevant objects that
are closely time-locked to referential expre ssion in the instructions. Subjects
typically make an eye-movement to an object prior to reaching for it and the
programming of the eye-movement to the target object occurs, on average, within
several hundred milliseconds of the word in the instruction that makes that
object unique with respect to the relevant visual alternatives.