* 9511894
* The Paleolithic Faunas of Hayonim Cave (Israel):  An        Integrated Plan for Research and Education on Hominid       Ecology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2004
* Mary Stiner, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 301,323.00

Stiner This award under the NSF Faculty Early Career Development competition
will provide five years of support to Dr. Mary Stiner to further her
paleoanthropological research in Israel, to permit her to develop a laboratory
at the University of Arizona and to allow the incorporation students into her
project. The funding will permit her and a student to travel to Israel each year
to conduct preliminary analyses of faunal materials recovered through
archaeological excavation. A sample will be shipped to the Arizona facility
where they will be subjected to extensive examination. Funds will also permit
the purchase of necessary research and training equipment and laboratory
supplies and will provide student support. Dr. Stiner's study centers on the
analysis of recently excavated faunas from Hayonim Cave in Israel. The work
investigates the human foraging niche in the Near East during the late Middle
through early Upper Pleistocene geologic periods, a question fundamental to
understanding the origins of modern humans in this region. The long faunal
sequence at Hayonim is important because it fills a unique and crucial gap in
our knowledge about the emergence of anatomically modern humans. During this
period between ca. 200,000 to 50,000 years ago two different kinds of humans
were present in the Near East. One of these was directly ancestral to modern day
peoples and archaeologists wish to understand their behavior and how they
adapted to their changing environment. Through the analysis of faunal remains,
it will be possible to reconstruct environmental change over time and to gain
insight into the ways in which people utilized the range of animal resources
available to them. This research is important for several reasons. It will shed
new light on human-environment interactions. It will provide insight into the
emergence of modern behaviors, support the research and teaching career of a
promising young scientist and assist in student training.