* 9511338
* Genetic Specification Neuronal Identity
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Randall Phillis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dr. Susan F. Volman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 185,608.00

9511338 Phillis The establishment of the distinct identities of individual
neurons represents a fundamental step in the development of the diverse array of
neurons that make up a mature nervous system. During this process, individual
nerve cells develop distinct properties including characteristic anatomy,
physiology, and patterns of connectivity. However, the mechanisms that confer
neuronal identity are just beginning to be understood. The goal of this research
is to investigate the role of a newly discovered gene in the establishment of
neuronal identity in the invertebrate peripheral nervous system. Mutations in
this gene affect behavior and the morphology of adult sensory organs. In
addition, these mutations have the ability to enhance the phenotype of mutations
in another gene that is a regulatory gene required to confer proper identity to
external sensory organs. If function in this gene is lost, the mechanosensory
bristles are transformed in their identity and acquire characteristics of
internal stretch receptors. When mutations are present in both genes, there is
an interaction that results in the loss of nearly all of the mechanosensory
bristles from adults. The effects of mutations in the gene under study on
sensory organ development will be investigated using several genetic and
immunological markers specific to certain types of sensory organs. This analysis
will determine whether mutations in the gene result in a transformation of
sensory organ identity. The gene will also be cloned and sequenced to determine
the pattern of its expression and the structure of its protein product. Finally,
an ectopic expression system for the gene will constructed to determine whether
expression in specific subsets of sensory organs affects their development. The
data from these investigations will provide fundamental insights into the
genetic mechanisms that function in the development and differentiation of the
peripheral nervous system.