* 9511623
* Regulation of Membrane Lipid Hydrolysis in Lipid-based      Signaling of Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Xuemin Wang, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/1999
* USD 220,000.00

9511623 Wang Lipid-based signaling via the octadecanoid pathway, which leads to
the formation of regulators such as jasmonic acid, plays an important role in
plant physiological processes. Jasmonate and related oxygenated lipids have been
shown to act as endogenous signals activating defense gene expression and
regulating growth and development. Alph-linolenic acid has been shown to be the
precursor for the synthesis of these regulators. However, very little is known
about lipolytic release of alpha-linolenic acid in the octadecanoid signaling
pathway. Which lipid hydrolyzing enzyme is activated in the signaling process?
Which glycerolipids are hydrolyzed? How is the hydrolysis regulated? These
questions are important because making available the fatty acid precursor is an
early step in the sequence of events in signal transduction and may control the
signaling pathway. The goal of this research is, therefore, to investigate the
involvement, nature, and regulation of deacylation by lipolytic enzymes in the
octadecanoid signaling pathway. Stimulus-induced lipid turnover and release of
alpha-linolenic acid will be investigated in castor bean leaves in response to
wounding. Wounding is chosen because it is a well characterized stimulus that
induces the jasmonate signaling system. Completion of the proposed work will
fill a critical gap in our knowledge of the cellular roles of membrane lipid-
hydrolyzing enzymes in plant growth and environmental responsiveness.