* 9511840
* Evaluating Public Participation Processes by Combining      Perspectives from Planners, Participants, and Normative     Theory
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Thomas Webler, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 06/30/1997
* USD 75,396.00

A fundamental challenge of democracy is to make public decisions in a manner
that protects the rights of individuals, but is responsive to the shared needs
of all. This requires participation of affected parties. However, many important
environmental policy issues have become increasingly disputatious and difficult
to resolve by traditional methods. Recently, governmental agencies have been
experimenting with new forms of participation, but too little attention has been
paid to careful examination of how well participation opportunities meet the
process related needs of decision makers and affected parties. This project will
refine and test a process evaluation methodology, and use it to improve
understanding of peoples' expectations for public decision making processes. The
methodology integrates perspectives of planners, participants, and normative
theory, using a `real world` case, based on recently completed activities of the
Northern Forest Lands council (NFLC). The method consists of four steps:
characterization of the public participation process as it occurred; interviews
of planners and participants and construction of value-trees to represent how
they evaluate the process; evaluation of the process using a normative framework
for public participation developed in prior research; and comparison of the
evaluations made by the various parties and derived from the framework. The
focus is on how promising this methodology for systematic process evaluation is
in understanding how particular processes incorporate and integrate values.
Concise descriptions of differences among parties who participated in the NFLC
process can link the differences to specific design attributes of the process
and enable the investigators to draw conclusions about designs that can
incorporate and integrate values from multiple perspectives. Tools from this
research will be applicable to the study of other experiments in participation
and the results will contribute to ongoing work in the development of normative
theory for public participation in environmental decision making. The
investigators will make presentations at conferences and prepare articles for
submission to professional and practitioner journals. Copies of their reports
will be available to federal and New England natural resource policy agencies
and regional community development organizations.