* 9511344
* Immigrant and Native Mobility in Historical Perspective:    Comparative Economic Progress in the U.S., 1850-1990
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Joseph Ferrie, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1998
* USD 158,324.00

9511344 Ferrie Despite enormous changes in both the characteristics of
immigrants and the character of the U.S. economy they have entered, little
evidence has been available to assess how their economic mobility has changed
over long periods of U.S. history. We lack a historical benchmark since adequate
information on the economic mobility of Americans has been unavailable for the
mid-nineteenth century. Published data from the decennial censuses of population
for this period allow examination of only broad aggregates: net migration flows,
the distribution of occupations at a particular place or point in time, and the
average level of wealth in various communities. Where specific mid-nineteenth
century immigrants and natives went, how they changed jobs over the course of
their careers, how successful they were in monetary terms as those changes
occurred, and how immigrants' economic performance changed as their time in the
U.S. increased have remained a mystery. This project uses two new longitudinal
samples of ante-bellum immigrants and natives followed through the federal
censuses of 1850 and 1860 to help fill this gap. It documents the extent of
economic mobility among immigrants and natives in the years before the Civil
War. A variety of sources provide comparable information on economic mobility in
the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries. The reports of the Immigration
Commission (1911) and Public Use Micro Samples from the 1900-10 and 1970-90
federal census of population provide cross-section information on the number of
years immigrants have spent in the U.S., making it possible to see how the
economic performance of immigrants compares to that of natives as immigrants'
time in the U.S. increases. This project provides a historical perspective on
the economic mobility of immigrants and natives in the U.S. over nearly a
century and a half of economic development. It assesses the relative economic
performance of immigrants and natives in three periods: 1850-70, 1880-1 910, and
1970-90. The study will examine changes in income, occupational attainment, and
wealth using data on time since arrival, career histories, and information on
the performance of parents and children. This will make it possible to assess
how the relative performance of immigrants and natives has changed over long
periods of time and to learn how much of the change in relative performance has
resulted from structural changes in the U.S. and world economies and how much
has resulted from changes in the legal restrictions placed upon immigration.
Answers to these questions are particularly relevant when the role of immigrants
in the U.S. economy is under greater scrutiny than at any time since the
Immigration Commission's Report of 1911 which prompted the imposition of the
quota system.