* 9511156
* Genetic Analysis of Tetrahydrobiopterin Interactions with   Tyrosine Hydroxylase
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Janis O'Donnell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 07/31/1999
* USD 237,152.00

IBN-9511156 O'Donnell, Janis Catecholamines are one of the basic groups of
messenger molecules in the central nervous system and are intimately involved in
transmitting information about the environment to the appropriate brain regions
in all animals. The enzyme regulating catecholamine biosynthesis is tyrosine
hydroxylase. An essential cofactor required by tyrosine hydroxylase is
tetrahydrobiopterin. If tetrahydrobiopterin levels are compromised, then
catecholamine biosynthesis is similarly compromised pointing to the reliance of
tyrosine hydroxylase on this cofactor. Dr. O'Donnell has been instrumental in
identifying the enzyme responsible for the production of tetrahydrobiopterin.
This enzyme is GTP cyclohydrolase. In the experiments supported by this award,
Dr. O'Donnell will examine the physical interaction of tyrosine hydroxylase with
GTP cyclohydrolase to better understand the integral dependence of one enzyme on
the other. The structures present in GTP cyclohydrolase that physically interact
with tyrosine hydroxylase will be examined using sophisticated molecular
techniques to alter the structure of the cyclohydrolase enzyme. Further
investigations will map the location of GTP cyclohydrolase and tyrosine
hydoxylase in neurons to establish whether they exist as a complex or as
individual molecules. In addition, by genetic screening procedures, the genes
encoding these enzymes will be studied to determine if they are controlled by
similar regulatory elements providing for coregulation at the gene and protein
level in controlling the production of the essential cofactor,
tetrahydrobiopterin. Catecholamines are crucial elements in normal functioning
of the central nervous system and understanding the regulation of catecholamine
biosynthesis is critical for future understanding of neurological disorders,
such as Parkinson's disease.