* 9511607
* Broadcast Technologies and Public Policy: Government Regulation of Radio and Television in the United States
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Hugh Slotten, George Mason University
* Fixed Price Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1997
* USD 76,301.00

The role of scientists and engineers in government decision-making poses a
number of problems within a democracy. How does a regulator balance the
technical expertise that a scientist brings while at the same time emphasize
broad-based democratic participation which takes into account the controversial
socio-political aspects of technical decision making? Dr. Slotten is exploring
the areas of conflict as well as agreement and support in the intersection of
technology, science, and the demands of a democratic society through an analysis
of the Federal Radio Commission (FRC), organized in 1927, and the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), established in 1934. The FCC was created to
extend the work of the FRC to regulate television and other communication
technologies as well as radio. Dr. Slotten is focusing on the intersection of
technical issues and the social, political, economic, legal, and cultural
components of regulation by the federal government of the four most important
broadcast technologies developed during the 20th century: AM and FM radio,
monochrome and color TV. He is analyzing the public policy debate during the
period when the public implications of each new technology first became
important, examining specifically the role of the different participants and the
significance of key policy decisions for the early commercial development of the
technologies. This period was crucial for the establishment of the American
system of broadcasting and the related culture of mass communications. By
analyzing the complex interplay of different factors that went into the
formation of public policy for radio and television, we not only gain a deeper
understanding of the institutional and social framework in which policy
decisions were made, but we also gain a better appreciation of the tensions and
conflicts that continue to frame science and technology debates. This study is
particularly timely given the current interest in revising the Communications
Act of 1934 and in formula ting policies for the construction of a "national
information infrastructure."