* 9511432
* Neuronal Control and Biomechanics of a Hydrodynamic Skeleton
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1997
* William Kristan, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel K. Hartline
* 12/31/1997
* USD 156,726.00

IBN-9511432 William Kristan To move, soft-bodied animals must first contract
muscles to make themselves stiff, then contract the same or other muscles to
lengthen, shorten or bend. This temporary stiffness effectively serves as a
"hydroskeleton" on which the animals move. The same kind of hydroskeletons are
used by tubular organs such as tentacles on an octopus, the trunk of elephants,
or our own tongues and intestines. The principles underlying the control of
hydroskeletons is not well-understood, largely because the arrangement of the
muscles is complex and because it is very difficult to obtain all the needed
physiological and mechanical measurements from a single animal or organ. These
studies will use the medicinal leech to study hydroskeletons because all the
relevant properties of the nervous system and muscular system can be measured in
this animal. This multidisciplinary group of scientists have constructed a model
of the mechanics that produces reasonable estimates of some behaviors, such as
shortening and crawling. Now they will measure dynamic properties of the muscles
and add them to the biomechanical model, so that faster behaviors, such as
swimming, can be explained. The completed model should serve as a more general
description of hydroskeletons that can be used for a better understanding of
tentacles, trunks, tongues and intestines.