* 9511934
* Rate of Persistence of Responding
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Richard Shull, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 01/31/1999
* USD 49,993.00

Abstract Shull 9511934 If an individual is obtaining some type of reward by
responding, what happens if additional rewards are freely given, regardless of
what the individual is doing? One obvious effect is that the rate of the operant
response declines. But free rewards can also enhance the persistence of the
response--at least that is what research with pigeons has demonstrated. When
conditions are made less favorable for responding (e.g., when the subject is
satiated or when the delivery of all rewards in halted), responding will persist
longer if additional free rewards had been provided in the context than if they
had not been. An implication is that the rate and the persistence of operant
behavior are not aspects of a single process like response strength but are,
instead, independent properties of behavior controlled by different classes of
variables. The rate of operant behavior (i.e., the inclination to engage in the
behavior) depends on the strength of the operant contingency-- that is, on the
proportion of the total reinforcers that are obtained by the particular
response. Persistence appears to depend on the degree to which the context in
which the response occurs signals an increase or a decrease in the rate of
reinforcers regardless of whether or not the response produces those
reinforcers. One interpretation of the persistence effect is that the freely
delivered rewards make the context in which they occur more arousing or
emotionally exciting through a Pavlovian conditioning process. The emotional
excitement, in turn, feeds into the operant behavior making it relatively more
persistent in the face of worsening conditions. A possible practical implication
is that one can enhance the persistence of a response by presenting reinforcers
freely in the context in which the response occurs (e.g., in a classroom) even
though doing so will likely reduce the rate of the response. It is possible,
however, that the rate and persistence of behavior appear to be independent
properties only because response rate in our usual experimental preparations is
a mixture of different kinds of behavioral events. The proposal provides a
formal development of this possibility, based on the assumption that response
rate, as usually measured, is comprised of initiations of activity and
performance during the activity. The rate of initiations corresponds most
closely to the everyday sense of an inclination to engage in an activity. An
implication is that the rate and persistence of the usual measure of response
rate can appear independent even though the rate and persistence of initiations
are correlated. The proposed experiments are intended to examine the effects of
additional free reinforcers on the rate and persistence of initiations. Several
preparations are described that should provide a measure approximating
initiation rate, as distinct from the composite rate. The important question is
whether the rate and persistence of initiation rates covary as a function of the
operant contingency or are independent. The subjects will be rats. The response
will be lever pressing for food reinforcers.