* 9511552
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: The Mechanism, Receptivity and Control of Compressible, Heat-Conducting Vortices
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Jain-Ming Wu, University of Tennessee Space Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 03/31/1999
* USD 56,982.00

*** 9511552 Wu This award supports collaboration between Jiezie Wu, Jain- Ming
Wu, University of Tennessee Space Institute, George Carnevale, Scripps Institute
of Oceanography, and Tong Binggang, Yin Xieyuan, and Ma Huiyang, University of
Science and Technology, Hefei, China, on the mechanism, receptivity, and control
of compressible, heat-conducting vortices. The project proposes a thorough and
detailed investigation of the stability and mechanics of compressible vortices,
and concerns questions which are both of fundamental importance and practical
relevance. The Chinese partners are from the University of Science and
Technology of China (USTC), a key university affiliated with the Chinese Academy
of Sciences. USTC received funding from the Chinese NSF for a "key" project on
the mechanisms of vortices, separation, and their control in complex gaseous
media. This entitled USTC to a large influx of funds (by Chinese standards) and
provides a valuable opportunity for US researchers to take advantage of
complementary research and instrumentation. The structure, instability, and
breakdown of a vortex core have been studied intensively over the past few
decades because of the relevance to almost all fluid systems with small
viscosity in nature and in technology. The proposed work could represent
important progress in understanding more compressible and heat conducting
vortical flows, ranging from geophysical vortices such as hurricanes and
tornadoes, to vortices in technology such as the vortex system around a
supersonic aircraft. ***