* 9511613
* RUI:  Ultracryogenic Acoustic and Thermal Evaluation        of Metals for Gravity Wave Detectors
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* William Duffy, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 108,327.00

Professor Duffy will continue ultracryogenic studies of the mechanical quality
factor (Q) of selected polycrystalline technical materials. The quality factor
will be measured on torsional resonators machined in the unique configuration
developed by him. The configuration permits audio frequency measurement
(typically at 1 kHz) over a wide range of Qs (103 - 108) and a wide range of
temperatures (50mK - 300K). Since only a small piece of material is involved
(typically 6 cm diameter by 6 cm long), the cost of operation and the turn-
around time of the complex dilution refrigerator cryostat needed for the very
low temperature measurements are kept low. The work is to be carried out in
support of cryogenic (4K) and ultracryogenic (&lt;100 mK) resonant mass gravity
wave antenna development both in the United States and abroad. Close contact
will be maintained with the gravity-wave- detector community. Materials to be
studied include those which offer the most promise for use as gravitational wave
detectors of high sensitivity. This requires materials of high Q, which also
have appropriate inertial, elastic and thermal properties. Specific materials
which are the focus of this study include an explosively bonded aluminum alloy
5056 and a series of copper and aluminum alloys. Grain size and hardness will be
evaluated. Appropriate heat treatments will be developed, which have been found
to be so essential for obtaining high ultracryogenic Qs in the materials studied
to date. Ultralow temperature heat capacity and thermal conductivity studies of
selected materials will be carried out. In addition to supporting gravity wave
antenna development, the results should contribute to the fundamental
understanding of acoustic loss mechanisms.