* 9511946
* U.S-Polish Collaborative Research on Effect of Confinement  on Solubility and Liquid-Liquid Phase Transitions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Keith Gubbins, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 08/31/1998
* USD 38,921.00

Microscopy is ubiquitous among measurement methods in the biological sciences
and related engineering disciplines. Virtually all laboratories at MIT utilize
some form of microscopic technology, yet these images are commonly obtained,
stored, and analyzed on individual machines using commercially-available systems
and standardized processing software. Interpretations often remain qualitative,
and storage capabilities available to individual users limit data transfer speed
and the number of raw and processed images that can be maintained. Today,
however, computerized networks can greatly enhance and extend image acquisition,
processing, analysis, storage, and interpretation. Accordingly, this project
aims to develop a Quantitative Microscopy & Image Processing Network (QMIPN)
that will enable access to facilities capable of acquiring, transferring,
storing, and recalling images rapidly and efficiently. Advanced methodologies
for quantitative image interpretation will be available from both central and
remote sites. QMIPN will also serve as a platform for developing new imaging
modalities, further enhancing hardware and software image processing modules,
and establishing automated and remote forms of image acquisition and analysis.
Three phases are planned: PHASE I -- The Principal Investigators will use
relevant research projects as prototypes to define network capabilities. Light,
fluorescent, confocal, atomic-force, and transmission electron microscopes will
be connected to a central server/router. These microscopes will be adapted to
provide common interface, data storage, and analysis paradigms, along with
automated remote access and image manipulation. Local computer terminals will
control each microscope and sample, communicate with the central processor, and
perform basic image filtering. Acquired images will be transported via high-
speed ATM connections and downloaded to large capacity systems so that more
complex, computer-intensive proces sing methods can be employed. PHASE II --
This network will be broadened to involve an increased number of investigators
and projects, employing either the core microscope facilities or their own
individual laboratory microscope facilities. Inexpensive new CD-ROM writing
capabilities will be used to create a large database of stored images. By
developing indexing and retrieval methods, these images can be a world-wide
source of information. PHASE III -- The network will be extended to an even
wider group of investigators both on and off campus. Accessibility of our
network through the Internet will provide a powerful teaching tool that can be
tapped by other less-advantaged institutions with a relatively small investment.
This would raise the possibility of developing innovative outreach programs to
enrich curricula, e.g., at smaller minority schools that do not have strong
research programs. Three major benefits will grow as the network develops: 1.
Increased research efficiency and innovation, resulting from multi-user
facilities involving investigators with diverse interests and skills, in terms
of both applications and techniques; 2. Increased research productivity,
resulting from wide dissemination and application of stateof-the-art image
acquisition and processing methods; 3. Increased cooperation among scientists
and engineers on and off campus in terms of both research and teaching,
resulting from the ease of access to visual images display and analysis from
electronic information networks. Substantial matching funds have already been
raised from a variety of institutional and other non-federal sources, standing
ready to be leverage this grant.