* 9511876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  "Food Faddism" and         Nutrition Science in the United States, 1910-1970
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Joseph Kett, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1997
* USD 5,000.00

SBR 9511876 Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Food Faddism and Nutrition Science
in the United States" Unlike previous studies that have examined health reform
movements, this project will explore the relationship between "food faddism" and
nutrition science, thereby broadening our understanding of the complex impact of
science and scientists on 20th century American politics and culture. More
particularly, it will explore a sphere of activity, the consumption of so-called
"health foods" in the United States, in which scientific authority has been
notably ineffective during an era generally believed to mark a high point of
public regard for science and its practitioners. It will examine why the use of
these foods and food supplements continued unabated and even increased during
the current century, even though most nutrition scientists condemned these
dietary practices as "food faddism.". Preliminary research has shown that the
proposition that the American food supply is nutritionally poor, which is the
core belief of most post-1920's health food advocates, has often been fostered
by the work of mainstream nutrition researchers. This project will examine in
detail the links between nutrition science and the three major health food
claims: 1) modern food processing robs food of valuable nutrients, 2) commercial
agriculture produces nutrient-poor crops, and 3) the nation's food products are
laden with harmful chemical additives. It will evaluate the scientific
authenticity of these claims and explore how the lack of scientific consensus on
many nutritional issues contributed to the spread of health food doctrine. In
pursuit of these objectives, the careers of a number of scientists who were
highly esteemed by the health food community will be investigated. In addition,
this project will look at the role played by scientists in both combating and
encouraging food faddism. It will examine the campaigns waged against
nutritional misinformation, and attempt to evaluate the reasons fo r their
failure. Conversely, it will show how the activities of some nutrition
scientists, especially their involvement in public health affairs, have perhaps
inadvertently furthered health food practices.