* 9511186
* Collaborative Research: Theoretical &amp; Empirical Issues in   Discrete Choice Modeling
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Michael Keane, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 07/31/1998
* USD 110,803.00

This research program revolves around three different but related projects in
discrete choice modeling and estimation. The common theme is the modeling of
consumer choice behavior, and the estimation of models of consumer behavior on
revealed preference data sets. With the availability of electronic scanner panel
data, choice models have become very important for understanding consumer
behavior. For example, such models may be used to evaluate the impact of the
marketing mix on consumer purchasing behavior, and to assess the patterns of
competition in the market place. The three research projects in this study
involve the use of recently developed simulation estimation techniques. In the
model of the first project, consumer choice probabilities are high dimensional
integrals over unobserved prices and coupon values, as well as over stochastic
preference shocks. Thus, Monte-Carlo methods must be used to simulate the
likelihood function in the model. In the second and third projects, both
solution of the dynamic programming problem and construction of the likelihood
function require high dimensional integrations over stochastic process for
prices, preference shocks, etc. In these projects we will use MonteCarlo methods
both to solve consumers' dynamic programming problems and to simulate the
likelihood function.