* 9511169
* Justice in the Delivery of Government Services: Decision Norms of Street-Level Bureaucrats
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Steven Maynard-Moody, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

95-11169 Maynard-Moody The official actions of street-level bureaucrats
substantially influence the distribution of government goods and services. A
better understanding of the norms that govern the decisions of street-level
bureaucrats would enhance our ability to make most effective use of the
government. This study seeks to discover under what conditions street-level
government workers use recognizable norms of substantive justice to shape their
allocative decisions and how that use is shaped through local work and identity-
centered cultures. It relies on data collected from stories of official
interactions told by a carefully-selected sample of bureaucrats over a period of
time. The story analysis is combined with intensive field work to learn how
local work and identity cultures shape the management of justice-related
decision-making dilemmas in particular settings. %%%% The official actions of
street-level bureaucrats substantially influence the distribution of government
goods and services. A better understanding of the norms that govern the
decisions of street-level bureaucrats would enhance our ability to make most
effective use of the government. This study seeks to discover under what
conditions street-level government workers use recognizable norms of substantive
justice to shape their allocative decisions and how that use is shaped through
local work and identity-centered cultures. It relies on data collected from
stories of official interactions told by a carefully-selected sample of
bureaucrats over a period of time. The story analysis is combined with intensive
field work to learn how local work and identity cultures shape the management of
justice-related decision-making dilemmas in particular settings. ****