* 9511713
* Mixe-Zoquean and Zapotecan Documentation and Comparative    Linguistics
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Terrence Kaufman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/1999
* USD 395,765.00

This three-year project is designed to advance the comparative study of
MixeZoquean (MZ) and Zapotecan (Zn) languages. No MZ language has more than a
rudimentary syntactic description, and for most even morphological description
is incomplete. We are targeting Ayapa, Oluta, Oaxaca Zoque, Soteapan, and
Texistepec for work in these areas, building on the foundation provided last
season. The project will also build a lexical and textual foundation for those
MZ languages that were not investigated in previous seasons: Highland Mixe,
Lowland Mixe, and (conditions permitting) Chiapas Zoque. There are fairly large
vocabulary collections for these languages, but some phonological features are
unclear or underspecified, morpheme classification is not adequate, and text
collections are lacking. Zn languages are mostly not fully documented, and the
same needs exist as for MZ. Three Zapotec languages (Isthmus, Guelavi*a, and
Oaxaca environs) and one Chatino language (Zenzontepec)are targeted for initial
documentation of the type done in 1993 and 1994. The proposed work is
significant in several areas. Both MZ and Zn languages have structural
properties of interest to current linguistic theory, although they are
structurally highly dissimilar. Notably, MZ has ergativity and OV
morphosyntax,and Zn has tones and an often opaque system of prefixes and
proclitics on verbs. The project has the potential to make a major contribution
to early Mesoamerican cultural and linguistic history: MZ languages were spoken
by Olmecs,and were influential at the Olmec era and subsequently in affecting
many other languages in the area. It contributes to the ongoing decipherment of
epi-Olmec writing; the interpretation of its texts depends heavily upon MZ
comparative studies, which were crucial in the original decipherment. Zn
comparative studies, though lagging behind MZ studies, are already advancing the
decipherment of Oaxacan writing. Finally, it includes a major language salvag e
operation, helping to preserve an important part of the linguistic heritage of
the Americas.