* 9511719
* Legal Authority in a Diverse Society:  The Psychology of    Cross-Ethnic Authority
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/05/1999
* Tom Tyler, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/05/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9511719 Tyler Recent events as well as the long-standing problems of relations
between legal authorities and disadvantaged groups illustrate the special
problems that arise when authority structures extend across the boundaries of
social diversity. This research begins from a central, important question: how
are legitimacy and acceptance of authority achieved in ethnically-diverse
societies, especially in that of the United States? Previous research has shown
that use of fair procedures is one of the most effective ways for authorities to
assure that they are viewed as legitimate. But it has not dealt effectively with
how social diversity affects judgments of fairness of treatment and acceptance
of legal authorities. This project will begin to remedy this by comparing how
people react to authorities similar to or different from them along salient
social dimensions. Findings from focus groups will be integrated with existing
theory on the psychology of authority to develop interview questions. Interviews
will then be conducted with 1,000 California residents drawn from four different
ethnic groups to investigate recent encounters with authorities of the same or
different ethnicity as the respondent, as well as numerous other matters. A
laboratory experiment will be conducted to test the causal relations suggested
by the survey. The project has the potential to guide the development of policy
governing the behavior of authorities that will enhance the prospects that their
decisions will gain acceptance or legitimacy. %%%% This research begins from a
central, important question: how are legitimacy and acceptance of authority
achieved in ethnically-diverse societies, especially in that of the United
States? Previous research has shown that use of fair procedures is one of the
most effective ways for authorities to assure that they are viewed as
legitimate. But it has not dealt effectively with how social diversity affects
judgments of fairness of treatment and acceptance of legal a uthorities. This
project will begin to remedy this by comparing how people react to authorities
similar to or different from them along salient social dimensions. Findings from
focus groups will be integrated with existing theory on the psychology of
authority to develop interview questions. Interviews will then be conducted with
1,000 California residents drawn from four different ethnic groups to
investigate recent encounters with authorities of the same or different
ethnicity as the respondent, as well as numerous other matters. A laboratory
experiment will be conducted to test the causal relations suggested by the
survey. The project has the potential to guide the development of policy
governing the behavior of authorities that will enhance the prospects that their
decisions will gain acceptance or legitimacy. ****