* 9511385
* Self-Evaluation Maintenance in Close Relationships
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Steven Beach, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 254,658.00

This program of research extends the PIs' Self-Evaluation Maintenance (SEM)
model to intimate relationships. More specifically, it examines the way in which
self-evaluation threat and self-evaluation benefit in close relationships lead
to changes in cognition and cognitive processes that are associated with the
destructive processes of envy in marital relationships as well as with such
positive emotions as felt attachment and commitment. The PIs will investigate
the role of SEM cognitive processes in: 1) precipitating defensive, negative
judgments about the partner; 2) increasing the availability of positive and
negative memories of the partner; 3) facilitating constructive or destructive
interpretations of prior interactive behavior; and 4) influencing definitiion of
the self and the emergence of complimentary 'selves' in intimate relationships.
The automaticity of SEM processes will also be examined. Taken together, these
studies will provide a foundation for understanding defensive reactions in
dyadic relationships and their destructive interpersonal and intrapersonal
consequences. Marriage is a fundamental building block of civilization. Well
functioning marriages provide the basis for effective emotional support in times
of difficulty, thereby preventing potentially serious declines in worker health
and productivity, and they also are a foundation upon which successful child
rearing can occur. Because parents who are able to nurture each other are also
in the best position to enable their children to develop into competent and
productive adults, successful marriages are the foundation of the nation's
future productive capacity. Yet, fully half of first marriages are destined to
end in divorce at great cost both to the individuals involved, their families,
and to society as a whole. This program of research will elucidate cognitive
processes in the service of self-evaluation maintenance that can contribute to
marital discord. As such, it is highly relevant to the "Famili es" component of
the Human Capital Research agenda. One of the perplexing problems in
understanding marital discord is how to account for the shift that may occur
from giving a partner the benefit of the doubt to assuming the worst when
negative things happen. It is clear that automatic cognitive processes are
involved and that these processes are often not amenable to conscious
introspection. However, the exact nature of these automatic cognitive processes
has been elusive. This program of research will illuminate some of these
processes. Moreover, the project focuses on processes that are particularly
relevant to the changing nature of American families. In particular, the
theoretical model that guides the work is highly relevant to the "new" marital
problems that may emerge as traditional gendered divisions of labor give way to
more egalitarian marital relationships. As such, the knowledge generated by this
program of research will be highly useful in developing improved methods for
preventing and ameliorating marital difficulties.