* 9511977
* Environmental Degradation:  Benign Attitudes and Destructive Decisions
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Jeanne Brett, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 04/30/1998
* USD 158,060.00

The PIs propose to examine the apparent discrepancy between the pro-
environmental attitudes that people express and the less than pro-environmental
behaviors that people perform. The PIs propose to perform four streams of
experiments to examine this issue. In the first stream of experiments the PIs
will examine preference reversals in environmental domains. The hypothesis is
that when persons evaluate a single option, they tend to focus on what they want
rather than what they think they should do. When choosing between two or more
options, people switch their mode of decision making toward what they perceive
they should do. In the second stream of experimentation, the PIs will explore
the self-enhancement biases that allow people to escape blame from behaving in
ways that are detrimental to the environment. In the third stream of studies the
PIs will explore egocentrism in the arena of environmental decision making. By
interpreting information in a self-serving manner, persons can act in an
exploitative way toward the environment and toward each other and still feel
that they have behaved appropriately. Finally the PIs will explore the area of
generation discounting--the means by which people evaluate the relative
importance of their current consumption relative to the welfare of subsequent
generations.