* 9511773
* Cell Biology of Prohormone Processing in Identified         Peptidergic Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Gwen Childs, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 05/31/2000
* USD 195,000.00

Nagle 9511773 Small protein molecules or peptides, play an important role in
communication between cells in the brain. The synthesis of these peptides is a
complex task involving the excision of the peptide from a larger precursor
molecule by specific enzymes. Moreover, these peptides must be compartmentalized
or packaged in the brain in such away that they can be released upon stimulation
of the brain cell. To accomplish this release, the larger precursor molecules
and the enzymes to process the precusor must be co-stored so the information
transmitting peptide can be cut from the larger molecule and released between
cells. However, how this packaging of material is accomplished remains unknown.
Dr. Nagle will use a well-established system to investigate how the enzymes
responsible for cleaving these peptides from their precursors is accomplished.
It is anticipated that these studies will also identify specific domains in the
enzymes responsible for targeting the peptide-containing precursors and enzymes
to the appropriate secretory apparatus. These studies are of fundamental
importance in understanding the transfer of information between cells. The
findings from these studies are applicable to cells in the brain, as well as
peripheral tissues. More importantly, however, these studies provide information
on the biochemical basis by which information is transmitted between cells in
the nervous system or the basis of the way the brain functions.