* 9511677
* Compensatory Renal Growth
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,05/31/2000
* Susan Mulroney, Georgetown University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 05/31/2000
* USD 215,946.00

9511677 Mulroney Removal of one kidney (uninephrectomy) results in the rapid
growth of the remaining kidney. Recent advances using whole animal, cellular,
and molecular biologic techniques have shown that there are different mechanisms
involved in this accelerated growth. Using this model of rapid renal growth, Dr.
Mulroney has determined that different growth factors are stimulated in young
and adult male animals, and they appear to govern the type of growth that occurs
in the regenerating kidney, vis a vis hyperplasia (cell multiplication) and
hypertrophy (enlargement of existing cells). Preliminary findings for the
present proposal have found that there are also differences in the mechanism and
renal growth response in adult female animals, compared with adult males. These
age and sex differences have important implications regarding the cellular and
molecular controls for cell growth in vivo and defining the mechanisms involved
in these pathways could provide information on basic influencing the growth
process. The broad objective of this proposal is to determine the effects of the
gonadal (sex) steroids on the compensatory renal growth that occurs following
uninephrectomy, and identify their importance in the final outcome of the type
of growth that occurs. These studies should provide important basic information
regarding the stimuli and mechanisms governing cell and organ growth. ***