* 9511655
* BAC: Neural Strategies in Eye Movement Control
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* John Semmlow, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-Robert Wood
* Continuing Grant
* Cole Gilbert
* 07/31/1999
* USD 241,046.00

9511655 Semmlow In terms of speed and accuracy, the systems in the brain that
control eye movements (the oculomotor control systems) produce the highest motor
performance that humans can accomplish. The controllers for these movements have
two great challenges: 1) the need for a quick response despite delays while the
brain processes the necessary information and 2) the need to attain accurate
positioning despite errors in the neural and muscular apparatus. These two
challenges are best met with different control strategies. Feedback can produce
extremely accurate responses but the delays in the feedback loop limit response
times. Alternatively, preprogrammed control can generate rapid responses, but
these responses suffer in accuracy. Recent experimental evidence indicates that
the brain solves this problem by using both strategies, either simultaneously or
sequentially. This multiple independent controller approach is made possible by
feedback and adaption. These investigators are constructing a systems-analytic
model using the three basic control strategies, multi-tasking, feedback and
adaption, to understand the extraordinary performance achieved by the oculomotor
control systems. The control concepts revealed by this approach may be
applicable to artificial systems faced with similar challenges.