* 9511529
* Short-term Unsteadiness in Aeolian Sediment Transport Across Beaches
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Bernard Bauer, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Bernard O. Bauer
* 07/31/1998
* USD 181,896.00

SBR-9511529 Bernard O. Bauer, Principal Investigator (PI) Douglas J. Sherman,
Co-PI University of Southern California, Los Angeles Short-Term Unsteadiness in
Aeolian Sediment Transport Across Beaches Sediment transport is a fundamental
agent of change in geomorphological systems. Our conceptual understanding of
sediment transport processes is robust, but practical implementation of this
knowledge is constrained by our inability to translate theory into generally-
applicable predictive models. Problems occur as a result of technical and
logistical hurdles. This research will enhance our understanding of the
potential role of unsteadiness in sediment transport processes and the
appropriate means of parameterizing models by focusing on an aeolian beach
environment. The results should be indicative of transport processes in other
geomorphic environments. Unsteadiness at temporal scales of seconds to tens of
minutes will be investigated systematically to determine whether wind speed
fluctuations are critical to modeling short-term sediment flux across beaches--
existing model parameterizations of transport are based on steady-state
assumptions. Continuously-measuring, fast-response sand traps employing
electronic load cells will be deployed in the field to provide contemporaneous
time series of both wind speed and sediment flux. The field data will provide
insight into the character of transport rate variability across beaches and
serve as a foundation for exploring improvements in predictive equations.