* 9511981
* Cooperation in Biological Oceanography in Namibia
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Mary Scranton, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 08/31/1997
* USD 34,418.00

This collaborative research grant supports the incremental linkage costs of a US
team, led by Prof. Peter Woodhead, of the Marine Sciences Research Center,
SUNY/Stony Brook, to work in Namibia, to investigate the ecology, physiology and
behavior of cape hake, Merluccius capensis, in relation to oxygen depletion.
These studies of cape hake, the dominant demersal fish in the Benguela upwelling
system, where depletion of oxygen from bottom waters is prevalent, will advance
knowledge concerning the responses of fish to hypoxia in the open sea. The
collaborating foreign institution is the National Marine Research and
Information Center (NATMRIC) of Namibia. Two oceanographers from the Marine
Science Research Center at SUNY/Stony Brook, with two graduate students, will
travel to Namibia to take part in two cruises with their counterparts in August
and October 1995, and again in 1996. This proposal offers very good
complementarity of resources between the US and foreign partners, and gives two
US graduate students international field research experience. Of the three
senior US sc ientists, two are women. Cooperation with the Namibian host
institution allows access not otherwise possible for the US investigators. The
Namibians are providing the ship time. The Namibian scientists have broad
expertise in the fisheries of the Benguela current system, but they have lacked
equipment and experience for relating changes in fish abundance and distribution
to critical environmental variables. The Stony Brook scientists bring strengths
in the latter, including assessment of effects of oxygen depletion on marine
communities. The joint research will provide information critical to management
and conservation of marine resources.