* 9511941
* Student Poster Session on Arthropod Venoms.  Meeting will be held in Frederick, MD, July 30 - August 4, 1995.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Davy Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 06/30/1996
* USD 2,000.00

9511941 Jones The field of molecular analysis of the structure of arthropod
venom proteins has recently made rapid advances that appear to interrelate what
were previously isolated lines of research. Up to the present, there has never
been an international format to bring together international researchers and
students investigating the molecular structure of protein toxins in arthropod
venoms. The objective of organizing such a gathering has now been accomplished
with the scheduled symposium of principle investigator speakers, for which
funding support has been identified. It is highly appropriate that this next
generation of students observe, and better yet, be involved with, the
formulation of ideas for future directions of the field that will come from the
gestation of the discussions of their mentoring principle investigators at this
first of its kind symposium. However, full funding has not yet been identified
for a proposed graduate and postdoctoral poster session in connection with the
parent symposium. The proposal seeks the remaining partial support for the cost
of participation of graduate and postdoctoral students, including women and
minority students, that is necessary to enable the proposed poster session to be
established and attended by the students. %%% Predatory and parasitic arthropod
inject a wide variety of venoms and toxins into tissues of their prey or hosts.
These venom proteins and toxins cause a range of physiological effects, but
their exact mechanisms of action are not well understood. At the 1995 Pan
American meeting of the International Society of Toxinology, there will be a
symposium that brings together for the first time the major national and
international researchers who are studying the molecular structure and action of
these proteins. Toward the education of a next generation of researches in this
area, a companion poster session for students will be held, in part under the
sponsorship of the National Science Founda tion. Through their attendance of the
symposium by their participation in this poster session, the students will
become exposed to the scientific methods and results used by the major
researchers in the field. In addition, the students will be exercised in the
presentation of research to colleagues in the field, and will also have the
opportunity to meet with the major researchers whose labs the students may seek
to join in higher postdoctoral training. ***