* 9511599
* The Place of Natural Values, Ecology and Technology in Restoration Policy
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Michael McGinnis, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 01/31/1997
* USD 65,000.00

Ecological restorations involve human attempts to return physical sites to some
state preceding some human disturbances. There are more and more restoration
efforts underway; a shift to ecological restoration at the biogeographical level
in the Pacific Northwest represents the largest effort in the world. However,
scientists have shown it is rarely possible to know what these sites may have
looked like or how they function. Restoration policy then lies in the domain of
`transcience,` involving the intermingling of facts and values. An understanding
of the influence of restoration values will add to the advancement and
development of effective and responsible restoration strategies. This project
will assess the place of natural values, science, and technology in restoration
policy development. The researchers will examine two research questions central
to the issue of large scale ecological restoration taking place in the Pacific
Northwest. First, what are the specific values and ethical positions of
individuals and institutions currently involved in large scale restoration
efforts? Second, what is the role of scientific decision-making in ecological
restoration? The investigators speculate that the capability of participants to
restore severely damaged ecosystems and wild species is predicated on collective
and shared values about the landscape, their sense of place in it, their
perceived relationship to nature, and their beliefs in the ability of science
and technology to restore ecosystems. The investigation will employ both
document analysis and a survey questionnaire to persons involved in restoration
efforts in the Pacitic Northwest, to develop profiles of individual and
institutional orientations to the range of potential restoration values. The
analysis will be extended by comparative case study of three large-scale
restoration efforts. Results will be disseminated among scholarly and
professional audiences in presentations and journal articles.