* 9511321
* Economic Literacy, Education, and Financial Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Douglas Bernheim, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 07/31/1997
* USD 149,290.00

This research is supported by the Joint NSF/Private Sector Initiative and
focuses on the following two closely related questions: Do individuals make
reasonable financial decisions for savings and retirement? How do various forms
of financial education affect financial behavior? The cooperating organization
is the Smith Richardson Foundation. Numerous previous authors have documented
the poor quality of personal financial decisions, and several studies have, in
particular, found that Americans save too little for retirement. The adequacy of
saving for retirement among younger Americans has, however, proven
controversial, in large part beaause pertinent economic developments over the
next 30 to 40 years are highly uncertain, and may profoundly affect retirement
prospects. Previous research has also shed considerable light on the general
public's level of economic and financial literacy. However, few determinants of
economic literacy have been studies (aside from formal education among high
school students). The determinants of financial knowledge among adults are
essentially unexplored, and virtually nothing is known about the effects of
knowledge on financial behavior. Finally, the existing literature has not
systematically considered the effects of financial education on financial
decisions; nor has it evaluated the various mechanisms (knowledge, comfort, or
habituation) through which financial education may affect behavior. Thus, a
central objective of this research is to examine financial education as an
important dimension of human capital accumulation. The study will focus on the
analysis of three extremely promising and previously unexploited data sources.
The first is a series of household survey sponsored by Merrill Lynch; the second
is a series of unique employer surveys undertaken by KPMG Peat Marwick; and the
third is an extensive 401(k) database compiled by Hewitt Associates. The
research is of direct relevance to private firms interested in using education
to alter the behavior of participants in contributory retirement plans. Indeed,
it bears on the continued viability of 401(k) plans, and the relative merits of
defined benefit and defined contribution plans. In addition, the research has
potentially important implications for national economic policy, including
strategies for promoting national saving, the design and implementation of
education curricula, pension policy, information policy, and securities
regulation.