* 9511826
* Meeting to Review and Synthesize Miombo Ecosystem Processes and Mechanisms
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Paul Desanker, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 12/31/1995
* USD 20,000.00

This workshop, organized by Dr. Paul Desanker, Assistant Professor, School of
Forestry and Wood Products, at Michigan Technological University, in cooperation
with Mr. Mzoma Ngulube of the Forestry Research Institute of Malawi, will be
held in Zomba, Malawi, in November or December, 1995. African and U.S.
researchers of global change, ecology, forestry, hydrology, social and economic
sciences, public health, and other disciplines, will review the state of
knowledge regarding the processes and mechanisms of savanna woodland ecosystems
and develop a proposal for a regional study on miombo woodlands. Miombo
woodlands, one of the most extensive vegetation covers in southern Africa, are
undergoing major changes due to human disturbances and possibly global climatic
changes. The woodlands hold vast pools of carbon, and changes in fire, climate,
disturbance regimes and other controlling processes will likely result in
significant global effects. The large savanna area of Southern/Central Africa is
the largest area of seasonal vegetation in the southern hemisphere, and so,
phenological effects of these savannas must be significant in global
circulations. Among the issues to be addressed are carbon sequestration, trace
gas emissions in relation to soil processes and biomass burning, and the
linkages between satellite data with ground measurements to describe ecosystem
processes in this poorly studied region of the world. An edited volume of the
proceedings will be published. In addition to eight US researchers, the workshop
will include participants from Zambia, Tanzania, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Kenya,
Mozambique, South Africa, Malawi, and Zaire. This workshop will strengthen
collaboration internationally (between US and African scientists), regionally
(among scientists throughout southern Africa, including South Africa), and
across disciplinary boundaries. This workshop will buttress the concern about
the socio-economic role of miombo woodlands with heightened awareness of
ecosystem functions related to soil protection, watershed protection, wildlife
preservation, biodiversity, and species with medicinal properties. All of the
participants are involved in other fora related to global change; this ensures
that the conclusions of this meeting and the findings of future research will be
linked into the global research effort on climate change.