* 9511835
* Securing Social Rights:  Subordinate Group Challenges to    Educational Policy and the Transformation of Public         Education 1880 to 1920
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Pamela Walters, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1998
* USD 50,932.00

This study looks at Progressive-era conflict over education and educational
policy in four states to answer questions about when, and how effectively,
disadvantaged groups mobilize to influence the state. It draws on existing
theories on social movements, the state, group conflict, and educational reform
to develop new theories for explain the processes by which subordinate groups
acquire concerns about education and the means to pressure the state to adopt
their policy objectives. Critical attention is paid to formal organizations that
mobilize individuals and present group demands and to the local and state
structures that provide opportunities for influencing policy. The study is based
on an historical analysis of four states, selected to vary on key attributes of
race, ethnicity, and nativity as well as in organizational and state resources.
%%% The research will advance our knowledge of how individuals, although
disadvantaged because of their position in the community, may be able to have
political influence when they become part of organizations. It moves beyond the
usual perspective of educational sociology with an expanded theory on the role
of organizations in providing resources, shaping demands, and expressing group
interests. Through attention to historical detail, it will spell out the
processes of change and illuminate the ways in which institutions are built.