* 9511396
* Community-Risk Factors for Urban Violence:  Effects of      Economic Hardship, Family Structure, and School Process on  Race-and Age-Specific Violence Rates
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Edward Shihadeh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 01/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

95-11396 Steffensmeier Crime and violence have pervasive impacts on the
development of America's human capital. The development of a scientific
understanding of the causes and consequences is the central theoretical concern
o of this project. It uses a community-level, quantitative methodology to
investigate the relationships between social capital and patterns of violence.
It identifies community risk factors predictive of violence in major American
cities. It seeks to compare the structural sources of violence by blacks as
compared to violence by whites and of juvenile as compared to adult violence, to
integrate, theoretically, family and school variables in the research, to
identify direct and indirect effects of structural conditions on violence rates,
and to examine the effects of change in structural conditions between 1980 and
1990 on race- and age-specific violence rates. The project will produce a unique
and useful data set for secondary analysis by other researchers. %%%% Crime and
violence have pervasive impacts on the development of America's human capital.
The development of a scientific understanding of the causes and consequences is
the central theoretical concern o of this project. It uses a community-level,
quantitative methodology to investigate the relationships between social capital
and patterns of violence. It identifies community risk factors predictive of
violence in major American cities. It seeks to compare the structural sources of
violence by blacks as compared to violence by whites and of juvenile as compared
to adult violence, to integrate, theoretically, family and school variables in
the research, to identify direct and indirect effects of structural conditions
on violence rates, and to examine the effects of change in structural conditions
between 1980 and 1990 on race- and age-specific violence rates. The project will
produce a unique and useful data set for secondary analysis by other
researchers. ****