* 9511347
* A Randomized Trial on Educational Inputs in Kenya
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Michael Kremer, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1998
* USD 163,594.00

9511347 Kremer There have been many retrospective statistical studies of the
effect of educational inputs on school performance. However, these retrospective
studies will be biased if schools with different educational inputs
systematically differ in other, unmeasured ways which are correlated with school
performance. For example, schools with better physical facilities may also
typically have parents who are more advantaged or more committed to education,
and this parental input, rather than the physical facilities themselves, may be
responsible for the correlation between test scores and physical facilities.
This project conducts a randomized trial which can overcome many of the
statistical problems of past studies. The project carries out one of the first
randomized trials on educational inputs and school performance. The trial is
based on the work of International Christian Humanitarian Services, (ITS), a
Kenyan GO. ITS provides selected rural primary schools with textbooks, exercise
books, uniforms, classroom construction, desks, and medical services. The
investigator will randomly assign a group of candidate schools to either a
control group or treatment group. Schools in the treatment group will receive
both educational and medical services from ITS. Schools in the control group
will receive medical services in return for participating in the program and
cooperating with their monitoring and evaluation efforts. The project compares
the change in text scores and dropout rates between the two groups. Since
different components of the assistance package will be provided in different
years, and will affect different classes of students, the investigator should be
able to separately assess the impact of the different inputs. The project also
examines whether the impact of the additional resources differs with students
gender or socio-economic status, or with teachers training and pedagogic
techniques.