* 9511365
* Two-Dimensional Models of Distributed Neural Processing in  the Saccadic System
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Edward Keller, Smith-Kettlewell Eye Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 08/31/1998
* USD 188,600.00

9511365 Edward Keller Saccadic eye movements are among the most rapid and
accurate movements that humans are capable of executing, but the mechanical
system producing eye movements is relatively simple in comparison to limb
movements. Therefore, the saccadic system has served as a model system for
gaining insights into the general problem of how the brain generates motor
control. This project is to examine how two-dimensional sensory information from
the visual system is turned into the highly distributed neuronal control signals
from the brain that move the eyes to produce highly efficient examination of our
surroundings, for example, during reading. These scientists will use artificial
neural networks and optimization techniques to model how movement commands are
developed in neural structures in the brain such as the nonlinear maps of visual
space and maps of the motor space. Saccades are controlled by internal feedback
about eye position during a movement, but not direct visual input, because the
visual messages are too slow to provide compensation during the saccade. These
scientists are testing their hypothesis that shifts in the populations of active
cells in these maps in the brain are driven by the internal feedback signal and
actively control the trajectory of the eyes during the movement. Their work will
help us to understand both how eye movements and other kinds of movement, such
as fine motor control or human gait, are controlled by the brain.