* 9511932
* Survey Respondents' Reactions To Persuasion Attempts:       Ethical Valuations and Behavioral Response
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Eleanor Singer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1998
* USD 76,628.00

Increasingly relied on by government and private sector, sample surveys range
from health care to prayer in schools, to the design of future automobiles. They
are a basic tool in commercial activity and in statistical operations of
government agencies, and they contribute to induction and testing of theories in
most of the social sciences. Increasingly, they are a common experience in the
daily lives of U.S. residents. Efforts to maintain response rates, so as to
preserve the representativeness of surveys and their inferential power, raise
serious ethical issues for survey research. Focusing on the issue of equity,
this pilot project will design and test methods to: explore public reactions to
ethical issues in the use of incentives and to alternative ways to reduce
nonresponse; and investigate the effect of these reactions on people's
willingness to participate in surveys. The investigators want to find out under
what conditions, if any, people feel an obligation to participate in a survey;
under what conditions, if any, they expect a tangible reward for their
participation; what strategies to increase participation offend their sense of
equity or their standards of politeness; and how these various beliefs combine
to affect the likelihood of participation. The pilot will examine the following
methods to measure these variables: direct questioning to measure beliefs,
perceptions, expectations, and standards; videotaped vignettes to measure
predicted behavior in response to different combinations of survey
characteristics and reward; and a small field experiment to measure actual
behavior. The narrow aim of this research is to investigate the role of
respondent perceptions in survey participation; it also has broader implications
for understanding the motivational force of equity evaluations and the role of
attitudes in influencing behavior. Several articles and plans for further
research should result from this award.