* 9511504
* Schema Induction in a Structure-Sensitive Connectionist     Model
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Keith Holyoak, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

9511504 HUMMEL This research will develop a computer system to model how people
learn schemas from examples. Schemas are knowledge structures that describe
general situations, events, rules, or relationships. For example, a Restaurant
Schema might specify the kinds of events that take place in restaurants, and the
relationships between the actors in those events (e.g., chefs, waiters, and
customers, etc.); a Family Relation Schema might specify the kinds of
relationships that define various family members, such as sisters, brothers,
parents, uncles, etc. A schema is very general, in that it refers to many
specific situations, and also highly structured, in that it specifies the
relationships between objects, events, or even between other relationships.
Psychologists and computer scientists have long recognized the utility of
schemas as a basis for reasoning: If one can recognize an object or situation as
an instance of a general schema, then one can use the schema to reason about the
specific object or situation. For example, the Family Relation Schema tells us
to expect that Mom's brother, Bob, is our uncle, and that if Bob has children,
then they will be our cousins. Due to the schema, it is not necessary to learn
the family relations for every individual separately. Although the generality
and structured nature of schemas make them extremely useful forms of knowledge,
they also make them very difficult to model: Traditional symbolic approaches to
computer modeling are good at representing structured information, but they have
difficulty flexibly matching specific instances to general facts; by contrast,
connectionist models are good at flexibly matching instances to general
categories, but they have great difficulty representing structured information
(such as rules and relationships). Perhaps for this reason, no one has ever
developed a formal and general model of schema-based learning and reasoning.
Hummel and Holyoak have developed a computer mo del of analogy that combines a
connectionist architecture with the capacity to represent and learn relational
structures. The model's capacity to represent structured information in a
flexible, general manner makes it an ideal vehicle for simulating human schema
learning and use. The research will apply the model's approach to the
representation of structure to the problems of representing, learning, and using
schemas. The result will be a model that can (a) learn general schemas from
specific examples, (b) match new instances to learned schemas, and (c) use the
schemas to make inductive inferences about the new examples. The model will be
the first formal theory of human schema-based reasoning, and will contribute
substantially to our understanding or human reasoning is a wide variety of
domains. It will also be the first working computer system to use schemas to
reason flexibly about general knowledge domains. ***