* 9511808
* Studies of transvection and chromatin in Drosophila         melanogaster
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Chao Wu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1999
* USD 375,000.00

9511808 Wu Several candidate members of a putative chromatin complex have been
identified in Drosophila. These include the products of zeste, Posterior sex
combs, Suppressor 2 of zeste, Polycomb, Polycomb-like, and polyhomeotic).
Genetic, biochemical, and cytological data argue for the existence of other
members as well as for other types of complexes. Who are the other members? What
other complexes are there and who are the members of the other complexes? These
are important questions because the impact of a complex is the sum of the
activities of all its members and it is not possible to fathom a complex until
all its components are understood. This proposal address these questions.
Genetic screens to find chromatin-related genes have relied almost exclusively
on four phenomena: PFV, zeste1 eye color, homeosis, and dosage compensation.
Clearly, these phenomena fall short of representing the full range of
developmental programs. As a consequence, our understanding of the proteins and
mechanisms by which chromatin regulates gene expression is limited and it is
almost certain that more chromatin-related proteins and processes remain to be
discovered. For example, of the 12-17 proteins thought to participate in one
species of chromatin complex, less than half have been identified. The goal of
the proposal is, therefore, to identify the chromatin-related genes and
mechanisms that have managed thus far to elude researchers. The strategy of the
proposed research is to diversify the genetic approach by implementing three new
kinds of screens for genes encoding chromatin-related functions. Our screens are
unlike most, if not all, previous screens which identified genes by mutations
that modified specific phenotypes, such as eye color or segment identity.
Instead, our screens will identify genes by virtue of their interaction or
redundancy with some of our best candidates for chromatin proteins. %%%
Chromatin structure underlies phenomena as fundamental as inheritance and gene
expressio n. It is involved in transcription, position effects, recombination,
and oncogenesis, to mention just a few examples. This proposal explores the
structure of chromatin in Drosophila. ***