* 9511111
* Recursive Competitive Search Equilibrium: Labor Market      Applications
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Dale Mortensen, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1997
* USD 129,051.00

9511111 Mortensen This project extends and applies an aggregate model of income
and employment determination developed under the previous NSF grant in three
areas: (1) fixed investment in job creation, vacancy chains, and innovation; (2)
wage determination and human capital investment; and (3) the value and role of
unemployment insurance. The solution to the aggregate model is based on a new
solution concept called a recursive competitive search equilibrium that combines
the notion of equilibrium in a matching model of the labor market with the
concept of recursive competitive search equilibrium. The research contradicts
the widely help view that only imperfect competition in labor and/or product
markets can explain involuntary unemployment, sticky real wages and observed
employment volatility. This new framework permits more accurate quantitative
estimates of the effects of labor market policy as well as greater realism. How
human capital investment is shared in an environment with transaction friction
and turnover has long been a topic of debate and study. The new framework will
be used to study such questions as: Do bargaining mechanisms and other wage
formation institutions provide the information individuals need to invest in a
decentralized setting? If so, what are the losses associated with these
institutions? Under what conditions is there a role for government intervention
in the form of subsidies to training and education? The significance and
potential importance of this new dynamic general equilibrium framework and
methods for the study of labor market policy are shown by the attention paid to
the strikingly large estimates obtained under the previous NSF grant of the
effects of the payroll tax and the Unemployment Insurance (UI) system on the
U.S. unemployment rate. A major problem with the estimates of the dead weight
losses attributable to UI, one shared with virtually all the formal literature
on the subject, is that it accoun ts for distortions attributable to moral
hazard but does not include the insurance value of the UI benefit because the
model used in the analysis is one in which agents are risk neutral. The third
part of this project addresses the theoretical and computational problems in
estimating the value of UI insurance.