* 9511657
* The Intrinsic Dynamics of Social Judgement
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Robin Vallacher, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/1998
* USD 155,749.00

This research program will investigate the tendency for the product of social
judgment processes (e.g., evaluation) to display temporal variation in the
absence of new information or external influence. Such variation, representing
intrinsic dynamics of social judgment, reflects the successive activation of
unique configurations of cognitive and affective elements pertaining to the
target of judgment. Because each configuration has implications for higher order
meaning and evaluation, this successive activation provides the basis for
internally generated temporal variation in judgment. When the elements are
relatively consistent, intrinsic dynamics tend to dissipate as the
configurations become integrated into a single higher order frame. Static
integration may be hard to achieve, however, when the elements are mutually
inconsistent. In such cases, there will be sustained intrinsic dynamics as two
(or more) conflicting higher order frames alternate in prepotence, each
providing integration to some portion of the elements. This dynamic integration
is especially likely when the judgment is personally important to the judge. A
paradigm involving the use of a computer mouse will be used to test this
theoretical framework. Subjects receive information about a target person
represented as a circle in the middle of the display screen and then think about
and evaluate the target for several minutes. During this time, they express
their evaluation by using the mouse to adjust the position of the cursor
relative to the target. Several dynamic measures are derived from the position
changes (e.g., rate of change in evaluation). The emergence of static vs.
dynamic integration, as well as other aspects of intrinsic dynamics, will be
examined in the context of important topics in social psychology, including
close relationships, social interaction, stereotyping, and attitude-behavior
consistency. The research program as a whole is inte nded to establish intrinsic
dynamics as basic to social judgment, supplementing the traditional focus on
content and structure. Our judgments of one another tend to be remarkably
dynamic, with a variety of thoughts and feelings coming to mind in rapid
succession. At the same time, judgment provides a basis for decision-making,
planning, and interpersonal behavior--functions that require stability in our
thoughts and feelings. The proposed research program will test a theoretical
framework that explains how mental volatility gives rise to integrated
understanding and coherent evaluations of one another. A distinction is made
between two different ways of integrating the variety of facts, feelings, and
images one may have concerning the person being judged. Static integration
occurs when this information is not too inconsistent and can be averaged in some
fashion to yield a stable judgment. Mental volatility in this mode of
integration should diminish over time as the judgment is formed. Dynamic
integration, on the other hand, occurs when information about the person exceeds
a threshold of inconsistency. In this mode of understanding, two (or more)
conflicting ways of thinking about the person, each providing integration for a
portion of the available information, may emerge and alternate in mental
dominance for the judge. Judgment in this case is therefore characterized by
oscillation between different ways of thinking about the person rather than by
one stable perspective on the person. The relation between mental volatility and
judgment is examined in the context of important topics in social psychology,
including intimate relationships, judgments of ability, racial stereotypes, and
moral judgment.