* 9511998
* Mandible Correlates of Contrastive Emphasis in Repeated     Corrections
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Osamu Fujimura, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/31/1998
* USD 80,352.00

The study is an experimental investigation of jaw movement: how jaw movement
changes as a function of whether the speaker emphasizes a word when s/he is
asked to clarify a word a listener misunderstood, and also, how jaw movement
changes when the speaker must repeat this same word several times in order to
make himself understood by the listener. The method involves examining jaw
movement tracings from x-ray microbeam recordings, which have already been
collected for four speakers. These jaw movement traces will be measured in terms
of various duration, velocity and displacement measures using a recently
developed software tool. Tentative statistical analyses will be applied to these
measurements to plan for future research which would involve a large number of
subject in order to identify which jaw measures are most useful in
characterizing contrastive emphasis. Although previous studies have examined jaw
movement associated with contrastive emphasis, no study to date has looked at
jaw movement of unrehearsed impromptu speech, and especially not of speakers
saying the same utterance with repeated corrections. As an experimental study,
it is independent of any particular theoretical framework; however, one of the
goals of this endeavor is to better understand the underlying organizational
principles of speech considering existing theoretical models. In particular, jaw
movement pattern in a seminatural dialogue situation will be interpreted as an
aspect of the prosodic representation of the utterance, relating observed
articulatory gestures to perceived of emphasis placed on one of the three digits
in a sequence, in the context, like, "No, it is nine FIVE nine Pine Street" (the
capitalized digit indicates the word the speaker emphasized). The findings of
this study are proposed to be interpreted to examine the validity of several
current theories of articulation-based prosodic organization models; in
particular, the PI's recent theory of phonetic implemen tation (the converter-
distributor model) will be evaluated determining its system parameters such as
the relation between the numerically augmented metrical pattern and magnitudes
of syllables and boundaries.