* 9511302
* Improvement in Zooarchaeological Data Management
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Elizabeth Wing, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 71,406.00

Wing With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Elizabeth Wing will enter
information on a series of archaeological assemblages into a Paradox data
management system. Approximately 25 specimens are included in a "catalogued
lot", and 19,526 of these lots will be entered into the Florida Museum of
Natural History computer system. The materials themselves consist of faunal
remains from: archaeological sites from Historic period Florida and southeastern
Georgia; prehistoric Florida and Georgia; and from coastal and highland Ecuador
and Peru. The Florida faunal remains trace changing human-environmental
interaction over thousands of years and indicate how human subsistence responded
to changing environmental conditions at differing levels of cultural and
technological complexity. The South American collections permit scientists to
chart the origin and spread of domestic animals in the Andean region and
therefore gain insight into perhaps the most significant change in human
subsistence technology. Museums such as the Florida State Museum of Natural
History contain collections which, in theory, will allow scientists to address
many significant questions. However often such materials are difficult to use
because they are poorly catalogued and the information which may be available is
difficult to recover. Dr. Wing curates one of the most important archaeological
faunal collections in the United States and with National Science Foundation
support, these remains will be made available online to a very wide group of
potential users.