* 9511592
* U.S-India Binational Workshop in Game Theory &amp; Economic     Applications, followed by 2nd International Conference in   Game Theory, Jan 2-6, 1996.  Award in US and Indian Curr
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1996
* T.E.S. Raghavan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 11/30/1996
* USD 13,300.00

9511592 Raghavan Description: This proposal will support US participation at the
US-Indo Binational Workshop on Game Theory &amp; Economic Applications, followed
by the 2nd International Conference in Game Theory, Bangalore, Jan 2-6, 1996.
Each of the co-organizers, T.E.S. Raghavan and T. Parthasarathy, are responsible
for having developed important centers for game theory research at their
respective institutions, the University of Illinois at Chicago and the Indian
Statistical Institute. This year is notable, with the Nobel Prize in economics
having been awarded to three distinguished game theorists for their contribution
to understanding economies as models of non-cooperative games. One of the main
thrusts of the conference will be the recent developments on equilibrium
selection and economic models of games with incomplete information in
bargaining, auctions and competitive bidding. Scope: Game theory is an area in
which there is a strong basis for collaborative research between Indian and US
mathematicians and economists. This workshop will build on the accomplishments
of a highly successful game theory conference that was supported by INT just
over five years ago. It will focus on the major advances in the analysis of
strategic behavior embodied in the theory of games. India's Finance Minister,
the Honorable Manmohan Singh, and operations researchers from US multinational
corporations located in India will report on problems particular to the Indian
setting that can be studied from a game theoretic perspective. *** /