* 9511137
* Collaborative Research on Experimental Studies of Iterated  Rationality in Noncooperative Games
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Teck Ho, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 07/31/1998
* USD 95,239.00

This is a collaborative proposal with Dr. Camerer (SBR-9511001). The PIs propose
to study iterated rationality in the context of economic game theory. Iterated
rationality refers to the belief that others are rational, that others believe
that you are rational, that you believe that others believe that you are
rational, etc. Iterated rationality is a central assumption of game-theoretic
analyses that have been applied to a large number of phenomena in economics,
psychology, and other social sciences. Since the empirical basis for this
assumption is weak, the PIs plan to examine it in several ways. First, they will
use a numbers game in which the estimate of a winning number by a contestant
reveals to what extent that contestant believes in iterated rationality. Second,
they will use variations of the numbers game in order to determine which changes
in the procedure foster more rational choices. Such procedural changes will
provide clues as to subjects assumptions about the rationality of their
opponents. Third, the PIs will examine participants with various
characteristics, such as group homogeneity or experience with the numbers game,
in order to determine what factors influence participants rationality. Finally
the PIs will examine whether what a participant learns about rationality in one
game transfers to a different game.