* 9511953
* Dynamic Joint Decisions:  Free-Riding, Multi-Issue          Bargaining, and Contract Revision
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Steven Matthews, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1997
* USD 124,579.00

Steven Matthews Northwestern University SBR-9511953 The proposal consists of
three related projects centered on the revision of contracts and the intentional
sequencing of agreements and actions. The first project examines the hypothesis
that when contracts cannot be enforced, then the parties may need to take
actions piecemeal over time. One application of this idea concerns the classic
case of voluntary contributions to a public good. If contributors have to give
at the same time, then the only equilibrium results in no contributions being
given as everyone tries to "free-ride." But if individuals can spread out their
contributions over time, in general an equilibrium will exist in which full
contributions are made in finite time. The research will explore the robustness
of this result to the underlying assumptions made. The second project looks at
multi-issue bargaining when not all actions are contractible. Again the goal is
to understand why contractual agreements are often reached in piecemeal fashion,
when current models predict that everything should be negotiated at the
beginning with no delay. The third project concerns the evolution of contractual
agreements. A model is presented that suggests that in a principal-agent model
in which contracts are contrained by limited liability, the equiibrium initial
contract takes the form of simple debt which is later renegotiated.