* 9511554
* Explanatory Coherence in Social Explanation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Stephen Read, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 01/31/1999
* USD 188,591.00

In this program of research, a series of experiments tests a parallel processing
model of social perception and social explanation. This model differs sharply
from the two-stage, serial processing , models that currently dominate much
social psychology. One set of studies seeks to demonstrate that when subjects
are combining dispositional and situational information, whether they
underadjust for either dispositional or situational factors under high cognitive
load, and the extent to which they do so, reflects the impact of attentional
focus and causal unit formation on the spread of activation in a conceptual
network. Such results would contradict Gilbert's (1989) model of dispositonal
inference and would, at a minimum, force a major expansion of Krull's (1993)
model. A second set of studies attempts to show that just as individuals
frequently make spontaneous situational inferences, so do they frequently make
spontaneous situaitonal inferences. These studies also seek to show that the
latter influences do not require a goal to make such inferences as Krull (1993)
suggests, but rather are under the control of the stimulus configuration.
Several factors are investigated that may influence the likelihood of
spontaneous situational inferences: (1) individualist vs. collectivist beliefs;
(2) proximity of the situational causal context to the target behavior; and (3)
salience of the situational causal context. A third set of studies examines
whether situational and dispositional information can be quickly and
spontaneously integrated, in parallel, to make a spontaneous dispositional
inference, thereby arguing against models that propose a two step process for
the integration of dispositional and situational information. A fourth set of
studies will test the hypothesis that factors, such as cognitive load and
salience which should reduce the spread of activation from explanations to
behavior identifications, will reduce the impact of explanatory hypotheses on
the id entification of ambiguous behaviors. This program of research has the
potential to replace several special-purpose 'mini' theories of social
explanation with a general connectionist model that can handle a wide variety of
phenomena. Figuring out the characteristics of others is central to successfully
negotiating everyday life. But doing so is surprisingly complicated. This
program of research tests a model which seeks to explain how people do this. A
central claim of this model is that when people make inferences about the causes
of behavior, such as "Sheila was furious", the available information is
integrated simultaneously into a limited capacity working memory rather than
being processed serially. The implication of this parallel processing of
information is that the causal explanation that a person favors (e.g., "Sheila
is short tempered" or "Sheila was insulted") will depend upon things that
influence information integration, such as the person's focus of attention, the
strength of pre-existing causal links among potential causes and effects, and
how much demand is being placed on the person's cognitive capacities by other
ongoing tasks. The results will have important implications for our
understanding of biases in social perception.