* 9511795
* Storage Improvement, Conservation Treatment and             Documentation Upgrade of Archaeological Perishable Material
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1998
* G. Michael Jacobs, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 125,819.00

Odegaard With National Science Foundation support, Nancy Odegaard and her
colleagues will conduct a program to improve the conservation of and access to
perishable archaeological artifacts excavated from a number of sites in the
American Southwest. This collection consists of an estimated 21,500 artifacts
and ethnobotanical lots. Based on a conservation survey, approximately 18%
require improved housing; many others require major or minor conservation
treatment. To remedy these problems, the team will undertake necessary
conservation, improve storage of materials and consolidate and organize
associated documentation. The related computerized database will be updated and
a user's guide developed. The archaeology of the United States Southwest is
important for several reasons. First, this region saw the rise of complex
societies which in prehistoric times linked communities with roads which
stretched across large expanses of deserts, which constructed multistory
buildings which housed hundreds of individuals and which devised ways to survive
in a harsh and unpredictable desert environment. Secondly, because of the dry
conditions, perishable organic materials are often well preserved and these
provide insights which are rare in archaeological situations. For example it is
often possible to reconstruct local environmental conditions and then determine
the subsistence strategies which human groups took to adapt and respond. The
perishable organic materials at the Arizona State Museum are an endangered and
valuable archaeological resource. With NSF support, they will be properly
conserved and made more available for scientific research.