* 9511822
* Androgenic Regulation of Epididymal Sperm Binding Proteins: Role of RNA-binding Proteins
* BIO,IOS
* 11/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Joe Hall, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 01/31/1998
* USD 170,000.00

9511822 Hall In all male mammalian species, including man, spermatozoa that
leave the testis are infertile and immobile. The acquisition of fertilizing
capacity and motility by spermatozoa occurs in an organ called the epididymis
and the overall process is often referred to as "sperm maturation". It is now
well accepted in reproductive biology and biochemistry that spermatozoan
maturation is mediated by proteins and glycoproteins called fertility antigens.
These fertility antigens are secreted by the epididymis under the control of the
male hormone, testosterone. Using the rat as an experimental model, Dr. Hall has
identified a key fertility antigen that is secreted by the epididymis and binds
to the sperm plasma membrane. This sperm plasma membrane antigen which is
synthesized by the epididymis plays a key physiological role in plasma membrane
changes on the surface spermatozoa that accompany the development of fertilizing
capacity and motility in mammals. An initial step toward elucidating the basic
causes of male infertility or developing compounds as potential male
contraceptives is to understand how these fertility antigens are regulated in
the mammalian epididymis. Thus, the broad, long-term objective of the present
study is to provide a basic understanding of how fertility antigens are
regulated. A working model for the androgen-dependent synthesis of this
fertility antigen is proposed in this study. A unique feature of the model is
that the synthesis of this fertility antigen may be regulated at the level of
its own messenger RNA (mRNA). He further hypothesizes that the rate at which
this fertility antigen is synthesized in cells of the epididymis is controlled
by proteins that bind to its mRNA. If this hypothesis proves correct, it may be
possible in the near future to develop a compound that can selectively block
(contraceptive) or enhance (conception) the synthesis of the fertility antigen.
***