* 9511796
* Relativity Principles in Historical and                     Foundational Perspective
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Robert Rynasiewicz, Johns Hopkins University
* Fixed Price Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 08/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

9511796, Robert Rynasiewicz After the introduction of special relativity,
physicists have come more and more to place a special emphasis on the role of
relativity and symmetry principles in theory construction. Such was quite
explicit in the considerations that led Einstein to the general theory of
relativity, and the identification of appropriate symmetry groups has become a
central concern in theoretical particle physics. There has, however, long been
disagreement within the physics community as to what it means for a theory to
embody or satisfy a relativity principle. One famous critique came form Erich
Kretschmann in which he published a scathing review of Einstein's
characterization in terms of the from invariance of the fundamental equations
under coordinate transformation and suggested that Einstein's gravitational
theory, despite its general covariance, is in fact an "absolute" theory in the
sense that it satisfies no non-trivial principle of relativity. Since
Kretschmann's critique, there is still no consensus as to (a) what relativity
principles in fact are satisfied by what is traditionally called the general
theory of relativity; (b) how to characterize in general the concept of a
relativity principle; or (c) what the relationship is between relativity
principles and other types of symmetry principles such as gauge symmetry and
time-reversal invariance. The current project aims to do two things. The first
is to identify the crucial historical factors responsible for the emergence
among physicists of the general ideal of a relativity principle. The second is
to make some systematic progress on how such a principle should be properly
sketched out, relying in particular on ideas of Kretschmann and others and also
the PI's own views as developed in previous grants. The resulting study should
be of interest to physicists, historians and philosophers of science.