* 9511422
* An Empirical Examination of the Legal Standard for Hostile  Environment Sexual Harassment Claims
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Barbara Gutek, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1997
* USD 110,000.00

9511422 Gutek The reasonable woman standard, the legal standard used to judge
what constitutes a hostile environment was first adopted by the Ninth Circuit
Court and is now used by several courts. It is widely held to be supported by
social science research showing that men and women tend to define sexual
harassment somewhat differently and do not always agree on the behaviors that
constitute sexual harassment. A Review of the literature shows that research
findings do not adequately support what occurs in court cases. It appears that
women have a broader definition than men of what constitutes sexual harassment.
A series of experiments will be conducted using samples of undergraduate
students and potential jurors from a jury pool (in Pima Court, Arizona).
Variables (e.g., the target's reaction to behavior; selected characteristics of
the situation; and the legal standard--reasonable person vs. reasonable woman)
will be systematically manipulated to measure gender differences in the
evaluation of sexual harassment scenarios. This research proposes to close the
gap between what is known from existing research and what is needed to assist
and guide the courts and policymakers in how to evaluate claims of sexual
harassment. %%%% The reasonable woman standard, the legal standard used to judge
what constitutes a hostile environment was first adopted by the Ninth Circuit
Court and is now used by several courts. It is widely held to be supported by
social science research showing that men and women tend to define sexual
harassment somewhat differently and do not always agree on the behaviors that
constitute sexual harassment. A Review of the literature shows that research
findings do not adequately support what occurs in court cases. It appears that
women have a broader definition than men of what constitutes sexual harassment.
A series of experiments will be conducted using samples of undergraduate
students and potential jurors from a jury pool (in Pima Court, Arizona).
Variables (e.g., the target's reaction to behavior; selected characteristics of
the situation; and the legal standard--reasonable person vs. reasonable woman)
will be systematically manipulated to measure gender differences in the
evaluation of sexual harassment scenarios. This research proposes to close the
gap between what is known from existing research and what is needed to assist
and guide the courts and policymakers in how to evaluate claims of sexual
harassment. ****