* 9511814
* BAC: Development of a Biologically-Motivated Model for      Adaptive, Multi-input Multi-output Control of Human         Balance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/2000
* William Paloski, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 01/31/2000
* USD 209,723.00

9511814 Kuo The goal of this research project is to understand how the human
brain puts together thousands of pieces of information from sensors throughout
the body, such as eyes, the inner ear, and receptors in joints and muscles, to
form a picture of where the limbs are and how they are moving. This information
is used for planning and control of movement. It is a process that the brain
carries out subconsciously; it is critically important for proper balance, to
keep up from falling; it provides athletes with the ability to move fluidly and
skillfully and allows seamen and astronauts to adjust movements to their new
environments. The approach used in this study is to integrate techniques from
two scientific fields. Physiological studies describe how signals are produced
by the sensors and define the places in the brain where these signals are
transmitted. Control engineering describes how signals of many types can be used
to perform a useful task. In this project, physiologists and control engineers
will work together to examine the differences in balance control in astronauts
before and after spaceflight. The adaptations that take place during spaceflight
make it possible to determine some of the factors that are and are not relevant
to control of moment and, therefore, to explain some of the basic mechanisms
underlying control of movement.