* 9511465
* The Economics of Privatization:  Evidence from the Baltics  and St. Petersburg
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Derek Jones, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1997
* USD 100,783.00

SBR-9511465 Derek C. Jones, Hamilton College This project will collect data on
100 newly privatized firms in St. Petersburg, Russia. This new, and potentially
very useful, data will be combined with previously collected on firms in Latvia,
Lithuania, and Estonia to study the effect of ownership forms, particularly
employee ownership, on firm performance. As an example, do firms with high
levels of employee ownership have substantially different levels of labor
productivity than do firms in which there is no employee ownership? Does the
level of employee ownership affect the way the firm adjusts to demand shocks and
price changes? The swift transformation of the economies of these countries from
command to market-based has created an important "natural experiment" with to
test theories about the incentive effects of ownership and control of the firm
by its employees. This "experiment" is made richer by the fact that, although
they all began with similar economic environments, since independence the Baltic
Republics and Russia have followed very different paths concerning
privatization. The empirical work will consist of the estimation of the
productivity effect of ownership variables using a standard production function
framework and the estimation of discrete choice models of the ownership and
control chosen for the firm.