* 9511470
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Property Rights and Land   Use in Changing Rights, Changing Forests:  Sabah, Malaysia
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Nancy Peluso, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 02/28/1997
* USD 6,340.00

9511470 Peluso This field research examines the impact of a changing political
economy on legal and customary property law systems and practices among Dusun
villagers around Mount Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia. The communal forest
resources management practices of the Dusun were given legal status in 1930. Now
villagers believe that the privatization of land and resources within their
community forests (legally, "Native Reserves") is necessary for economic
survival. If forest reserves are moved from community management to private
ownership or sold to outside interests, dramatic changes in the use, protection,
and distribution of these resources will probably occur. The focus of this
research will be on the ways in which transformation from customary laws to a
formal legal system has affected local property rights and land use practices
and resulted in conflicts between and within communities over use and ownership
of land. It will expand the body of knowledge that emphasizes the importance of
integrating resource management and property rights law systems within the
larger historical and political-economic context to understand the behavior of
resource users. It will probably demonstrate that property rights and control
over and access to resources are crucial factors affecting resource management
systems. %%%% This field research examines the impact of a changing political
economy on legal and customary property law systems and practices among Dusun
villagers around Mount Kinabalu in Sabah, Malaysia. The villagers now believe
that the privatization of land and resources within their previously-communal
forests is necessary for economic survival. If forest reserves are moved from
community management to private ownership or sold to outside interests, dramatic
changes in the use, protection, and distribution of these resources will
probably occur. The focus of this research will be on the ways in which
transformation from customary laws to a formal legal system has affected local
prope rty rights and land use practices and resulted in conflicts between and
within communities over use and ownership of land. ****