* 9511628
* Formal Models of Legislative Organization and the Decision  to Delegate
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* David Epstein, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1997
* USD 109,591.00

9511628 O'Halloran Recent literature on positive political theory, addressing
such diverse topics as legislative organization, administrative procedures,
judicial review, and comparative political institutions, consistently posits
that the process by which policy is made ultimately shapes political outcomes.
Known generally as the "new institutionalism," this line of research asserts
that what politicians do is intimately linked to how they do it. In the study of
American government, one of the most important procedural choices is whether
substantive policy decisions will be made by congress or delegated to an
executive branch agency. This question goes to the very heart of policy making
in a separation of powers system, as the forces brought to bear on legislators
are quite distinct from those affecting bureaucratic agencies. The current
research investigates Congress's choice of whether or not to delegate
substantive discretionary authority to the executive branch. It has been argued
that Congress delegates authority merely to shift the blame for unpopular policy
decisions or to protect favored constituents. The researchers suggest instead
that congressional delegation to the executive branch can be seen as a
politically expedient response to the inefficiencies of congressional policy
making. Thus, this analysis links the details of legislative organization to
congressional-executive relations and the decision to delegate. The project
contains three central components. 1)Building on new advances in the theory of
the firm, the researchers model Congress's decision to produce policy "in-house"
or subcontract policy making to the bureaucracy. From this model, they derive
several propositions about the impact of divided government, committee outliers,
and organized interests on Congress's decision to delegate, and on the amount of
discretion granted to executive agencies. 2) The investigators empirically test
the model of delegation with data drawn from important legislation enacted over
the past half century. This data set allows the researchers to track changes in
delegation both across issue areas and over time. Using the econometric
specifications suggested by the theoretical framework they test a series of
hypotheses relating political conditions to delegation and agency discretion.
3)In addition to legislative histories, the researchers conduct detailed case
studies of two policy areas, international trade and environmental regulation.
These case studies investigate whether the institutions of delegation are fixed
and unchanging, or malleable, responding predictably to changes in the political
environment. ***