* 9511518
* The Evolution of Specialization and Its Effects on          Performance: Model Testing for American State Legislative   Committees in the Twentieth Century
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Keith Hamm, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/2000
* USD 141,629.00

9511518 Hamm Every 20th century U.S. state legislative chamber has organized its
work and completed its tasks by assigning members to smaller work groups--
standing committees. As one would expect, this prominent role for committees in
the legislative process has attracted the attention of citizen, press and
academic observers. For example, writing in 1931, it was demonstrated that
committee action was the final action for more than 90 percent of bills
introduced in the Maryland Senate and House during the 1927 legislative session.
Among the themes dominating political scientists' analysis of legislative
committees from a functional perspective has been their growth in specialization
and use as a means for "division of labor" in a chamber. Based on earlier work
and using organization theory literature, several propositions regarding
specialization in legislative committees are developed in this research
investigation. The purpose of the current research is to allow the investigators
to: posit a model of the causes of committee specialization; complete the
collection of a data base on specialization indicators for American state
legislative committees; analyze the data base resulting from these efforts using
regression analysis; identify study states for collecting committee performance
data from this analysis; posit a model of the consequences of committee
specialization for committee performance in policy and program formulation;
initiate the collection of legislative performance data relevant to evaluating
the effects of committee specialization; analyze the data base resulting from
these efforts using path analysis; and, prepare written reports and the data
base for subsequent distribution. This project promises to substantially enhance
our understanding of the topic of this research. ***