* 9511708
* Nobel Physics and Chemistry Prizes
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Robert Friedman, University of California-San Diego
* Fixed Amount Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1997
* USD 80,000.00

Friedman All of us tend to regard the Nobel prize as an indicator of ultimate
excellence in science. Some preconditions to begin making sense of the prize
decisions first became available after 1976 when Nobel proceedings over 50 years
old became accessible. Under his previous grants, Dr. Friedman began exploring
the history of the physics and chemistry prizes. Under this grant, Dr. Friedman
is bringing into focus issues related to values and disciplinary cultures within
the Swedish Academy's procedures as well as examining uses of the prize in
transmitting values through attempts at forging identity, collective memory, and
tradition. Disciplinary boundaries, goals, standards, and values do not occur
naturally; these are negotiated, adapted, and often contested. Nobel prizes
became enmeshed in disciplinary politics. In de-mystifying the Nobel prize --
its awarding and its various use -- Dr. Friedman seeks to illuminate how values
have been negotiated in 20th century science especially with respect to concepts
of reward and excellence; who is celebrated and for what types of achievements?
This study will show how and why individuals attempted, with varying degrees of
success, to fashion and appropriate the institution of the Nobel prize for
furthering disciplinary and cultural agendas in Sweden and abroad: a history of
the politics of excellence. How might reward and excellence be understood when
the politics of assigning credit and renown are made visible? How might Nobel's
wish to celebrate those who have conferred "benefit on mankind" be regarded
today when the original moral referent of knowledge for its own sake is
compromised by a culture of competition and market-place values?