* 9511927
* Symposium on Metal Ions in Biology and Medicine: Natural    and Synthetic Approaches to be held in Honolulu, Hawaii     17-22 December 1995.
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1996
* John Dawson, American Chemical Society (ACS)
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 11/30/1996
* USD 4,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F Ko4 4 C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l Ko4 4 Ko4 4 ( ! " # $ % &amp; ' ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ;
&lt; = &gt; ? @ A B C D E F G H I J F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; e = e J J n n n n n n n D 1 # &amp; u T ; D n D n n n n n n n
n 5 9511927 Dawson This symposium Metal Ions in Biology and Medicine: Natural
and Synthetic Approaches will be held in Honolulu, Hawaii, December 17-22, 1995.
It will bring to the attention of the chemical community new advances in the
area of the structural and catalytic properties of metalloenzymes, the use of
biomimetic metal complexes to model the structural and catalytic properties of
metalloenzymes, and to introduce the emerging research areas of metal-nucleic
acid interactions and therapeutic uses of metal complexes. %%% Metal ions play
an essential and yet imperfectly understood role in biological catalysis and
participate in a large number of transformations within cells. This meeting
brings together biochemists, biophysicists, and inorganic chemists who actively
study the role of metal ions in biology and medicine. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TE MPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 9511927
marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ I y 4 @ @ {\! 4 @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; E F
J U F J ! ! ! ! K @ Normal a b c " A@ " Default Paragraph Font J J J J 5 marcia
steinberg!\\CLM11\MCBPUB\BIOCHEM\DAWSON.ABS @HP DeskJet Printers LPT1: HPDSKJET
HP DeskJet D L f , , " W d }w;W } d " W HP DeskJet D L f , , " W d }w;W } d " W
I I I F 1 Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial " h .3 EE3 E $ ; 9511927 marcia
steinberg marcia steinberg ; ;