* 9511020
* Modulation of Calcium Channels in Neurons
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Michael Adams, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 231,000.00

9511020 Adams Nerve cells communicate with each other by means of chemical
signals called neurotransmitters and neurohormones. The arrival of electrical
impulses at nerve endings release tiny amounts of neurotransmitters acting
locally or much larger amounts of neurohormones acting at longer distances; both
stimulate the electrical activity in neighboring nerve cells. The release of
these chemical signals depends on the brief entry of calcium to nerve terminals,
a process that is highly regulated by "calcium channels". Small amounts of
calcium enter for neurotransmitter release, whereas larger and longer periods of
calcium entry are necessary for the release of hormones. These differences are
to a large extent dictated by variations in the properties of different calcium
channels. Dr. Adams and his colleagues are working to define the properties of
calcium channels in different types of nerve cells, ranging from motoneurons to
neuroendocrine cells, using a combination of electrophysiology and pharmacology.
The kinetics of calcium channel opening and closing as well as their
sensitivities to different drugs and toxins will be used to classify them into
different groups and to associated them with different functions in nerve cells.
Potential applications of these studies are the development of pharmaceuticals
and pest control agents.