* 9511867
* Science, The Cold War, and Democratic Values: Scientists in U.S. Foreign Policy, 1945-1963
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,12/31/2000
* Ronald Doel, American Institute of Physics
* Fixed Price Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 12/31/2000
* USD 106,550.00

Until World War II, the international activities of science and of the U.S.
government were conducted in relative isolation from one another. By the start
of the Cold War, scientists became increasingly involved in foreign policy
evaluations and decision-making. This unprecedented development created a new
professional role for scientists and new tensions with traditional diplomats and
career politicians. Yet because the history of American involvement in
international science after 1945 remains largely unexplored, little is known
about these far-reaching changes. Dr. Doel is concentrating in this study on
science and scientists in the State Department, the National Security Council,
the Central Intelligence Agency, and related institutions in the early Cold War
era. He is focusing particularly on how the new links between science and
foreign policy influence the practice of science and affected American
diplomacy, and examines how these developments affected democratic values and
processes, including the role of experts in policy formation. The integration of
science and technology into foreign policy was one of the most significant
political transformations in the second half of the 20th century and is
recognized today as a salient feature of global relations. Yet this
transformation was far from smooth. Diplomacy, one of the least responsive of
democratic establishments, linked to traditional constituencies, was slow to
react to the new prominence of science. Scientists, seeking to extend their
faith in technocratic values to broader realms of U.S. policy, nevertheless
persevered in creating new opportunities that many hoped would ease
international tensions while aiding American research. Yet, after Sputnik's
launch, scientists split with one another and with the government officials over
American participation in international science activities, management of Third
World science aid, and calls for centralized controls over U.S. research to
match perceived Soviet superiority . The relationship between science and U.S.
foreign affairs is an important component of Cold War history, one that promises
new insight into the evolution of democratic values and practices.