* 9511364
* Valuing Risky Projects:  Integrating Option Pricing Theory  and Decision Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Kevin McCardle, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 08/31/1997
* USD 151,970.00

There are two major competing procedures for evaluating risky projects where
managerial flexibility plays an important role: one is option pricing theory,
based on the no-arbitrage theory of financial markets, and the other is decision
analytic, based on stochastic dynamic programming. The basic procedure in the
option pricing evaluation of is to find a portfolio of securities and a trading
strategy that generates cash flows exactly matching the cash flows of the risky
project. One then determines the market value of this replicating portfolio and
compares this value to the cost of undertaking the project, yielding, as a
consequence, the optimal investment decision. The basic procedure in a decision-
analytic evaluation is to construct a decision tree (or dynamic programming)
model of the project and assess the manager's subjective probabilities and
utilities for the possible outcomes. One then works backwards through the tree
to find the project's value and the optimal investment decision. As a project
involves more real assets, such as buildings, equipment, and human capital (as
opposed to purely financial assets such as stocks and bonds), finding a
replicating portfolio becomes problematic. On the other hand, as a project grows
in complexity, assessing probabilities and utilities for all possible states of
the world becomes difficult. The goal of this research project is to further
develop a procedure for evaluating risky projects that integrates the option-
pricing and decision- analysis approaches. The proposed procedure is consistent
with both the option-pricing and decision-analysis approaches, can be applied
when the option pricing method fails due to a lack of a replicating portfolio,
and is simpler and easier to implement than a full decision- analytic treatment.