* 9511866
* Barbara McClintock, Cytogenetics and Evolution
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,07/31/1998
* William Provine, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Fixed Price Award
* Michael M. Sokal
* 07/31/1998
* USD 80,004.00

Lee B. Kass and William B. Provine: " Barbara McClintock, Cytogenetics and
Evolution" Certain figures in science develop an aura around them that is
difficult to displace. Mythologies build up so that the truth of how they fit
into and transformed scientific traditions are lost. Linus Pauling, Margaret
Mead, Albert Einstein, Jonas Salk are examples. Barbara McClintock, Nobel Prize
Winner in biology, is one of these mythological figures. As myth would have it,
she was a lonely researcher who pursued her study of the genetics of corn for
decades before the rest of the biological community came to realize the
importance of her work. That her work was important is undeniable: her so-called
"jumping genes" brought about by the exchange of genetic material between
organisms and their parasites has been replicated in what is now the foundation
of our contemporary biotechnology industry. But what about the myth of the
solitary scientist whose work was ignored? This is what Drs. Kass and Provine
are examining in their study of Barbara McClintock. This study is important for
our understanding of the development of science: how does a genius such as
McClintock transform a research tradition? Surely it is not as a solitary worker
with no followers. Transformations of a tradition are brought about by
researchers engaged in the active development of a field. How McClintock
accomplished this is the purpose of this study. Kass and Provine hope to
demonstrate in this research how McClintock's work on genetic exchange grew
understandably from her earlier work on cytogenetics of corn beginning when she
was a graduate student at Cornell. They are tracing the influences of advisors,
colleagues, institutions and culture on the development of her science. Their
sources include extensive archival collections at every institution where
McClintock worked, extensive interviews they conducted with her before her
death, and interviews with those who knew and worked with her. The result of
this researc h should be a major biogra hy of this near mythical figure in the
history of contemporary biology.