* 9511937
* RUI:  Adoption as a Global Sociolegal Practice
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Barbara Yngvesson, Hampshire College
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1999
* USD 154,686.00

9511937 Yngvesson Adoption can be an important process in building strong
families and improving the condition of individual deprived children. This study
examines the global market processes that have led to a "commodification" of
poor children and how those processes are worked out in the transnational legal
arena and in the adoption policies and practices of the United States and
Sweden. It does so by investigating the connections between global market
processes, transnational legal processes, specifically the expansion of formal
and informal legal ideologies and practices among those handling adoption, and
local practices and policies surrounding adoption in Sweden and the United
States. Its method is ethnographic. It will contribute to our understanding of
how world legal "space" changes and is itself changed by local legal culture and
practices. %%%% Adoption can be an important process in building strong families
and improving the condition of individual deprived children. This study examines
the global market processes that have led to a "commodification" of poor
children and how those processes are worked out in the transnational legal arena
and in the adoption policies and practices of the United States and Sweden. It
does so by investigating the connections between global market processes,
transnational legal processes, specifically the expansion of formal and informal
legal ideologies and practices among those handling adoption, and local
practices and policies surrounding adoption in Sweden and the United States. Its
method is ethnographic. It will contribute to our understanding of how world
legal "space" changes and is itself changed by local legal culture and
practices. ****