* 9511315
* Democratization and Science:  The Theory and Practice       of Technical Assistance at MIT
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Robert Kargon, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 01/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

MIT offers an unusual opportunity to study how the theory and practice of
modernization shaped one another within the context of the Cold War. In the
1950's and 1960's, MIT social scientists, natural scientists and engineers
formulated an important new approach toward the uses of science and technology
as tools of American foreign policy. These ideas about modernization and
democratization had considerable influence on the macro-level in the Kennedy
administration. On the micro-level, MIT tried to carry out some of the ideas
presented in this new approach by assisting a number of universities in Third
World countries (India and Korea, for example) develop technological institutes
for training of engineers to serve in modern democracies. Under this grant, Drs.
Leslie and Kargon are concentrating on the developments at MIT and their
influence on US policy. Future studies will examine how these projects were
carried out by MIT in advice to these Third World institutions. MIT's version of
modernization gave a new prominence to science and technology as indispensable
tools for furthering American interests abroad. In practice, technical
assistance did not always promote either independent economic development or
political democracy, as its promoters expected. Nonetheless, by redefining the
respective roles of economics and politics in American foreign policy,
modernization theory represented an important alternative to military
containment and had lasting implications for political and economic culture in
the developing world. Of particular interest is how the theory of modernization
was pioneered and used at MIT's Center for International Studies (CENIS) by
economists Max Millikan and Walt Rostow, political scientists Lucian Pye and
Ithiel Pool and anthropologist Clifford Geertz. MIT's social scientists never
fully appreciated how much their own assumptions about science, economic
development and political culture--in short, the very tenets of modernization
theory itself--had been sh aped by the political and economic priorities of the
Cold War. Not did MIT's engineers always recognize how much the models of
technical education and regional development they were offering the Third World
had been influenced by the same priorities. Drs. Leslie and Kargon are
investigating under this grant the theories advanced at CENIS concerning the
relationship among science, technology, and development, with particular
attention to their presumed effects on democratization in the Third World. They
are also investigating how MIT tried to implement these ideas by examining the
history of MIT's involvement in the founding of technological institutes. They
have other support to see how these plans were specifically carried out in
Korea. Future studies will extend this work to the actual implementation of
MIT's plans in India and how the Indian Institute of Technology actually
developed as an adaptation of MIT's blueprints and Indian sensibilities.