* 9511633
* Visual Attention, Perception, and Memory for Objects
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Anne Treisman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/1999
* USD 310,001.00

9511633 TREISMAN The goal of this research is to study the formation, storage
and retrieval of visual representations of objects. In particular, it will
explore the separate effects of attention, of prior knowledge, and of the task
being performed on the nature of visual memories. Recent research is revealing
surprising evidence of the plasticity of the visual system: Information is often
registered without awareness or conscious memory, although it can be probed
using indirect methods like priming or interference with subsequent perception
of the same objects. The conceptualization behind this research distinguishes
between the reactivation of prestored representations of familiar objects (which
leads to object identification or classification) and the creation of new
tokens, either of familiar or of unfamiliar objects, representing the current
stimulus as we are seeing it, in its particular, perhaps arbitrary
instantiation. Several different priming paradigms will be used to study newly
formed object tokens. One series of experiments will explore the object-specific
integration of information in displays of moving objects. The general question
is how we maintain the coherence and continuity of perceived objects as they
move and change in a dynamic environment. Another explores the initial
representations that are automatically generated without attention the first
time a new object is seen. A negative priming paradigm, in which an unattended
object becomes the attended one on a later trial, will be used to explore the
nature and duration of these object tokens. For example, is their three-
dimensional structure available? Is their shape abstracted from other aspects
like size, color and orientation? Under what conditions can they be consciously
retrieved, as well as passively shaping our perceptual responses? The focus will
be on the ways in which these implicit memory tokens differ from the
representations formed either for attended novel object s or for unattended
familiar objects. The aim is to better understand what roles attention and prior
knowledge play and how they interact in object perception. This research may
well lead to a better understanding of the higher levels of processing in the
visual system. It may have implications for ways of improving visual learning in
a variety of skilled tasks, and for better understanding the various influences
that unattended visual stimuli can have in shaping our behavior (for example in
advertising). It may also suggest ways of linking the inferred processes to
neural mechanisms in the brain, perhaps throwing light on the various
difficulties experienced by neurological patients with damage to specific areas
of the brain. ***