* 9511045
* Doctoral Dissertation:  Mapping the Territory of Uncertainty and Ignorance:  Broadening Current Assessment and Policy   Approaches
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Roger Kasperson, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 10/31/1997
* USD 10,113.00

Moser, S. This support is for a Doctoral Dissertation Enhancement Award. Current
efforts in the assessment of uncertainty in global change are largely confined
to technical and scientific uncertainties. The treatment of scientific
uncertainty fails to address the broader uncertainties involved in the human
dimensions of global change. The first goal of this dissertation research is to
help broaden uncertainty analysis and assessment beyond the physical dynamics of
global change by exploring how social uncertainties and the domain of ignorance
can be incorporated into uncertainty analysis. The substantive context is that
of potential impacts from human-induced sea-level rise (SLR) on the natural and
social systems along the U.S. East and Gulf Coasts. Second, the study aims to
assess how uncertainties are currently addressed in policy-making and management
systems and how they may better be confronted to allow for a more effective
human response to climate change and SLR The study aims to (1) contribute a
broadened conceptual framework of uncertainty and ignorance as a basis for a
more inclusive and robust assessment of uncertainties in global change, (2)
evaluate current scientific uncertainty and sea-level rise impact assessment and
management efforts, and (3) point toward venues of improvement both for
uncertainty assessment and for policy-making for and management of high-
uncertainty, high-stake situations that incorporate human-dimension
uncertainties and ignorance. f8 Û-ª þ + Ûª▓ ÑOh ª' +'ª▒0 Ý + ] $ H l + ¢ ╗ S u m
m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ & Û ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++
++++++++++++ D h + *send the memo, to type the sub R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT