* 9511640
* Child/Adolescent Risk Precursors of Adult Adjustment: A     Longitudinal Study
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Jack Block, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 09/30/1999
* USD 226,285.00

This project comprehensively assesses at age 30 the participants in a
longitudinal study of personality and cognitive development begun in their early
childhood. Participants have already been intensively assessed during their
nursery school years, in middle childhood, preadolescence, early and late
adolescence, and young adulthood. Appreciable information also exists regarding
their parents and parent-child interactions. Many theoretically important and
useful findings concerning the determinants of personality and cognitive
development have been reported during the course of this study. However, the
ultimate import of various childhood and adolescent behaviors and experiences
can only be recognized in adulthood. By age 30 life paths and opportunity
structures are appreciably set for most individuals. A multifaceted assessment
of subjects when they are entering their fourth decade is unusually
consequential.because at this age, unlike the last assessment at age 23, the
developmental requirement of accommodating to issues of work and interpersonal
connection has been seriously confronted. The age 30 assessment will focus upon
the participants' life courses to date and their current life circumstances
(e.g., work and career patterns, self perceptions, experienced life stresses,
physical and mental health, cognitive and moral development, personal
philosophies, pattern of leisure time usage, interpersonal and attachment
relationships). Procedures will involve detailed, intimate, and systematic
interviews videotaped for subsequent coding; various experimental information-
processing procedures deemed relevant to personality, cognitve, and moral
development; measures of psychobiologic reactivity; inventory items which follow
up and extend knowledge derived from previously administered questionnaires.
These data wiill consolidate understanding of the implications of various
processes during the formative childhood, adolescent, and youth years for
successful developmental outcomes in adult hood. This project provides follow-up
assessment at age 30 of participants in a well-established longitudinal study
who have been intensively studied from ages 3 to 23. Unlike most longitudinal
data sets, this project is notable for the large amount of data available for
each participant and on the comparability of the data across time periods.
Because of its longitudinal -- fully prospective -- nature, many theoretically
important and useful findings have been reported during the course of this study
that could not be gleaned from other data sets. For example, one notable
contribution has been to revise the understanding of the impact of divorce on
children: by studying families prior to divorce, it was shown that pre-divorce
family discord appears to account for much of what earlier had been viewed as an
effect of divorce. Other contributions to knowledge include: the nursery school
and familial antecedents of drug use in adolescence and young adulthood; the
early childhood personality and parental antecedents of depression in
adolescence and young adulthood; early antecedents of creativity, ego-
resilience, and ego-control; personality continuities in self-esteem and
resiliency. By extending assessments to age 30, when life attainments and
relatively established life patterns can be identified, this project addresses
crucial developmental issues that cannot be addressed with data collected at
earlier ages. More specifically, a multifaceted assessment of subjects when they
are entering their fourth decade is unusually consequential because at this age,
unlike the last assessment at age 23, the developmental requirement of
accommodating to issues of work and interpersonal connection has been seriously
confronted. The prospective assessement of the antecedents of successful
adaptations in the domains of work and marriage which this project will provide
is highly relevant to the Human Capital research agenda on 'workplace' and
'families'. These data wiill consolidate understanding of the implications of
various processes during the formative childhood, adolescent, and youth years
for successful developmental outcomes in adulthood that are of great societal
consequence..