* 9511360
* Elementary Coordination Dynamics of Learning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* J. A. Scott Kelso, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 07/31/1998
* USD 130,856.00

9511360 KELSO The ability of animals to learn from experience reaches its
highest form in human beings. Yet, despite extensive work in various fields of
scientific inquiry, fundamental questions still remain to be answered: What is
learning? What processes underlie the ability of humans to learn new skills?
What is the nature of change? What factors determine generalization of one skill
to another? What makes one task easy to learn and others difficult? This
research is part of a broad program addressing these questions through studies
of perceptual-motor coordination in tasks not unlike learning to play a musical
instrument, but simple enough to be measured. The approach employs novel methods
that allow a quantitative evaluation of the learner's existing capabilities
before the introduction of a novel task. Nobody is a blank slate. The individual
learner possesses his/her own "signature" (dependent on previous experiences,
inherited traits, etc.) that influences the learning process. This research is
based on the hypothesis that the rate of the learning process and the form that
it takes is depend on the interplay between preexisting capabilities and the
task to be learned. Since both can be expressed in terms of the same variables
and the rates of change of these variables, dynamical laws of learning become
accessible. This research will investigate how learning causes changes, not just
in the representation of what has been learned, but in the entire layout of the
learner's dynamics. Preliminary studies have shown that what is learned
(relevant information) is quite independent of the particular system that
practices the task. Thus, the ability to transfer knowledge from one domain to
another appears to rest heavily on finding out what the relevant information is.
A further direction of the research stems from a conceptualization of memory
which assumes that its strength depends on the stability of the learned state
and can be precisely quant ified using dynamical measures (e.g., fluctuations,
time to relax from perturbations). Moreover, future plans include an evaluation
of human brain activity patterns corresponding to behaviorally observed changes
in learning and memory. Although the research is basic, aimed at understanding
the psychological and neuronal mechanisms of human learning, it has the
potential to spawn both implications and applications. In particular, the focus
on individual constraints on learning and the need to structure the learning
situation in the context of such constraints have significant implications for
education. Avenues for applications exist in human-machine interface design,
prosthetics, and rehabilitation following strokes, as well as in recovery from
the numerous brain diseases that afflict human beings. ***