* 9511359
* RUI:  Development of Vasopressin Structures and Vasopressin-Dependent Behaviors
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* John Axelson, College of the Holy Cross
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 07/31/1999
* USD 174,782.00

IBN-9511359 Axelson, John F. The development of brain structural and behavioral
sexual dimorphisms is a topic of intense investigation, as are attempts to
define the factors responsible for inducing the structural changes. However,
little information about the different functions of brain dimorphic peptide
modulatory systems have been forthcoming. In the present studies, Dr. John
Axelson proposes to investigate how steroid hormones modulate brain development
during critical pre- and post-natal periods. These studies will determine if
modulation of the steroid hormone environment during early or late development
influences not only behavioral patterns and memory, but also the amounts of
information transmitting molecules in the brain. Dr. Axelson will be
investigating the role of the vasopressin-containing neurons in the brain and
whether this neuropeptide system is involved in sexually dimorphic development
of social recognition memories. Further, it is proposed to examine the role of
steroid hormones in the generation of dimorphic patterns of vasopressin
expression as a basis for understanding their role in behavioral changes. The
proposed studies will generate novel information about brain development and the
corresponding behaviors that will enhance our understanding of human behavior
and cognition.