* 9511275
* Technological Change, Human Capital, and Income Distribution
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Nancy Stokey, National Opinion Research Center
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1999
* USD 181,841.00

9511275 Stokey The goal of this research is to explore some of the links between
technological change, investments in human and physical capital, and the
distribution of income. The first part of the project is motivated by the
results of recent empirical work that shows that the degree of intergenerational
mobility in the income distribution is far lower than earlier studies had
suggested. This project will analyze together the important channels for the
persistence of inequality. Pervious theoretical models have treated these
channels one at a time ald neglected altogether one important channel. The goal
of this part of the project is to develop a theoretically tractable model that
can be calibrated to U.S. data. Understanding the mechanisms through which
persistence is generated is critical for debates about the efficacy of various
policy measures in raising the earnings prospects of children whose family
backgrounds alone give little reason for optimism. For example, to calculate the
benefits of increased public expenditures on educational investments in children
from low-income families, one needs to know how much higher investments are
likely to raise the child's eventual earnings, to what extent higher public
expenditures are likely to be offset by lower private expenditures, and the
extent to which any benefits to the child will also affect the child's own
descendants. The second part of the project is motivated by the evidence of a
dramatic increase in the wage premium for skilled labor in the U.S. in the 1980s
due to skill biased technological change. The experience of the 1980s was not
unique, however: the U.S. has seen several extended periods of expansion and
compression in the skill premium during this century. A stochastic dynamic
general equilibrium model will be used to study such periods of expansion and
compression as equilibrium responses to stochastic, skill biased, technological
change.