* 9511759
* Biochemistry of Hemoglobins and Oxygen Transport
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Austen Riggs, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 149,500.00

9511759 Riggs A problem of major importance in biochemistry is the determination
of the mechanisms by which different parts of proteins communicate with one
another. The interactions between subunits that give rise to cooperative ligand
binding in vertebrate hemoglobins (Hbs) have been intensely studied for many
years and have become relatively well understood. Although not widely
recognized, additional ligand-dependent interactions between tetramers are
widespread in many avian reptilian and amphibian Hbs. This project seeks to
determine both the structural basis and functional consequences of these
interactions between Hb tetramers by means of site-directed mutagenesis,
functional analysis, and X-ray crystallography. These tetramer-tetramer
complexes have novel subunit contacts that perturb the heme-pockets in such a
way that the oxygen affinity is greatly reduced. The ligand-linked dissociation
to a higher affinity tetramer forms the basis for a new mechanism of
cooperativity of ligand binding. We seek to determine the structural basis of
these properties because they are of considerable physiological importance: they
make possible delivery of oxygen to the tissues at higher pressures than would
otherwise be possible. Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to construct human
Hb mutants to have similar properties. Additional studies include the Hbs of the
lamprey (vertebrate), an echinoderm, Caudina, and the diving beetle, Buenoa, all
of which comprise monomers which undergo either mixed or self-association on
ligand removal. Each of these systems possesses unique features that together
with the self-associating tetrameric Hbs, will be used to generate the general
rules that dictate how ligand binding is linked to dissociation. The long-term
goal is to understand fully the structural and energetic basis for these ligand-
linked dissociation processes that comprise important models for understanding
allosteric regulation. %%% Many physiological processes, including oxygen
transpor t, are mediated by proteins that are composed of two or more subunits.
Self-association of these proteins to larger structures or dissociation into
subunits often greatly changes the functional properties of the proteins. The
control of these changes comprises an important way in which the properties of
these proteins can be changed to meet changing physiological requirements. This
proposal is designed to measure the self-association of bird and lamprey
hemoglobins. The efficiency of oxygen transport from lungs to tissues in birds
is depends on this self-association which makes it possible for bird hemoglobins
to deliver up to 30% more oxygen than is possible with human hemoglobin. This is
an evolutionary adaptation to meet the stringent evolutionary adaptation of
flight. This proposal aims to use procedures of DNA technology to determine
exactly which amino acids in the protein structure are important for these
unusual physiological properties. Mutant hemoglobins will be constructed with
amino acid changes in order to understand the self-association. ***