* 9511884
* Joint U.S.-India-Sri Lanka International Workshop on        South Asian Anaphora:  Delhi, India (January 1996)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Barbara Lust, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/1997
* USD 24,000.00

9511884 James Gair/Barbara Lust Description: This proposal seeks support for a
five day regional workshop: "Joint U.S.-India- Sri Lanka International Workshop
on South Asian Anaphora, Delhi, India, January 2-6, 1996. The central topic is
the analysis of lexical pronouns and anaphors in several South Asian languages.
The principal objective of the workshop is to reactivate the South Asian
linguistics enterprise by generating a cross- fertilization of theory and data
among leading scholars in the field. Other important results associated with the
workshop include the publication of a fundamental reference work on the
comparative grammars of South Asia languages, Lexical Anaphors and Pronouns in
South Asian Languages: A Principled Typology, and the initiation of new research
collaborations, particularly among "new generation" scientists from all three
countries. Scope: The workshop has the potential to reactivate the linkages
between linguistic communities in South Asia and the US. Both the Ford and
Rockefeller Foundations had been successful in developing a significant level of
collaboration among scholars of linguistics through summer institutes,
workshops, and exchanges of scientists. It is expected that the workshop will
have considerable impact on laying the foundation for new collaboration among
the participants and focus on the next areas in which long term collaborative
research can be extended. The proceedings of the workshop will be published. ***