* 9511726
* War and Nature:  Science and Technology in the History of   Chemical Weapons and Insecticides
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Edmund Russell, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce E. Seely
* 06/30/1999
* USD 45,000.00

Two of the most powerful factors shaping the 20th century have been war and the
environment. Traditionally, however, researchers have treated these issues as
separate. Dr. Russell asks whether this separation is the right approach. He
cites the history of chemical weapons and the parallel history of insecticides
to argue that we should not separate these subjects. Efforts to control national
and natural enemies are linked, he argues, on at least three levels. The first
is technology. Beginning in World War I, chemical compounds shuttled between
battle fields and farm fields. In Gerhard Schrader's laboratory, nerve gases and
insecticides entered the world as fraternal twins. The second is institutions.
Nation states harnessed military and civilian institutions in tandem to develop
chemicals for war and peace. The third was metaphor. Soldiers and scientists
shaped the way people experience war and nature through shared metaphors. In
World War II, for example, military and civilian publications published cartoons
of half-Japanese, half-insect creatures and called for "annihilation" of both.
These developments helped produce some of the most exciting, and the most
tragic, events of this century. Humans used a poison chemical to boost crop
yields and free themselves from disease, but they also used the same compound to
try to "exterminate" human beings. Dr. Russell is organizing his research around
case studies of institutions representing military, civilian, scientific and
industrial interests. His results promise to advance our understanding of
interactions between science, technology and society, between military and
civilian endeavors, and between humans and nature. They also promise to inform
debates about pest control, arms control, dual use technology and environmental
policy. Dr. Russell's is using his research to help train students in the School
of Engineering and Applied Science at the University of Virginia. Hi is
developing a module on environmental issues for use in courses required of all
fourth year students. He is also developing two electives in environmental
history and environmental problems and policies.