* 9511994
* Interest Rate Rules for Monetary Policy
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Michael Woodford, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 01/31/1999
* USD 194,317.00

This project is concerned with the theoretical analysis of alternative rules
for monetary policy. More specifically, the aim is to better understand the
consequences of policy rules that involve use of a short-term interest rate as
the instrument in terms of which the monetary authority formulates its policy
over short periods of time. The project will also consider the extent to which
interest-rate smoothing conflicts with other aims of policy, including both
price-level stabilization and stabilization of output and employment. The
research seeks to bring the theoretical literature in monetary economics into
closer contact with the problems of contemporary monetary policy. The
theoretical literature to date has largely conceived of monetary policy in terms
of alternative paths for a monetary aggregate, which is treated as being under
the direct control of the monetary authority. But, while operating procedures of
that sort have often been advocated by academic critics of central bank
policies, central banks have seldom operated in that way. Recently the U.S.
Federal Reserve has ceased to use monetary aggregates as guides to policy, even
in the role of intermediate targets. A theoretical understanding of the
properties of the kinds of procedures currently being used or contemplated is
badly needed. ***