* 9511732
* Escaping Distressed Neighborhoods
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Scott South, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/1998
* USD 140,475.00

This research is designed to study patterns and determinants of residential
mobility out of distressed neighborhoods in U.S. metropolitan areas. It is
concerned with understanding racial differences in mobility, in particular, the
characteristics of individuals, families, and social contexts that allow some
minority group members to leave poor neighborhoods for more desirable ones. Data
from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics' Geocode-Match Files and Census Extract
Datasets will be used to select a nationally representative sample of families
and individuals and to test three theoretical models of residential mobility.
The human capital/life stage model argues that residential mobility is a
concomitant of social and occupational mobility and of life cycle changes. The
place model focuses on barriers to mobility, especially those caused by racial
discrimination. The housing availability model relates moving to availability
and to the constraints of renting or ownership. %%% This research should
contri`ute to new models of intrametropolitan mobility by taking into account
the full range of relevant variables that can affect moving by individuals and
families located in distressed neighborhoods. By explicitly modeling the effects
of racial discrimination on housing search and location choice it will provide a
comprehensive examination of barriers against and opportunities for residential
mobility. The research should result in attaching probabilities to the links
between human capital and neighborhoods, family, poverty, and disadvantage.
Findings should be useful to policy makers concerned with these issues as well
as to social scientists looking for more comprehensive theories.