* 9511309
* CAREER:  Information Storage in a Biophysical Model of the  Hippocampal CA3 Neural Network
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* David Jaffe, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Roy L. White
* 07/31/1998
* USD 222,695.00

IBN-9511309 Jaffe The hippocampal formation is a region of the brain that is
important for certain aspects of learning and memory. The goal of this project
is to examine how an important component of the hippocampus, the CA3 region,
might process, store and recall specific patterns of information. A
computational model of the CA3 neural network will be used to test hypotheses.
Specific parameters regarding the firing properties of inhibitory neurons and
certain aspects of synaptic transmission will be obtained using state-of-the-art
electrophysiological recording methods from neurons in hippocampal slices. The
computer network will contain 1,000 to 10,0000 neurons based on published data
and the experimental data from inhibitory neurons. A key feature of the network
will be that excitatory connections between pyramidal neurons will potentiate or
depress based on biophysical rules for synaptic potentiation and depression. The
CA3 network will be trained with different patterns of input to test the
following: 1) can the network can discriminate between input patterns, 2) can
the network complete partially presented patterns, and 2) is information
distributed across the network. This work will be important for our
understanding of how this region of the hippocampus is involved in associative
information storage.