* 9511992
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research On Current Problems in      Field Theory and Gravity
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Roman Jackiw, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 03/31/2000
* USD 19,885.00

9511992 Jackiw This proposal requests funds to permit Dr. Roman Jackiw,
Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, to pursue with Dr.
Q-Han Park, Department of Physics, Kyung Hee University, for a period of 24
months, a program of cooperative research to investigate various questions in
field theory and gravity. Dr. Choonkyu Lee, Department of Physics, Seoul
National University, will serve in an advisory capacity with Dr. Park so as to
facilitate Dr. Park's entry into collaborative research with the U.S. scientist.
This research will be centered on three major topics: (1) properties of
effective field theories for high-temperature and high mass quantum
chromodynamics (QCD) as well as gravity; (2) low-dimensional field theory
including gravity; and (3) the study of integrable models and soliton physics.
The collaborators expect to make significant progress in understanding
physical/mathematical properties of field theory and gravity and in finding
possible applications to various areas of physics. Benefit for the U.S. side
will result from access to well-trained Korean scientists, familiar with the
topic, who are eager to engage in the research and its computations. The Korean
scientist will benefit from contact with a senior U.S. researcher who, in
addition to collaborating on this project, can provide an overview of current
research in this field and can provide suggestions for the direction of further
Korean research in field theory and gravity. This project is relevant to the
objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase
the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers
through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques
and through collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Dr. Park's
participation in the project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). ***