* 9511681
* BAC: Analysis of Insect Flight Dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Thomas Daniel, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Roy L. White
* 07/31/1999
* USD 232,171.00

Daniel IBN-9511681 Insect flight is a highly efficient mode of locomotion.
Interest in studies of insect flight arises partially from the need to develop
new design criteria for artificial robotic systems. This research project
focuses on the development of computer models for flight and flight control in
insects. The goal of this work is to better understand how sensory feedback from
the wings and pattern-generating circuits in the central nervous system govern
flight performance. The current approaches of studying any single component of
insect flight (muscle mechanics, aerodynamics, or neural control) alone cannot
be used as predictive models. In this work, mathematical and experimental
approaches are incorporated into the models in order to understand the physics
of force production by muscles and the physics of aerodynamic lift and thrust
generation by wings. Computer models will solve these problems of physics
simultaneously to predict flight performance in the moth Manduca sexta, the
tobacco hornworm moth. This group of researchers couple these processes in
developing a novel biological and engineering approach for a priori predictions
of flight dynamics in response to a suite of physiological and physical
parameters. By this method we can better understand the physics, physiology and
control of flight dynamics.