* 9511897
* Japanese Bioscience and Society
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Samuel Coleman, University of Oregon Eugene
* Fixed Price Award
* Edward J. Hackett
* 09/30/1996
* USD 63,661.00

Dr. Coleman is undertaking a major study of bioscience and its role in Japanese
society. To complete his portrait of Japanese bioscience, he is examining
several groups as well as individuals in Japan who pursue laboratory research in
biochemistry, molecular biology and protein engineering, and the organizations
in Japanese society that support (and sometimes hinder) their work. This project
offers a systematic study in another culture of bioscience as a basic science
with very close connections to commercial applications. Dr. Coleman hopes to
demonstrate the pervasive influences on laboratory social organization from a
number of specific elements in Japan's social structure, in particular
government bureaucracy, management practices in industry, education in the life
sciences, and the women's labor market. He will present rich accounts and
observations created through first-hand observation, in illustrations or
qualified interpretations of aggregate survey studies. He will thus provide a
clear understanding of the direction of rapid change in the organization of
present-day laboratory life science research in Japan. Dr. Coleman is using a
variety of data sets that he has already collected. Among them are interview
transcriptions and field notes from a previously supported year of participation
observation in four bioscience laboratories in Japan, government surveys
unavailable in English, and popular writings for both bioscientists and
laypeople (also unavailable in English). Under this grant, Dr. Coleman is
undertaking additional research in Japan at the Science and Technology Agency's
National Institute for Science and Technology Policy (NISTEP). He will be
examining the relations between basic bioscience research and biotechnology as
an organizational and managerial issue. This project promises contributions to
our understanding of the social dimensions of the relationship between basic and
applied research in the life sciences, and the constraints and opportunities of
the larg er society with which research teams articulate. It will also
contribute to the current discussion regarding the role of ethnography in
studies of laboratory social organization, and provide a new perspective on the
"insider/outsider" debate concerning the epistemological status of ethnography's
subjects.