* 9511343
* Does Market Structure Affect the Conduct and Performance    of Educational Institutions?
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Caroline Hoxby, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1998
* USD 104,423.00

9511343 Hoxby This project empirically examines three topics in the economics of
education. The first part of the project employs natural variation in cohort
size within school districts to analyze the effects of class size on student
performance in this way avoiding many criticisms of the existing literature on
the productivity of school inputs. The second part of the project extends a
substantial literature on the effects of school finance centralizations on
average public school per-pupil spending in a state in a new direction. This
project examines the effect of centralization on school productivity, or student
performance and per-pupil inputs. This new line of research is timely and
important because from 1972-92, 36 states centralized school finance to some
degree, twelve by court order. The third and final part of the project studies
how the emergence of a national college market, with schools drawing students
from across the nation or within a several-state region, affects the
characteristics of the college attended by a given student and the value of the
student s college degree. School-based results on the effects of alass size
typically suffer from an omitted variables problem: the student-teacher ratio is
endogenous to unobserved student characteristics. Results based on aggregate
(state-wide) data have untenable identifying restrictions and suffer from
aggregation bias. The first part of this project makes use of the fact that
school districts with populations under 25,000 have natural year-to-year
variation in cohort size. Because teachers are relatively indivisible and grade-
specific, schools cannot perfectly re- allocate resources so as to equalize
class sizes between different sized cohorts. The strategy uses panel data on
Connecticut school districts, and instruments for the change in class size
between succeeding cohorts with the change in cohort size. The second part of
the project analyzes sixteen recent (1977-87) reforms th at increase school
finance centralization at the state level. For each district, Census of
Governments data are used to categorize the change in the tax-price of marginal
local school spending as a result of the reform. These vary from no change to
extremely large increases in the case of districts that have reached maximum
spending levels in their states. The project develops and tests empirically a
model in which a high tax-price of local school spending decreases school
productivity (student performance for inputs) because it weakens mechanisms by
which less productive schools are made more productive.