* 9511349
* Multidisciplinary Collaborative: Behavioral and Biological  Effects of Chronic Social Stress
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* D. Blanchard, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 165,912.00

IBN-9511349 and 9528213 Blanchard, D. C. and McEwen, Bruce Social stress is a
common and enduring feature of life with important behavioral and physiological
effects. A multidisciplinary research collaboration between the Laboratory of
Behavioral Neurobiology at the University of Hawaii and the Laboratory of
Neuroendocrinology at Rockefeller University is aimed at description and
analysis of these effects. Previous work indicates that single, two-week stress
periods can produce increased defensive behavior and decreased social and
reproductive behavior; higher levels of stress hormones and impairment of
mechanisms that normally limit stress hormone action; and widespread changes in
brain neurochemical systems. Although these changes are beginning to provide
insights into the dynamics of the physiological and behavioral response to
chronic social stress, completed studies have measured only a single time point
in the process. The proposed program will investigate the development of stress-
related behavioral and physiological changes over time, and will determine the
persistence of stress effects following single or multiple periods of chronic
social stress. In addition, individual differences will be examined as
determinants of responsivity to social stress. The proposed program will thus
draw upon the different approaches and expertise of these two research groups to
provide a uniquely comprehensive description and analysis of the effects of
social stress in an ecologically appropriate situation.