* 9511576
* Prehistory of the Channel Islands
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,10/31/1999
* Jeanne Arnold, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1999
* USD 113,187.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Jeanne Arnold and her colleagues
will conduct three seasons of archaeological research at sites located on Santz
Cruz Island, one of the Channel Islands located off the coast of California.
Previous work has indicated an archaeological sequence which extends back
millennia in time. The proximate goal of the research is to locate a number of
submerged pitlike structures which served as living sites and to excavate a
number of them. A remote geophysical survey will be conducted to find sites and
on this basis a sample for excavation will be selected. Data will be recovered
from ca. 30 houses at 6 well dated sites. In most, small scale excavations will
be conducted while at three, larger areas will be exposed to develop an
understanding of house floor features, differential distributions of artifacts,
quantities of craft production by-products and the presence/absence of wealth
items. The materials recovered will be analyzed to provide both environmental
and socio-cultural information. Archaeological studies along the southern
California coast in recent years have shown that the prehistoric populations of
the Northern Channel Islands and adjacent mainland coast developed a highly
specialized political economy characterized by unique features, the most
important of which were legitimate craft specializations, an intensive exchange
system across the Santa Barbara Channel, and an elite sector able to control
resources, labor and the movements of manufactured goods through ownership of
plank canoes and manipulations of valuables. Based on both archaeological and
ethnographic data, anthropologists believe that the coastal Chumash peoples were
among the New World's most complex hunter-gatherers. Dr. Arnold wishes to
understand how this unusual level of complexity developed and was manifested in
the social organization of the island populations. Because of the commercial
nature of the craft manufacture, she wishes to gain insight into the
relationship between economy and social organization. To accomplish this, she
will focus on intra-settlement variation to determine the extent to which social
ranking is evident and the degree to which it relates to manufacturing
activities. This research is important because it will provide data of interest
to many archaeologists. It will increase our understanding of United States
prehistory and shed new light on how social complexity emerges.