* 9511129
* Collaborative Research: Household Relations, Migration      Decisions, and Employment Outcomes
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Victoria Lawson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 07/31/1999
* USD 102,742.00

SBR-9511134 SBR-9511129 SBR-9511108 Richard Bilsborrow Victoria Lawson Andrew
Morrison U.N.C. - Chapel Hill U. Washington Tulane U. Collaborative Research:
Household Relations, Migration Decisions, and Employment Outcomes This
collaborative research proposal requests funding to conduct field research and
quantitative and qualitative analyses of intra-household relationships,
migration decisions by different household members, and employment outcomes in
destination regions. The research questions and design are the result of
collaboration among two economists, a geographer, and a biostatistician. The
field area is several urban areas in Ecuador. The Ecuadorian setting is
characterized by rapid urban population growth (including via in-migration) in
the context of rapid, policy-induced, changes in economic structure. The field
work entails three stages over 18 months: extensive surveys of migrant and non-
migrant households in destination cities; household surveys in the main origin
areas; and in-depth case histories for migrants in destination areas to
complement and extend the survey findings through detailed examinations of the
connections between life, household, and work histories. The results will: focus
attention on household structures and dynamics as influences on migration
processes; combine research traditions of migration as an individual, household
and local-context phenomenon; and relate migration motivations to employment
outcomes at the destination.