* 9511606
* The Transition to Democracy in Ukraine: State Building,     Ethnic Mobilization and Adjustments to a Market Economy
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 07/31/1999
* USD 163,000.00

SBR-9511606 John O'Loughlin University of Colorado The Transition to Democracy
in Ukraine: State Building, Ethnic Mobilization and Adjustments to a Market
Economy The principal concern of the research is the roles of the politically
elite and of strong ethnic majorities in the state-formation process. The
research investigates the organization and effects of political campaigns
(defined as "intensive efforts by leadership circles to step up their control
over resources in order to achieve ambitious aims") by the leadership of newly
independent Ukraine, in the face of ethnic-territorial divisions. Specifically,
interviews with political elites, archival data on public protest, socio-
economic data, and election-results analysis will be used to uncover the
influences and role of ethnic Russians in the Donbass region (eastern Ukraine)
in support of or opposition to the new regime. The geographic dimensions of the
research entail the relationship between political processes at the sub-state
(oblast) and national-state scales, the role of ethnic-territorial fragmentation
in the building of a nation-state, and the influence of the Russia-Ukraine
border on economic and political events in this eastern-most region of Ukraine.
The project should provide a political-geographic perspective on the development
of (or failure to develop) a democratic institutions at the sub-national and
national scales, including the influences of ethnic territoriality and the
multiple implications of a national border on institutional development.