* 9511172
* Paleoanthropological and Geological Research at the Hadar   Hominid Site, Ethiopia:  1995-96
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1995,10/23/1998
* Donald Johanson, Institute of Human Origins
* Continuing grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 10/23/1998
* USD 124,016.00

The Ethiopian site of Hadar is renowned for its rich yield of fossils,
including numerous, well preserved remains of human ancestors - the Hominidae.
Early work at Hadar added significantly to the understnding of human evolution
in the middle Pliocene (ca. 3 - 4 million years ago) at a time when the hominid
record older than 3 million years ago was a virtual void. The identification of
the species Australopithecus afarensis relied heavily on the Hadar hominid
sample, which by 1977 comprised nearly 250 specimens (including `Lucy`) and
promoted refreshed debate on early hominid systematics and paleobiology. Since
1990 Hadar has been once again the focus of paleoanthropological and geological
field research. Four seasons of fieldwork have resulted in further important
hominid finds, including the first fairly complete adult skull of A. afarensis,
in geological and climatic context. Now, fieldwork here is taking a trun toward
the upper deposits in the Hadar Formation, those younger than 3 million years.
This period saw the rise of the `robust` australopithecine line and the origin
of our own. This new grant, for another two years of excavation, will focus on:
1) further investigation of the younger sediments in the Hadar Formation, and 2)
new excavations at the still prolific `Lucy` locality.