* 9511490
* Collaborative Research:  On Semi-Parametric Mixed Poisson   Regression Models
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Kenneth Land, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 157,411.00

A basic problem in the statistical analysis of scientific data consists of
developing models for the analysis of so-called count data -- data consisting of
the numbers of events of some type occuring over a given period of time.
Examples include the number of incidents involving damage to ships of a
specified type over a given time period, the number of crimes committed per year
in the life course of a career criminal, and the number of firms of a given type
founded per year in an economy. To account for factors that increase or decrease
the rates of occurrence of such events, regression models of the Poisson or
Poisson family (where the latter consists of mixtures of Poisson regressions)
typically are formulated. The most commonly used mixed Poisson regression models
-- which offer considerably more flexibility than the basic Poisson model -- are
based on the specification of a parametric mixing distribution such as the gamma
distribution. A new methodology for mixed Poisson regressions -- based on a
nonparametric specification of the mixing distribution and the semiparametric
maximum likelihood estimation of the model parameters -- has been defined and
explored by the Principal Investigators. This project will systematically
refine, reexamine, and more fully develop statistical procedures of estimation,
testing, and model comparison for this new class of models. A computer
simulation study will be conducted to examine the properties of the statistical
estimtors for relatively small samples. Four prototypical datasets from diverse
subject matters will be analyzed to demonstrate the techniques and to make
comparisons with existing analyses. Computer software for the empirical
application of the techniques will be further developed. Because these new
statistical models provide more flexibility in modeling event count data than
conventional models, the methods to be developed could improve data analyses
across a variety of scientific disciplines.