* 9511473
* The Impact of Unions on Wages and Unemployment
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Bruce Western, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1999
* USD 90,740.00

This is a study of the labor market impact resulting from declining levels of
unionization in 18 OECD countries between 1973-1990. Although trade union
decline in membership has been carefully recorded, the effects of that decline
have not been analyzed previously in the ways proposed here. The research argues
that labor market trends are the result of political struggles among workers,
employers, and their representatives. It tests hypotheses about the effects of
centralized bargaining, the electoral failure of social democratic parties,
increased inequality in the work force, and rival economic theories about the
oil price shock and the growth of world trade. The mutual dependence of union
membership and unemployment is examined using statistical techniques developed
by the researcher. Because of the possibility of strong sectoral trends in
earnings and employment , the research is supplemented with comparative case
studies of Britain, Germany, and the United States, where there are existing
data to examine export and sheltered sectors of the national economies. %%% The
research will offer new sociological and institutional explanations of important
processes of social capital formation that will supplement, if not challenge,
existing economic explanations. Through its focus on the struggles by workers
and employers to affect economic outcomes, it links stratification research with
political sociology and presents the possibility of an enlarged conception of
economic sociology.