* 9511748
* Comparative Research on Selection Bias in Media Coverage of Protests and Demonstrations
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Pamela Oliver, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 142,246.00

This study is designed to complete a three-city comparison of selection bias in
the coverage of protests and demonstrations. It compares a state capitol in the
United States with one in Germany and with the national capitol. The research is
tied to theories of social movements and collective action that emphasize the
interaction among institutionalized and non-institutionalized forms of politics.
Those theories give a central place to the role of the mass media in spreading
the message of protesting groups and shaping evaluations of their importance.
The research systematically examines the ways in which the mass media report
demonstrations and protests compared to information about those events from
official sources. The proposed research will contribute to theories of democracy
that focus on the role of protest in enabling large numbers of people to
demonstrate their concerns and to persuade others of the importance of their
cause. It will also enlarge theories about the role of the mass media in
spreading news about protest and in both encouraging others to take up the cause
and to suppress it. There is also an important methodological contribution that
will result from its findings about the nature and extent of bias in coverage.
These findings will aid researchers who now rely on newspaper reports as their
primary source of information on protests and demonstrations without knowing the
directions of bias.