* 9511444
* Institutional and Legal Sources of Presidential Power:      Policy Making Through Executive Orders
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Kenneth Mayer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1998
* USD 60,005.00

9511444 Mayer This research investigates the nature and extent of independent
presidential policy making authority embodied in executive orders and
administrative directives. Much of the literature on the presidency suggests
that presidents cannot make substantive policy without congressional
cooperation. Executive orders that are issued under the president's statutory or
constitutional powers as chief executive are, according to this framework, an
insignificant source of presidential power. At the same time, however,
presidents have on a number of occasions issued unilateral orders with profound
political and social consequences, and policy makers themselves recognize the
potential for independent presidential action. The issue of how much independent
authority presidents have remains a basic empirical question that is not
adequately addressed in the presidency literature. The starting point of the
study is that if presidents use orders and directives for strategic purposes,
then their use should vary predictably according to a president's strategic
situation and political context. To investigate this phenomenon, the project
analyzes three separate types of data on executive orders and administrative
directives: 1) a time series analysis of all executive orders and administrative
directives issued since 1935, with the goal of uncovering statistical patterns
in how, and under what circumstances, orders are issued; 2) a random sample
drawn from the universe of orders and directives. This sample is coded to
identify those orders which have substantive policy or political significance (a
result that, by inference, may be applied to the entire population of orders).
This subsample of important orders is in turn subjected to analysis to determine
what aspects of a presidents strategic situation and political context affect
their use; 3) case studies of approximately 10 of the most important executive
orders. The project sill substantially enhance the un derstanding of executive
authority and the balance of policy making power between the Presidency and
Congress. It also advances the state of presidency research, by moving beyond a
"president"-centered focus to a more general conception of presidential behavior
that cuts across administrations. ***