* 9511642
* Behavioral Ecology of Monkey Spatial Movements
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Charles Janson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* None
* 12/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

Non-technical Summary: Janson, C. Proposal IBN-9511642: 'Behavioral Ecology of
Monkey Spatial Movements' The goal of this project is to understand the rules
animals use to decide where to move within a known home range. Much evidence
from studies of animal foraging suggests that they attempt to maximize food
intake relative to foraging costs. When costs are proportional to distance moved
between known resources, the problem is essentially similar to the human
'Traveling Salesman Problem' , in which the goal is to travel among N known
cities in the shortest possible distance. This problem has resisted precise
mathematical solution despite great efforts, and thus the possible rules that
animals might use are far from obvious -- even the approximate solutions to this
problem offered in the economics literature typically involve vast numbers of
calculations on powerful computers. Do animals use simple or complex rules, do
they 'look ahead' to more than the next immediate goal, how closely do their
rules approach the best possible solutions available on computers today? A wild
population of fruit-eating primates (capuchin monkeys) were chosen as the study
animals because they need to solve such spatial problems every day. Their major
resources, fruit trees, are scarce and fixed in space, while the cost of
traveling between fruit patches in rainforests is very high compared to moving
on level ground or flying. Some data in captivity suggest that fruit-eating
primates can learn and remember the locations of large numbers of hidden food
sources, so it is plausible that they can use such abilities to solve spatial
foraging problems in the wild. In addition, primate groups can be followed
continuously for long periods (weeks), thus allowing for large sample sizes of
natural spatial movements. However, because human researchers can rarely know
everything (such as location, productivity, and palatability) about all the food
patches available to a primate group, the results of previous observational
studies are not easy to interpret. To reduce these problems of interpretation,
this project uses a field-experimental approach in which fruit (tangerines) is
provided on a series of wooden platforms suspended from trees -- the
investigator can completely control the location, amount of food reward, and
food type on the platforms. Confounding influences of other, natural food
sources are minimized in this subtropical Argentine study site by working only
in winter, when nearly all natural fruit production stops. The spatial locations
of the platforms are chosen (using a computer program) so that the sequences of
movement choices from one platform to the next will differ depending on the
possible decision rules used. The specific rules tested will include ones that
(1) place differing amounts of emphasis on delayed vs. immediate rewards, (2)
trade off distance vs. amount of food, and (3) examine rewards individually by
platform or integrate over the entire spatial array of platforms. Investigating
the rules capuchins use to move between known resources will help us to
understand (1) a largely neglected aspect of foraging behavior, (2) the likely
mental organization of spatial knowledge in primates and possibly humans, and
(3) what aspects of the resource base of an animal species may favor the
evolution of complex mental maps, which have been implicated in the evolution of
intelligence in man's ancestors. The knowledge about spatial decisions of these
monkeys will also provide important information about their spatial needs and
how they may react to habitat disturbance, results which may help in conserving
this species in the wild as increasing numbers are taken for laboratory use.