* 9511329
* World Systems and Alternative Models of                     Mesopotamian-Anatolian Interaction
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Gil Stein, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1998
* USD 161,379.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Gil Stein and his collaborators
will conduct one season of fieldwork at the archaeological site of Hacinebi and
the following year will analyze the materials they have excavated. Hacinebi is a
3.3 ha. mound strategically located at the major Euphrates river crossing point
in southeast Anatolia, overlooking the main trade route from Mesopotamia to the
copper and lumber sources located in Turkey's Taurus mountains. The site was
inhabited during the 4th millennium BC and the small amount of later overburden
makes it possible to expose broad horizontal areas of occupation and provide a
representative picture of settlement organization and functions. Excavations in
1992-4 have established that Hacinebi has two main early occupations and
artifact distributions in the later one suggest a possible Mesopotamian
`colonial` enclave in one corner of this Anatolian settlement. With NSF support,
Dr. Stein will expose pre-contact levels at Hacinebi in order to reconstruct
economic organization and the degree of social complexity at the site before
Mesopotamian expansion. Broad horizontal exposures of the upper level will allow
comparison of pre contact and contact organization and in the latter permit
examination of the relationship between local and immigrant groups. The first
Mesopotamian city states pursued a strategy of aggressive commercial expansion
into neighboring areas and recent research has located several sites which have
been interpreted as such outposts, established to control trade routes while
extracting raw materials in what may be the world's earliest known colonial
system. Although some `colonies` have been excavated, virtually nothing is known
about either the organization of this system or its effects on the development
of local polities. Many archaeologists and historians have speculated on what
form such interactions may take and have developed a world systems model which
postulates domination of the periphery by the central group. However little data
exists to support such a formulation and Dr. Stein has suggested that alternate
models may in fact apply. By providing detailed data on local political and
economic organization during this critical contact period at Hacinebi, Dr. Stein
will conduct the first rigorous archaeological test of such models and will
contribute significantly to our understanding of inter-regional interaction in
the development and spread of social complexity in the ancient Near East.