* 9511509
* The Sustainability of Democracy: The Experience of Latin    America, 1945-1994
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Karen Remmer, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 06/30/1996
* USD 45,000.00

9511509 Remmer By focusing upon the relationship between institutional
arrangements and regime sustainability, this project is designed to bridge the
gap separating older macrosocial understanding of political democracy from more
contemporary work stressing indeterminacy, conjunctural conditions, and
contingent choice. This study reevaluates the conventional wisdom concerning the
dependence of democratic stability upon economic performance and test a
theoretical alternative that takes into account the differential strengths and
weaknesses of political democracy and authoritarianism as well as institutional
variations among democratic regimes. The overarching conception is that
institutions matter as contextual determinants of behavior mediating between
systemic and structural forces, on the one hand, and individual political actors
on the other. The project involves three major components. First the research
entails the development and analysis of a data base on political institutions,
electoral outcomes, and economic performance in Latin America for the period
1945-1994, which will be shared with other interested researchers. Second, the
study elaborates and tests a set of cross-sectional regression models linking
regime durability with three major sets of variables: international political
context, domestic economic performance, and political institutions. The models
will address outstanding questions regarding the relative fragility of
authoritarian and democratic political orders and establish a basis for
estimating the relative contribution of economic and institutional forces to the
sustainability of political democracy. Third, the research utilizes survival
analysis to explore the ways in which fluctuation in international conditions,
economic performance, and changes in the rules of the political game over the
lifetimes of individual regimes have shaped the risk of regime breakdown. The
results of this research address the long-standing theo retical debate over the
breakdown and consolidation of political democracy as well as issues of
relevance to the policy community concerned with the contemporary political
dynamics of Eastern Europe and Latin America. ***