* 9511978
* US-Indo Workshop: Active Galactic Nuclei, Dense Stellar     Systems, and Galactic Environment
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Susan Lamb, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 02/28/1997
* USD 14,300.00

9511978 Lamb Description: This proposal requests support for a joint workshop on
"Active Galactic Nuclei, Dense Stellar Systems, and Galactic Environments", to
be held at the Inter- University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics(IUCAA),
Pune, India. The workshop will bring together a number of leading astronomers
from the US, the UK and India having expertise in component areas present in
galaxies which affect galactic nuclei and the possible production of Active
Galactic Nuclei(AGN). The workshop will bring together researchers in
traditionally disconnected areas of research who are interested in exploring the
symbiotic relationships contributing to the structure and dynamics of AGN. The
aim of the workshop is to explore why 'activity' occurs uniquely in the nuclei
of the galaxies and to interpret the many varied observations of AGN. The
workshop is being organized by Susan Lamb (University of Illinois), Judith Perry
(Institute of Astronomy, Cambridge), and Jayant Narlikar (Director of IUCAA,
Pune, India). Scope: The workshop, by providing a forum on the various elements
of the AGN puzzle, is intended to further cooperative research on the galactic
context of nuclear activity and to include leading Indian researchers in
trinational collaborations. Considering the inter-disciplinary expertise of the
participants, the workshop will have high educational value for participants as
well as for the young Indian students of Astronomy. Proceedings of the workshop
including review articles and contributed papers will be published. ***