* 9511757
* The Structure of Similarity
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Douglas Medin, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/1999
* USD 259,942.00

9511757 GENTNER Similarity is a central aspect of cognitive processing. It
influences category learning, transfer of knowledge, inductive inference,
decision-making, and case-based reasoning and planning. Because of its
centrality, it is important to understand the psychology of similarity. The
approach on which this research is based models similarity as a process rather
than considering it as a simple value to be measured. Thus, the approach departs
from prior research by others in its emphasis on dynamic models of the
psychological processes that underlie similarity, and also in utilizing rich
representations of the items being compared. The research involves two
computational models of the process of similarity comparison, SME and SIAM, that
show how the comparison process proceeds from local to global alignment. A focus
of the research is further exploration of the time course of similarity
comparison and analysis of its implications for on-line processing. For example,
speeded similarity judgments show sensitivity patterns different from slow
judgments, an observation relevant to interface design in contexts where humans
are placed under speed stress. Previous work on this project investigated two
key factors in similarity processing. The first was interconnectivity, the fact
that interactions between features can make some features more salient in
similarity judgments and even change the psychological interpretation of the
features. The second issue was the effect of alignment on judgments of the
perceptual similarity of two figures. The new research to be performed under
this Accomplishment-Based Renewal is organized around two major questions: 1.
How do structure and process interact to determine similarity; and 2. How do
results on similarity processing extend to other tasks that use similarity as a
component. For example, new experiments will investigate how the seeming
similarity between two figures changes with context, by manipulati ng the kind
of alignment that is easy or hard to do. Yet another line of research will
examine the effect of similarity comparisons on constructive induction
associated with similarity judgments, category-based induction, memory
retrieval, and decision making. Overall, the project will inform our
understanding of the range and flexibility of similarity processing and examine
its role in other cognitive functions. ***