* 9511710
* Protein Interactions Required for the Function of a         Candidate Mechanosensory Ion Channel
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Monica Driscoll, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 10/31/1998
* USD 255,000.00

IBN-9511710 Driscoll, Monica A. All living organisms have the ability to sense
and respond to mechanical stimuli. Mechanotransduction is critical to such
diverse processes as hearing, touch and gravitaxis in plants and animals.
Mechanotransduction in all species studied to date appears to be mediated by ion
channels that open or close in response to mechanical stimuli. The genes
encoding these channels have been identified but an examination of the subunit
structures, composition and assembly has yet to be undertaken. Dr. Driscoll has
been instrumental in identifying these novel channels in a simple biological
model system and she proposes to continue her studies with these interesting
proteins. In the proposed studies, she will determine how these channels
assembled and which subunits are linked together into functional units.
Additionally, since tension must be applied to the channel for it to open or
close, the implication is that it is somehow anchored into the cell. Further
studies will identify the normal constituents of the cellular skeleton that
serve as the anchor point for these channels. Through these studies, Dr.
Driscoll will gain unique insights into the biochemical nature of the mechanisms
by which cellular distention is involved in changing cellular function. In
addition, since mechanical forces are involved in changing cellular function in
mammals as well as simple organisms, new insights may be gained about the
mechanisms in which sonic or tactile information are transduced in humans
thereby opening new avenues of clinical significance.