* 9511600
* Hormonal Influences in Nonviolent Dominance
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* James Dabbs, Georgia State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1999
* USD 138,984.00

Prior research on testosterone has focused on delinquent and antisocial
behavior. Little attention has been directed toward prosocial behavior, or
toward variables that mediate and moderate the effects of testosterone. The
proposed research will cover four areas. First, it will examine physical
individual difference characteristics as they are correlated with testosterone
level. Second, it will examine cognitive factors that are correlated with
differences in testosterone level, using neuropsychological tests and pupillary
response measures. Third, it will examine behavioral differences between groups
of high and low testosterone individuals, focusing upon success in select
occupations. And fourth, it will examine the role of testosterone in an
assertive, out-going, and risky kind of behavior called "heroic altruism." The
work is guided by an evolutionary model, which holds that testosterone is
selected to produce strength, persistence, focused attention, a combative frame
of mind, a preference for action over thought, a confident and intimidating,
manner, and sexual activity. These characteristics sum together to define
dominance, which leads to success in agonistic encounters and to reproductive
success. Personal experiences and social control forces moderate the effects of
testosterone, allowing it to lead to delinquency, restraining it, or converting
it into prosocial behavior. Many high testosterone people are aggressive and
violent, but some devote their lives to helping others. To understand how this
can be, we need to look at the most basic effects of testosterone. Testosterone
brings strength, activity, a willingness to fight, and a confident manner. These
can be used to hurt other people or to help them. The present project will
gather detailed information on the personality and ways of thinking of high
testosterone people. It will also study how family values and community
pressures lead these people to use testosterone in good or bad ways. The results
should help us understand what causes violence and how we can contol and limit
it.