* 9511806
* U.S.-Kenya Cooperative Research - Tsetse Flies and Their    Endosymbionts
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Serap Aksoy, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 08/31/1998
* USD 29,890.00

This collaborative research grant supports the international linkage costs to
enable Dr. Serap Aksoy, Assistant Professor in the Department of Internal
Medicine at Yale University School of Medicine, and a postdoctoral associate, to
conduct field-based studies in Africa over a three-year period, to understand
the fundamental biological relationships between symbiotic microorganisms and
the tsetse (genus Glossina). The work will be conducted in collaboration with
Dr. S.K. Moloo, Head of the Tsetse Research Laboratory at the International
Laboratory for Research on Animal Diseases (LRAD), in Nairobi, Kenya. The
research will focus on host-symbiont coevolution in tsetse and its gut- and
ovary-tissue associated endosymbionts. Building on current understanding of the
phylogeny and the potential function of these organisms based on observations of
a limited set of laboratory colonies, the international collaboration will
permit research with wild flies and flies from other colonies. In Nairobi, the
PI will collect specimens from the wild and from laboratory strains from Vienna
and Canada, and will extract and store the nucleic acids and other materials for
analysis. The first aim is to evaluate the concordant evolution hypothesis of
tsetse and their endosymbionts and to validate the constructed phylogeny for
genus Glossina using field collected insects. The second goal is to evaluate the
extent and the stability of Wolbachia -mediated Cytoplasmic Incompatibility
phenomenon in tsetse in nature. The collaborative relationship between the
international partners and their institutions builds on their complementary
strengths. The facilities, size of colonies, and availability of technical
personnel at ILRAD make possible microinjection and mating experiments on a
scale that would be difficult to undertake at the PI's home laboratory. The
novel approach of using insect symbionts to disrupt the biology of disease-
transmitting insects promises immense potential benefit for developing countries
and the global economy.