* 9511609
* Many-Body Effects in the Photoionization Process,           US-Turkey Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Steven Manson, Georgia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 11/30/1997
* USD 16,600.00

Description: This project supports cooperation between Dr. Steven Manson,
Physics Department at Georgia State University, Atlanta, and Dr. Zikri Altun,
Physics Department at Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey. The research deals
with two areas: first, the photoionization of open-shell atoms using many-body
perturbation theory (MBPT) with particular emphasis on the very difficult
transition metals and rare earth elements, by investigating the region around
the so-called giant resonances in the photoionization cross sections of the 3rd
transition metal atoms; and second, the photoionization with excitation of
closed-shell atoms, where the experimental results of photoelectron spectroscopy
measurements display many partial cross sections whose relationships are
difficult to evaluate, and where the calculation of these cross sections will
help understand this important correlation. Scope: This project will allow a
cooperative activity that has started about two years ago to continue for an
additional two years, and to produce maximum benefits from the collaboration.
The US scientist's group is well established, is experienced in the
photoionization theory, and has extensive facilities for large-scale
calculations. The Turkish scientist has considerable knowledge of the MBPT
codes, developed by his thesis advisor and mentor, and also has the facility for
code development and testing at his department. The two scientists have already
accomplished considerable success in the first two years, presented several
papers at scientific meetings, and have submitted at least one joint paper for
publication. They are likely to produce more papers during the period of this
project extension. The project clearly meets the objectives of the Division of
International Programs in linking US scientists with foreign scientists where
the talents and capabilities are complementary.