* 9511809
* Collaborative Research on the PC-Xinu Operating System with Colleagues in South Africa and Australia
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Timothy Fossum, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 06/30/1996
* USD 14,439.00

This collaborative research grant supports Dr. Timothy Fossum, Professor of
Computer Science at the University of Wisconsin-Parkside, to work with
colleagues in South Africa and Australia on enhancements to the PC-Xinu
operating system. The international partners are Richard J. Foss, Lecturer in
Computer Science at Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South Africa; and
Christopher Chlap of the Department of Information Sciences and Engineering,
University of Canberra, Australia. The research in South Africa will focus on
implementing real-time features in PC-Xinu, especially as they relate to control
of devices for generating music. A particular emphasis will be Petri net-like
real-time synchronization features. The work in Australia will design a dynamic
device-allocation mechanism and implement per-process memory protection, to
improve on limitations in the current version of PC-Xinu. Extensions to the Xinu
system to support new synchronization primitives and new high-speed protocols
should enhance the attractiveness of Xinu as a teaching tool, especially for
instruction in real-time systems, and in networking. All three research partners
have experience in using and extending Xinu. This project promises to strengthen
cross-fertilization among ongoing research being conducted by the investigators
on three continents.