* 9511686
* Coupled Elastic Surface Waves in Curved Structures,         US-Pakistan Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* John Harris, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1999
* USD 27,172.00

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist, Dr.
John Harris, from the Department of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics, at the
University of Illinois, Urbana, and Dr. Saleem Asghar, Department of
Mathematics, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan. The research aims at
investigating, with mathematical models, the propagation of a surface wave, that
glides over a curved elastic surface, where it clings closely to the surface and
decays into the interior. The coupling of waves from one surface to another will
be studied. In addition. scattering of such waves as they strike a small crack
breaking an interior surface or encounter a patch of roughness along that
surface will be studied. Scope: This project allows cooperation of two well
known scientists whose capabilities complement each other to do important
scientific work; and it helps understand properties of surface waves that are
important in detecting problems or potential problems in many curved structures
such as pipelines. The Pakistani scientist is in one of that country's most
important universities for graduate education and research. He has expertise in
the radiation of sound from fluid-loaded plates, while the US scientist has
expertise in the area of high-frequency surface wave propagation. A US graduate
student of Dr. Harris is expected to participate in this work. This project
meets a number of important objectives of the Division of International
Programs.