* 9511916
* Unemployment Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Sergio Rebelo, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1999
* USD 276,426.00

9511916 Greenwood This project addresses the question: Why is there
unemployment? The relationship between the adoption of new technologies and the
abandonment of old ones, one the one hand, and creation of new jobs and the
destruction of old ones, on the other, by constructing a model with vintage
physical and human capital. The goal is to construct a model that can usefully
organize the existing evidence on structural unemployment obtained from cross-
national comparisons, as well as suggest further testable implications. This
model is used to evaluate the effects of the policies that are frequently used
to reduce the distributional effects of structural unemployment. Particular
emphasis will be placed on discussing the effects on unemployment of social
protection programs such as those implemented in European countries, and of new
industrial policies aimed at encouraging investment in new technologies. The
project also analyzes frictional unemployment in a business cycle setting. The
analysis will be aimed at explaining the cyclical properties of labor market
aggregates. The last model explores the dynamics of investment in a setting in
which firms face a non-trivial financing decision between the use of internal
and external funds. The model is consistent with the observation that firms tend
to utilize external financing in large lumps at infrequent intervals.
Additionally, the model can potentially explain the more intensive use of
external finance by large, as compared to small, firms. This framework is used
to study the relationship between intermediation on the one hand, and growth and
business cycles on the other. ??