* 9511654
* U.S.-Korea Cooperative Research on Development of a         New Multi-Dimensional Code for Magnetohydrodynamics in      Astrophysics
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Thomas Jones, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 01/31/1999
* USD 17,720.00

9511654 Jones This award provides funds to permit Dr. Thomas W. Jones,
Department of Astronomy, University of Minnesota, to pursue with Professor
Dongsu Ryu, Department of Astronomy and Space Science, Chungnam National
University, for 24 months, a program of cooperative research on the development
of a new multi-dimensional computer code for magnetohydrodynamics (MHD) in
astrophysics. The code is designed to solve problems involving fully ionized,
magnetized plasmas in astrophysical environments. The code will be built from an
extension to MHD of Harten's "Total Variation Diminishing" second-order accurate
scheme for gasdynamics. A one-dimensional MHD has already been developed. The
objective of the present work is to extend the method to mulitdimensional flows
and to improve its performance in some important respects. The initial
application will be to the study of the nonlinear evolution of unstable boundary
layers, or contact surfaces, inside so-called blast waves. These structures are
important features to understand in young supernova remnants, for example, and
are also expected to be modified by the presence of magnetic fields. The
collaborators are recognized as experts in the field of this research. This
project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest
and benefit. Korean participation in the project is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***