* 9511787
* Doctoral Dessertation Research:  Magnetic Recording in      the United States
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1996
* James Brittain, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 05/31/1996
* USD 4,441.00

One of the most novel and brilliant innovations of the 20th century, the
magnetic recording of information, has turned out also to be one of the giant
commercial successes of the last 50 years. Mr. David Morton, under the direction
of Dr. James Brittain, is undertaking his dissertation research on the history
of magnetic recording in the United States. He is focusing first on its
protracted and troubled early phase of commercial development, following through
to its sudden flowering during and immediately after World War II, and then
shifting to its wide-ranging social, economic, and technological effects. The
history of magnetic recording is important for reasons that go beyond the huge
economic significance of products such as audio and video recorders or computer
hard drives. The results of this research promise to illustrate and advance our
knowledge of important historical processes and phenomena such as the
interaction between government and industry, the ways that large corporations
build business operations around particular technologies, the mechanisms of
university research and development, and the transfer of technology
internationals and from laboratory to industry. In addition to studying the
innovation and development phases of this technology, Mr. Morton is also
exploring technological history from another perspective, that of users ald
consumers. Magnetic recording history is unique because of the way that the
technology proved to be adaptable to such an amazing array of applications. This
research promises to show how inventors, small companies, and even individual
end-users made radical changes in the way magnetic recording technology could be
utilized, in a sense redefining it to fit new ideas about how it would be
useful.