* 9512344
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for Automated DNA Analyses
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Douglas Meeks-Wagner, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 185,000.00

We propose to establish a DNA analysis facility with the purchase of several key
instruments for the automated analysis of DNA molecules. The instrumentation
requested is commercially available and represents the core of many genome and
DNA sequencing centers at other major research universities. This type of
facility is essential for research projects that require experiments to be done
on a genome-wide scale. There are currently three such research programs at the
University of Oregon; all of these absolutely require the establishment of the
proposed DNA analysis facility if they are to achieve their stated goals. In
addition, the acquisition of the requested instrumentation is likely to have
significant ancillary benefits. Many other users of the instruments will be able
to complete their projects more efficiently and economically by incorporating
the automated methods into their research programs. The establishment of the DNA
analysis facility should also greatly aid our recruitment of new faculty with
research interests in developmental genetics, molecular neuroscience and
molecular evolution. These are all areas in which we plan to hire new faculty in
the near future. Specifically, funds are requested for: 1) an Integrated
Separation Systems AutoGen 740 that can prepare up to 200 DNA samples of viral
DNA, bacterial plasmid DNA, yeast artificial chromosomal (YAC) DNA or genomic
DNA in a 24 hour period; 2) a Biomek 2000 robotic workstation and sideloader for
robotic manipulations of clones and nucleic acids; and 3) an ABI 377 DNA
sequencer and the necessary accessories to perform high throughput automated DNA
sequence and microsatellite analysis. In addition, several small equipment items
(including Macintosh PowerPC 8100, two GeneAmp 9600 thermocyclers, and two
microfuges) are requested to equip the DNA analysis facility. Presently, there
is no facility in the State of Oregon that can provide the research support of
the proposed DNA analysis facility. Fundin g this proposal will allow the
faculty to fully develop recently initiated projects that utilize emerging
intellectual and technical advances in the genetic analysis of complex
(quantitative) characters, and that take advantage of map-based cloning
strategies to isolate and characterize genes of major effect. These projects all
aim to elucidate the genetic and molecular basis of fundamental biological
processes, and encompass a broad spectrum of biology, from evolution and
population genetics, to developmental genetics, to behavioral genetics. For
example, the plant genetics project that will supported by these instruments
will identify genes within the plant genome that control the evolution of
different strategies of plant reproduction within a single species in which
individuals have been geographically isolated for many generations. The dog
project uses the same experimental logic being applied in the plant project, but
in this case, the plan is to take advantage of the striking morphological and
behavioral differences between dog breeds to gain insight into the genetic and
molecular basis for these differences. The zebrafish research efforts are
concentrated on identifying genes important for embryonic development of the
organism, including genes required for the proper development and functioning of
the nervous system. An important approach which is being pursued by these
investigators is to identify new mutations that effect developmental processes
in question. The ability to place these new mutations onto a high quality
genetic map will facilitate the cloning of the genes and eventual molecular
understanding of how these genes function. It should be noted that many of the
projects described in this proposal are collaborative in nature. This reflects
the efforts of our faculty to combine our individual expertise in order to
advance our fields of interest more rapidly. Establishing the DNA analysis
facility with the acquisition of the requested instrumentati on will represent a
major advance in these collaborative efforts, and will provide the
infrastructure necessary for the success of our research programs.