* 9512142
* Acquisition of Computer Equipment for Development of Algorithms for Scientific Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Roy Nicolaides, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This equipment will be used to support research and graduate and undergraduate
education in the mathematical sciences. The Department of Mathematics at
Carnegie Mellon has a strong program in numerical analysis which attracts some
of the most talented graduate students in our Ph.D. program. This equipment will
be used by the principal investigators, visitors, postdoctoral fellows, and
their graduate students to enhance ongoing research programs in computational
material science and multilevel computational techniques. The CMU program in
material science has application in computing the properties of materials that
exhibit complex fine scale phenomena. These problems appear in the study of
metallurgy, magnetism, optimal design, etc. where fine scale (microscopic)
variations are frequently observed. Recent mathematical advances suggest that
these oscillations are governed by energy considerations, and can often be
characterized by a macroscopic (slowly varying) quantity, the Young measure.
Such characterizations provide a basis for the efficient numerical modeling and
approximation of these materials and their properties. The development,
analysis, and testing of algorithms for the solution of such problems is
considered in this proposal. The research program on efficient algorithms -
especially multilevel algorithms- is aimed at making optimal design calculations
in acoustics, electromagnetism, shape optimization, and nondestructive testing
computationally feasible. Efficient solution of such problems requires multiple
solutions for the underlying problem in order to isolate an optimal solution:
the problems we consider would be impractical without powerful computation
algorithms of the kind under investigation. Multilevel computational techniques
are very effective solution methods in a variety of different fields of science
and engineering. The authors have been involved in developing these methods for
a variety of problems with great success. The proposed research deals with new
developments of these techniques for boundary related optimization problems
governed by non-elliptic systems, and for the efficient discretization and
multilevel time marching techniques for hyperbolic evolution problems.
Applications of these techniques include problems arising in electromag netism,
design of microwave devices, acoustic noise reduction, non-destructive testing,
and the control of fluid flows.