* 9512954
* A Field Emission, Intermediate Voltage Electron Microscope  for Structural Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Lee Makowski, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 400,000.00

This application proposes the purchase of Philips CM300-FEG electron microscope
with a maximum 300 kev accelerating voltage and field emission illumination. The
CM300-FEG is fully computerized with a revolutionary goniometer and capabilities
that are particularly well designed for electron tomography and cryoelectron
microscopy (cryoEM). A specialized holder and anticontaminator will be purchased
to facilitate cryoEM of biological specimens and a CCD camera from Gatan with
Macintosh computer system to facilitate development of computerized on-line data
collection and to obtain instant feedback on the quality of specimen
preparation. The capabilities of this instrument will enhance the research of 6
full time faculty who use electron microscopy as an integral part of their
research. Research projects include electron tomography of insect flight muscle
(Taylor), electron crystallography of actinin (Taylor) and the Ca2+-ATPase
(Taylor), electron diffraction of oriented gels of tobacco mosaic virus
(Caspar), 3-D reconstruction of helical filaments of the major sperm protein
(MSP) from Ascaris suum (Roberts &amp; Stewart), 3-D reconstruction of
filamentous bacteria viruses and pili (Makowski), studies of the 3-D geometry of
immune complexes (Roux) and studies on the structure of the cytoskeleton
(Keller). This instrument will enhance these projects (1) through high
resolution imaging of thicker specimens, (2) through digital survey of specimens
prior to data collection by means of on-line image recording, (3) by enabling
development of protocols for automated tilt series data collection for
tomography by virtue of its motorized and computerized specimen stage (4) by
facilitating electron diffraction of oriented, multilayered arrays of filaments,
(5) by facilitating high resolution imaging of 2-D crystalline and
paracrystalline arrays of proteins and multiprotein complexes, (7) by enabling
high resolution imaging of single molecules and small complexes by utilizing the
high c oherence of the field emission electron source and the high depth of
focus provided by 300 kev electrons.