* 9512973
* A Confocal Microscope and Imaging System for Biological     Investigation
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Arthur Popper, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 139,241.00

Ten biologists from the Departments of Zoology and Psychology of the University
of Maryland, College Park are requesting funds to purchase a laser-scanning
confocal microscope and image analysis workstation to support and enhance their
research. Drs. Mount, Payne, Popper and Rivas will be the primary users of the
instrument. Within our multidisciplinary group, the uses of confocal microscopy
include investigations of neuronal polarity in cerebellar granule neurons (Dr.
Rivas, Co-PI on this grant), regeneration of sensory hair cells in the ear (Drs.
Dooling and Popper), the role of calcium ions in phototransduction (Dr. Payne),
the development of central auditory projections in the CNS (Drs. Brauth, Carr,
and Hall), how the correct processing of RNA from protein-coding genes is
specified in higher organisms (Dr. Mount), homology of invertebrate auditory
neurons (Yager), and investigations of stream meiofauna (Dr. Palmer). These
laboratories have a large number of postdoctoral, graduate and advanced
undergraduate students who will use the confocal microscope during their
research training. We are requesting a Bio-Rad MRC 1024 confocal imaging system
coupled to a Nikon 300 inverted epi-fluorescence microscope, and a Silicon
Graphics "Indy." image analysis workstation for quantitative image analysis and
three-dimensional image reconstruction. The confocal system will include a
krypton-argon laser (with emission lines at 488, 568, and 647 nm), triple
dichroic beamsplitter, four detection channels (three PMT-based detector
channels and one detector for transmitted light), and high resolution 24-bit
acquisition software. This system will allow us to image up to three separate
fluorescent channels for multi-label applications. An inverted configuration
with DIC optics is needed so that the epi-fluorescence Nikon microscope can be
used for cell cultures, and to provide ample access for micromanipulation, as is
required by several of our users. Confocal micr oscopy will significantly
enhance the research programs of each of the core investigators, and will allow
them to pursue areas of research that have heretofore been extremely difficult
or impossible to examine with conventional microscopy. In contrast to
conventional fluorescence microscopy, in confocal microscopy out-of-focus
structures do not contribute to background because they receive little or no
illumination, and any fluorescent signal produced by them is rejected by the
instrument. Unlike conventional microscopy, where one must physically cut a
thick tissue into extremely thin sections for imaging, the extremely shallow
depth-of-field of confocal microscopy allows the optical sectioning of either
intact cells or thick specimens (such as embryos or brain slices). Optical
sections taken at successive focal planes can be re-combined using computer-
generated techniques to produce a highly informative three-dimensional
reconstruction of an entire tissue or cellular structure. These characteristics
make this technique essential for our multi-disciplinary studies, all of which
require optical sectioning through thick biological specimens with elimination
of out-of-focus fluorescence. Each of the investigators in this proposal will
use the optical sectioning and quantitative capabilities of the confocal imaging
system. For example, Dr. Rivas will use the confocal to study the development of
fluorescently-labeled neurons that were implanted into the brain. Using
conventional fluorescence microscopy, out-of-focus fluorescence from thousands
of implanted neurons masks the structure of any particular cell. Indeed,
individual neurons extend through many focal planes, allowing sharp focusing
only on particular portions of the cell. Drs. Brauth, Carr, Dooling, Hall,
Popper, and Yager face similar methodological problems as they attempt to study
the complex structure of neurons in the auditory nervous system. Dr. Mount will
use the confocal to make optical sections th rough thick Drosophila embryos, and
Dr. Palmer will use the confocal to section through invertebrate whole mounts.
Dr. Payne will extend our use of the confocal into the area of neuronal cell
physiology. Dr. Payne will investigate a localized light-induced elevation of
intracellular calcium that is co-incident with the electrical response of
photoreceptors to light. Drs. Rivas and Yager will also use the confocal for
live neuronal imaging, using the optical sectioning capabilities of the confocal
to image fluorescently-labeled neurons in thick brain slices or embryos. Thus,
in each area of our research, the confocal will greatly improve our ability to
study correlated structure and function.