* 9512589
* Acquisition of a SQUID Magnetometer System for the          University of Kentucky Materials Characterization Facility
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Lance De Long, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 149,920.00

9512589 De Long A Superconducting Quantum Interference Device (SQUID)
magnetometer will be acquired and installed as part of the Materials
Characterization Facility of the University of Kentucky. The requested system is
configured to accommodate a variety of applications in materials science and
engineering, chemistry, and solid state physics. Immediate users of the SQUID
magnetometer will utilize it to investigate vortex dynamics in anisotropic
superconductors, thermodynamics of low- dimensional conductors with charge-
density or spin-density waves, synthesis and properties of novel fullerene-based
compounds and polymers, and nanoscale magnetic particles for use in catalysis.
The principal investigator in this project will develop novel, public domain
software for the analysis of nonlinear susceptibility data (higher harmonics)
which the current instrument does not have. This capability is increasingly
important for the study of high temperature superconductors and of magnetic
vortex dissipation. The SQUID manufacturer has agreed to cooperate fully in this
endeavor. %%% A unique strength of this research is the software development
which will be made available to the general community. The data analysis package
will enable a large number of current SQUID magnetometer users to easily add
this important capability without having to build or buy whole systems. ***