* 9512791
* U.S.-Czech Astronomical Research on Morphologies of         Eclipsing and Non-eclipsing Algols
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Mercedes Richards, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 47,305.00

INT 9512791 Richards This U.S.-Czech research project between Dr. Mercedes
Richards of the University of Virginia and Dr. Pavel Koubsky of the Astronomical
Institute of the Czech Academy of Sciences will focus on testing the utility of
a proposed model for binary Be stars (B-type stars with emission lines). If they
are successful, results should contribute to a unifying picture of two classes
of Be stars, eclipsing Algols (typically viewed edge-on, in the orbital plane)
and non-eclipsing Algols. In this effort, the researchers will undertake
extensive optical and ultraviolet spectroscopic studies of classical Algols to
interpret the spectra of non-eclipsing Algol candidates. They expect to prove
that the present apparent paucity of non-eclipsing Algols is a selection effect.
Overall, these findings should increase our understanding of the three-
dimensional structure of circumstellar matter in these interacting binaries,
above and beneath the orbital plane. This project in stellar astronomy fulfills
the program objective of advancing basic scientific knowledge by enabling
leading experts in the United States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary
talents and pool research resources in areas of mutual interest and competence.
??