* 9512829
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  Physiology and           Cultivation of the Economical Important Seaweed Gracilaria  Cornea from the Gulf of Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Clinton Dawes, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/1999
* USD 8,280.00

9512829 Dawes This Americas Program award will fund collaborative research
between Dr. Clinton J. Dawes, University of South Florida, and Dr. Daniel
Robledo, Centro de Investigaciones y de Estudios Avanzados del I.P.N., Mexico,
on the physiology and cultivation of the seaweed Gracilaria cornea. The species,
occurring along the Yucatan coast of Mexico and in the lower Keys of Florida,
contains a commercially important phycocolloid, agar. As a result of experiments
to be conducted, strains showing high growth rates, useful morphotypes, and high
yields of quality agar will be selected. It is expected that the information
resulting from the proposed research will benefit those countries where algae
are used as food or as raw material for the agar industries. There is a
potential need for developing new sources of high quality agar in the world.
More than 80% of the raw material for agar used in the U.S. is imported from
distant countries. Thus, there is an important demand for agar from adjacent
countries such as Mexico. This project, combining the expertise of the U.S.
scientist in seaweed physiology and cultivation, with the knowledge of local
seaweeds of his Mexican counterpart, may lead to the development of a new
seaweed mariculture industry, that could provide the raw material for North
American agar production. ***