* 9512107
* Property Rights and Conflict in the Brazilian Amazon
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Gary Libecap, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1998
* USD 277,660.00

This research builds on a previous project, "Property Rights and Land Use on the
Brazilian Frontier", by examining the circumstances under which violence occurs
in providing property rights to land in the Amazon and its economic impact on
land values, land use and investment, and tenure. This is an important topic
because secure land tenure increasingly is viewed as an important condition for
investment and how natural resources are ultimately exploited, particularly
forests and biodiversity in developing countries. The question arises, what
policies will provide tenure routinely to support economic development and when
is the process likely to lead to conflict and violence with the dissipation of
economic rents and over exploitation of natural resources? For a people who are
poor by most standards and for a region with rich natural resources, tenure
policies and their potential link to violence in the Amazon is a critical issue
in need of further scientific study. This project involves collecting and
analyzing two unexploited sources of data on violence and land tenuring. Using
these data along with other census data, the interaction among violence, land
value, tenure, and investment will be examined. The analysis will involve a two
stage econometric technique that has been developed to examine the simultaneous
relationships among land value, tenure, investment, and violence. Additional
data will also be collected from secondary sources on policy formation regarding
Amazon settlement and tenuring. In addition, land claimants will be surveyed in
a region which enjoyed major government subsidies for ranching and also
experienced the most deaths from violent conflict over land between 1970-1985.
These subsidies are important because they significantly raised expected land
rents and may have encouraged rapid and conflicting settlement of the region by
both ranchers and by small claimants or squatters. Moreover, land agencies
responsible for titling, may not have provided secure title to land in a timely
fashion. which would have added to chaotic and over exploitation of the land and
its natural resources. *** From these surveys and the analysis of the results,
we can determine the conditions under which violence over property rights to
land occurs and its impact on land value and investment. Tailandia will provide
a time-series data set on settlers (tenure, plot size, land value, investment,
age, sex, education and other socio-economic characteristics, distance to
market, wealth) from 1992 through 1996/1997 that will be valuable to other
researchers. We already have assembled survey data for six sites for 1992-93 for
249 small holders. The resurvey of part of this group will allow us to observe
changes in turnover and consolidation, investment, and land value. With
increased economic growth in Brazil in general, we expect greater activity in
the Amazon. The Amazon in Brazil is still largely unsettled and covered with
forest. Recent estimates from land satellite imagery indicate that approximately
10 percent of the Brazilian Amazon is deforested. It is thus not too late for
policy to affect the fate of much of the region. Much has been written about the
settlement of the Amazon and the attendant conflict associated with it. What is
lacking is documentation as to where and when conflicts arose and an analysis of
the determinants and impact of violence. The research team has developed skills
and knowledge of the region, tenuring policies, primary and secondary data
sources, and survey technqiues.