* 9512648
* US-Mexico Symposium in Plant Biology; Cocoyoc, Mexico,      November 5-9, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Maarten Chrispeels, American Society of Plant Physiologists
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 17,000.00

This Americas Program award will support travel and related expenses for ten
U.S. scientists and five postdoctoral and graduate students, to participate in a
joint U.S./Mexico symposium to be held on November 6-9, 1995 in Cocoyoc,
Morelos, Mexico. Organizers are Dr. Martin Chrispeels, University of California,
San Diego, and Dr. Virginia Walbot, Stanford University, in collaboration with
Dr. Federico Sanchez, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico. Topics will
include agrobiology, molecular physiology and biotechnology of crops important
to Mexican agriculture. The conference will consist of a series of symposia,
minisymposia and poster sessions, organized around six important topics in plant
biology, including development of cereals, biotechnology, and disease and insect
resistance. The major goal is to provide a vertical integration of approaches
and subject matter from the molecular through the level of crop physiology. This
joint U.S.-Mexico symposium and minisymposia will be held in conjunction with
the VII National Congress of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology of Plan ts ,
under the auspices of the Biochemical Society of Mexico. The meeting will
provide an opportunity for U.S. and Mexican scientists, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers to initiate contacts and collaborations, and strengthen
already established ones.