* 9512684
* Exploratory Research:  An Archaeological Survey of          Plio-Pleistocene Deposits in the Southern Republic of       Georgia
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1999
* C. Reid Ferring, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1999
* USD 38,285.00

Ferring With National Science Foundation support Dr. C. Reid Ferring and his
colleagues will conduct geological and archaeological research in the Diliska
Gorge region of the Republic of Georgia. Past work by this team has demonstrated
the presence of lake and river sediments which extend along the gorge over a
distance of ca. 15 km. Preliminary evidence indicates that these deposits date
to the early part of the Pleistocene and well preserved remains have been
discovered in them. Dr. Ferring and colleagues will undertake a detailed
geological survey of the area and collect geological samples which will permit
age determination. They shall analyze faunal materials and search for
archaeological remains. If successful, this project will lay the groundwork for
a longer term collaborative Georgia-U.S. research endeavor. Scientists know that
the roots of the human lineage can be traced back to Africa and that the
earliest stages of human development took place there. They are interested in
how and when the first hominids appear outside this region because of the
insight this information will provide into developing abilities to cope with the
environment. Recently early hominid remains were discovered at the site of
Dmanisi which is located in Georgia. Their age is significantly greater that one
would have expected and interest in this region, which may lie on the original
route out of Africa, has increased. Dr. Ferring's search for early
archaeological sites and the stratigraphic and chronological framework he will
establish, will increase understanding of early hominid prehistory and
behavioral development. It will also further collaboration between U.S. and
Georgian scientists.