* 9512406
* Acquisition of a Shared DNA Sequencing Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Gregory Palumbo, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 101,219.00

This application proposes to acquire the necessary instrumentation for
developing a Shared DNA Sequencing Facility at the University of Oklahoma Health
Science Center. This instrumentation will include an automated DNA sequenator
with attendant computers and software for collecting DNA sequence data, an
optical disk drive for archiving sequence data, a Sun workstation and an
additional Macintosh computer for DNA sequence analysis, and a spectrophotometer
for analysis of template DNA and primer concentration and purity for sequencing
reactions. Currently, we have state-of-the-art facilities that support cell
biology, genetics and most other aspects of molecular biological research.
However, rapid automated DNA sequencing is not currently available on the
Oklahoma City campus. Automated DNA sequencing can be performed in the
laboratory of Dr. Bruce Roe, in the Department of Chemistry on the University of
Oklahoma/Norman campus (roughly a 30 minute automobile drive). However, this
facility is heavily used by the laboratories of Dr. Roe and his collaborators,
precluding routine use of that instrumentation for the projects proposed in this
application. The research projects in the Department of Microbiology and
Immunology that will immediately benefit from this facility include: i) three
projects to examine structure/function relationships in eucaryotic and
procaryotic proteins (Lloyd, Gilmore and Tweten), ii) a project that will
examine the evolutionary development of MHC loci in minority populations
(Hildebrand), iii) a project that will examine the evolutionary relationships
among poxviruses (Palumbo), iv) a project examining procaryotic
plasmid/chromosomal interactions (Gilmore), and v) two projects that will
sequence the genomes of a gram-positive and a gram-negative coccus (Dyer and
Ferretti). Some of these projects are currently supported by extramural funding,
and the availability of this Shared DNA Sequencing Facility will dramatically
increase the likelihood o f extramural funding for other projects. Intertwined
with and an essential component of this scientific enterprise is significant
training in basic molecular biology. This training includes the ongoing research
education of post-doctoral fellows and graduate students within the Department
of Microbiology and Immunology. Further, several programs in the Department and
the University support research training for undergraduate students, minority
high school teachers and minority high school students. Thus, the
instrumentation proposed for this Shared DNA Sequencing Facility will
significantly enhance the research and research training environment within the
Department of Microbiology and Immunology. In support of this, the Department of
Microbiology and Immunology has committed funds to support a technician
dedicated to the facility, and to support the service contracts necessary to
maintain the facility for the initial three years of operation. Although the
Shared DNA Sequencing Facility will be housed in the Department of Microbiology
and Immunology, the facility will be available to all investigators on the
Oklahoma City campus, subject to user fees to help defray costs. Thus, this
facility will have significant impact outside the Department, enriching the
research and research training capability of the entire University of Oklahoma
Health Science Center campus. Consistent with this potential, we have obtained
significant institutional support for this Shared DNA Sequencing Facility, as
the Health Sciences Center has pledged matching funds (dollar-for-dollar) to
purchase the instrumentation to be housed in this facility.