* 9512699
* Scanning Laser Force Microscope with Nanometer Resolution   for Dynamic Imaging of Single Biomolecules Under            Physiological Conditions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Christoph Schmidt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 08/31/1999
* USD 359,154.00

The ideal biological microscmpe should have enough resolution to image
biological macromolecules on a nanometer scale, should image in physiological,
watery conditions, and should have sufficient temporal resolution to follow
crucial dynamic processes on the scale of macromolecules, macromolecular
assemblies and cells. An important unsolved problem in biology that highlights
the potential usefulness of such an instrument is the micromechanical function
of the ubiquitous motor proteins. Motor proteins are the driving force behind
processes such as muscle contraction, cell locomotion, ciliar and flagellar
beating, mitosis, meiosis, intracellular transport, DNA replication and
transcription and protein synthesis. The goal of the proposed feasibility study
is to develop a microscope with molecular resolution, based on scanning a
nanofabricated silicon tip over a protein sample using a single beam laser
optical trap (optical tweezers). The trapping laser will double as
displacement/force sensor, recording the interaction force between tip and
sample. The displacement signal will be fed into a feed-back loop keeping the
tip at a constant distance from the sample, thus imaging its contours. As proof-
of-concept, cytoskeletal protein polymers will be imaged to demonstrate spatial
resolution. The motor proteins kinesin and ncd will be imaged on microtubules,
with the goal of resolving the movement of the individual heads of the motors
and their tracking on the microtubule surface. Single headed truncated motors
will be imaged in comparison, with the goal of understanding the cooperativity
of the two heads of native kinesin and ncd, and to test if a single head can
produce movement at all. The project will be an interdisciplinary collaboration
between i) a nanofabrication laboratory, providing expertise to develop a
process to manufacture exactly defined silicon tips with nm features and a
controlled surface chemistry, ii) a physics/biophysics laboratory providing
expertise in instrument building, microscopy and laser technology, and iii) a
molecular biology laboratory providing the expertise in protein biochemistry and
developing procedures to produce well characterized cytoskeletal and motor
proteins and modified proteins using an E.coli expression system. If successful,
the proposed instrument would constitute a major advance in microstructure
determination, uniquely matched to the requirements of biological research. It
would make it possible to dynamically image the fundamental functional units of
biology, proteins, DNA, RNA, "at work". The instrument would have a broad range
of applications, especially in the life sciences, and a multitude of fundamental
questions appear solvable, by "looking and seeing how things work".