* 9512683
* De-alloying:  The Selective Dissolution of Alloys in        Corrosive Environments, U.S.-Egypt Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Howard Pickering, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1997
* USD 17,500.00

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by a U.S. scientist,
Dr. Howard Pickering, Department of Metals Science and Engineering at the
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, and Dr. B.G. Ateya, Department
of Chemistry, Cairo University, Cairo, Egypt. The two propose to study the
problem of de-alloying in corrosive environments, to understand the prevailing
mechanisms and to identify and characterize the various rate processes involved.
The work involves physical and mathematical modeling and experimental
measurements. Scope: This project meets the objectives of the Division of
International Programs: it allows cooperation of two eminent scientists whose
capabilities complement each other to do important scientific work; it allows
for a foreign scientist in a developing country to validate his analytical work
using experimental techniques and facilities not available in his country; and
it helps understand the causes of one of the most common, and most serious,
problems that affect industry, and consumers of various commercial products that
are made of alloys. The P.I. is one of this country's most renowned scientists
in the field of corrosion. The Egyptian team has an excellent capability and
exceptional record of publications in the field.