* 9512451
* Acquisition of a Departmental Research Network for the      Analysis of Spatial Data
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Duane Marble, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1997
* USD 114,658.00

With partial support from the National Science Foundation, the Geography
Department at Ohio State University will acquire a departmental research server
(SGI Power Challenge L), 2 graphic workstations (SGI Indigo XZ) and related
storage, peripherals and software which allow integration with existing
equipment and make the system immediately useful for research by faculty and
students. The Geography Department specializes in the analysis of large data
sets and focusses on flows of people and goods. The instruments will assist in
research in visualization and exploratory data analysis and specific research
projects include studies of transportation, migration, trade and information
flows. The common tools developed in the course of this work will then be
applied to related domains. These include research in time series of air
passenger flows, simulation of major interruptions in transportation networks
and models of issues related to regional economics and structural change.
Recently new large spatial flow data sets have become available and these
involve flows of air passengers and urban traffic. However their utility is
limited by the lack of optimal analytic techniques. New methods of data
exploration and analysis have been proposed, developed and partially tested.
However progress has been limited by the lack of computer hardware and software.
This award will remove these constraints.