* 9512486
* Acquisition of Equipment for Three Dimensional Organismal   Reconstruction, Analysis and Modeling
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Robert Full, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 11/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

From cells to populations, an organism's world is three dimensional and dynamic.
Organismal analysis is on the verge of a revolution. Never in history has the
equipment and computing power been sufficient to allow most organismal
biologists to move rapidly and quantitatively from one level of organization to
another. We are entering an era of Integration that is simply unprecedented. To
this end, we propose the creation of a unique facility for organismal biologists
which consists of equipment that will allow acquisition, analysis, presentation
and world-wide exchange of three-dimensional (3D) structure, function and
behavior. We request four major, state-of-the-art pieces of equipment in the
present proposal: a 3D stereo-microscope ("real-time", large depth-of-field,
resolution-enhanced), 3D laser digitizer (capable of whole organismal scans in
15 sec at 14,580 points/sec with 0.05 mm resolution), 3D high-speed imager
(capable of capturing 58,000 split images in 5 sec directly into memory) and a
graphics computer cluster to process, analyze and exchange the images and data.
Projects greatly facilitated or made possible include: the neural basis for
behavior, biomechanics of morphogensis, gut-chemical reactor modeling of
digestion, 3D musculo skeletal modeling of tetrapods to the earliest hominids,
3D dynamic whole-body modeling of insect locomotion (which has provided
biological inspiration toward the design of autonomous legged robots), dinosaur
behavior and the fluid movements that affect organisms in the world's oceans.
The proposed infrastructure equipment will promote: the utilization of
approaches across disciplines, cross fertilization of ideas, the creation of new
fields of investigation, new approaches for museum data collection and
distribution, new collaborations with engineers, computer scientists and the
private sector, and novel training of future organismal biologists.