* 9512711
* Mechanism of Chaperonin Specificity
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Samuel Landry, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 310,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ~ SI @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c
t P o o l ~ SI ~ SI 4 @ C D E F G H I J K L F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; / @ * Index 1 ` , $ ` 9512711 Landry Chaperonins are
a class of molecular chaperones characterized by a ring shaped oligomeric
structure and the distinctive ability to use ATP to promote protein folding.
Prokaryotic chaperonins usually are composed of two types of polypeptide, cpn60
and cpnl0, which in Escherichia coli are GroEL and GroES. GroEL has a weak
ATPase activity, binds and stabilizes unfolded proteins, and releases them in
the presence of ATP. GroES, also known as the co chaperonin, binds to GroEL in
the presence of ATP, increases the cooperativity of the GroEL ATPase, and
promotes ATP dependent discharge and folding of GroEL bound proteins. Since
GroEL/GroES is necessary for folding in vivo of a large fraction of E. coli
proteins, the mechanism of chaperonin action must not depend on specific
features of substrate proteins. However, the bacteriophage T4 encoded co
chaperonin, Gp31, is specifically required for GroEL dependent bacteriophage
capsid assembly. The mechanism of chaperonin function is poorly understood, and
how co chaperonins promote folding and whether they confer substrate specificity
is presen tly unknown. This research addresses co chaperonin structure/function
relationships and investigates how Gp31 specifically supports chaperonin
function in bacteriophage T4 growth. Chaperonin assisted citrate synthase
refolding will be evaluated for GroES in which the mobile loop has been
specifically mutated to reduce or enhance GroEL binding. GroEL binding
affinities will be measured by fluorescence techniques with GroES variants
containing tryptophan. The effect on mobile loop dynamics and peptide
conformation will be analyzed by nuclear magnetic resonance experiments. The
affinity of GroES for GroEL will be compared to that of Gp31 for wild type and
mutant GroEL. A genetic screen will be carried out to identify novel GroES
mutants that have acquired the ability to replace Gp31 in T4 growth. These
studies will illuminate mechanistic features of chaperonin function and identify
determinants of chaperonin specificity for substrates and co chaperonins. This
information will be useful for heterologous gene expression in biotechnological
applications. %%% The folding of proteins into their active three dimensional
structures is facilitated by a group of proteins called molecular chaperones.
Several types of molecular chaperones are found in all organisms. One type of
chaperone is composed of two ring shaped structures; and in the bacterium E.
coli, they are called GroEL and GroES. GroEL and GroES bind to each other when
they are assisting the folding of other proteins. GroEL alone can bind and
release unfolded proteins, but GroES is essential for certain proteins to fold
correctly. The importance and specificity of the GroES/GroEL interaction is
shown by the chaperone requirements of the bacterial virus T4. This virus
encodes its own version of GroES which is necessary for viral infection. This
research will investigate how GroES directs the function of GroEL and why the
viral version of GroES is necessary for viral infection. *** ....()()))()() Oh
+' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @
m 2QI @ S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( B RI @ oSI @ `4< Microsoft Word
6.0 4 e = e D D D D D \ f D C p t t t t t t t #