* 9512700
* Light Scattering in Complex Ternary Polymer Solutions       US-Turkey Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Paul Russo, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 12/31/1998
* USD 30,390.00

Description: This project supports a collaboration by Dr. Paul S. Russo, of the
Chemistry Department at Louisiana State University (LSU) and Dr. Zuhal
Kucukyavuz and Dr. Savas Kucukyavuz of the Chemistry Department at the Middle
East Technical University (METU) in Ankara, Turkey. In this collaboration they
will study the phase stability and dynamics of ternary polymer solutions. The
specific classes to be investigated will be systems where rigid rodlike polymers
and flexible polymers are mixed together in a common solvent. Such systems
represent precursors to molecular composites wherein a random coil polymer is
strengthened by the fibrous, rodlike polymer. Light scattering studies will be
conducted on specially selected prototype systems, with special attention given
to `fuzzy rods` made from polypeptides with long alkyl sidechains. The long
sidechains impart good stability to the fuzzy rods, which will be studied in
tetrahydrofuran when they scatter strongly. The random coil component will be
polydimethysiloxanes, which scatters only weakly in tetrahydrofuran.
Polydimethylsiloxanes will be prepared and characterized at the METU in Ankara.
Light scattering measurements will be performed at LSU in Baton Rouge. Scope :
The collaboration to be supported in this project is useful to the US and to
Turkey because it allows the two scientists to use their complementary
capabilities to enhance the effectiveness of their research. Dr. Russo is
currently supported by NSF's Division of Material Research for the primary
research. The funds provided by INT will be used for the incremental costs
resulting from the collaboration.