* 9512477
* Acquisition of Biophysical Instrumentation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Robert Kemp, ROSALIND FRANKLIN UNIVERSITY OF MEDICINE AND SCIENCE
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 167,140.00

Request is made in this application for Biophysical Instrumentation for the
characterization of proteins. The instruments are: a BIALite biosensor
(Pharmacia), Isothermal Titration and Differential Scanning Calorimeter
(MicroCal), Dynamic light scattering instrument (Protein Solutions, DLS),
Stopped flow attachment (SLM, SF), and Image Analyzer (Appligene, IA). These
state-of-the-art instruments allow characterization of the size, shape, and
interactions of proteins in rigorous, thermodynamic ways not previously readily
accessible. The group of instruments complement each other and represent a
broad, unified approach to studying the physical chemical properties of
interesting and important proteins. The Biosensor directly measures protein-
protein or ligand-protein interactions in real-time. The Calorimeter measures
the thermodynamics of ligand binding (ITC) and denaturation (DSC) of proteins.
The DLS provides direct determination of the hydrodynamic radius of native
proteins in solution. The SF attachment will enable fluorometric kinetic
measurements in the msec region. The IA will facilitate quantitation of proteins
on gels for purity assessment, interaction analysis, record keeping, and
publications. The major focus of the group of four investigators applying for
these instruments is the study of function related to structure in a diverse set
of proteins. The requested instruments are needed by this group of senior and
junior investigators to strengthen the physical chemical basis of the structural
studies that are being done. The department currently contains a protein
sequencing core facility, a molecular graphics computing center, and a
spectroscopic laboratory (circular dichroism and flourescence). The five new
instruments will complement these facilities and enable the goals of
characterization of proteins and protein-protein interactions to be greatly
enhanced with this modern technology. The four protein systems under study are:
nerve growth factor (NGF), its receptors, and related neurotrophins;
phosphofructokinase (PFK) from several species; yeast mitochondrial ATP
synthase; and isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) with evolutionarily related
dehydrogenases. All four of the investigators heavily utilize site specific
mutagenesis. The characterization of the molecular weight of the native state
(by DLS) and the polypeptide chain (with the assistance of IA) of mutant
proteins is extremely important for understanding the affects of individual
amino acid residues on function. Direct determination of the thermodynamics of
ligand binding to PFK and IDH will be greatly facilitated with the ITC
calorimeter. Direct studies of association of NGF with its receptors and the
association of the subunits of the ATP synthase will be possible with the
Biosensor. Characterization of the stability of native and mutant proteins in
all four systems willbe possible with the DSC calorimeter and complement
previous results of the stability of NGF from so~vent denaturation. Rapid
kinetic studies of ligand binding to IDH, PFK, and the NGF receptor will be
achievable with the SF attachment to the currently existing SLM fluorometer and
may be critical in the studies of the catalytic site of PFK, IDH, and ATP
synthase. No other access to instrumention of this type currently exists at
FUHS. These instruments will also be made available to other investigators in
the school and will probably be more broadly used than currently described.