* 9512799
* U.S.-Indo Workshop on New Directions in the Interaction of  Energetic Protons with Matter
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Richard Pratt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

9512799 Pratt Description: This proposal requests support for the US-Indo
Workshop entitled "New Directions in the Study of the Interaction of Energetic
Photons with Matter". The workshop will convene in Darjeeling, India, November
1995 and will be hosted for its one week duration by the North Bengal University
and its affiliate, St. Joseph's College. The coordinators are Richard Pratt,
University of Pittsburgh and Swapan Sen Gupta, North Bengal University. Its
subject is the interaction of energetic photons with matter, as in such
processes as photoabsorption, photon atom scattering, bremsstrahlung and pair
production. Leaders from Indian and US research communities will together
examine the opportunities provided by emerging technologies and identify new
directions for the research. Scope: The workshop is important considering the
interest in this subject that has been generated by the advent of a new
generation of synchrotrons. The interaction of energetic photons with matter is
a modern field in which there is a long tradition of research in both countries.
There is substantial experimental work going on in India in this field and the
basis for developing cooperative research activities very strong. Proceedings of
the workshop will be published. *** Pakistan and is the next step in developing
a relationship between scientists who are doing research in this field. s area
of research. ngoing relationship in the exchange of information foin developing
. The International Conference on Non- Accelerator Particle Physics will convene
in Bangalore, India from January 2-9, 1994. Gaurang B. Yodh, University of
California, Irvine and R. Cowsik, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research and
Director, Indian Institute of Astrophysics, Bangalore are the organizers. This
conference is dedicated to the discussion of the fundamental physics that
emerges from diverse areas of non-acc elerator particle physics such as: Solar
Neutrino Astronomy, Cosmic Rays, Particle Physics, Neutrino Physics and the
Detection of Dark Matter. Substantial progress has been made in these fields
during the past five years and it is widely thought that definitive answers to
several questions of Physics beyond the Standard Model can now come from Non-
Accelerator methods of inquiry. The conferees will review recent developments in
the various aspects of Particle Physics, their implications in astrophysical
situations, experimental detection of dark matter, theoretical interpretation
and empirical and physical models of the large scale structure of the Universe.
Scope: This conference will precede a major interdisciplinary research program
between the Indian Institute of Astrophysics and the University of California,
Irvine. As considerable research is going on in the US in all fields to be
discussed at this conference, it will be important for the US researchers to
present their work to an international body of some of the most respected
scientists from all over the world. ***