* 9512908
* Acquisition of a New-Generation, Variable Pressure, Digital Scanning Electron Microscope for Multi-Disciplinary Studies in Biological Sciences and Biotechnology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Jay-lin Jane, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1998
* USD 85,661.00

This proposal requests a new-generation, variable-vacuum (pressure) scanning
electron microscope (SEM), for the central Bessey Microscopy Facility (BMF) at
Iowa State University, with a digital image enhancement system for observing
details more clearly with simple operation using automated functions, and
capable of providing high resolution (@ 3.5nm at 30 kV). This instrument can be
retrofitted with a cryopreservation system and a x-ray energy dispersive
detector already in use in the BMF. Certain modern-day SEMs are able to provide
both high-resolution, bright images at high vacuum over a range of kVs and
magnifications, and at low vacuums and kVs to reduce specimen radiation damage
and charging, but also with good resolution. Need for a high performance, high
resolution SEM has become a basic requirement in biological sciences, and in
other diverse areas of scientific research. In addition, interest of using SEM
at a kV below SkV is also recognized in such applications as studying
intracellular ultrastructure, detection and identification of 5-10 nm colloidal
gold markers for immunocytochemical labeling with a backscattered detector, and
particularly viewing beam sensitive and/or unstable specimens such as food
products and other delicate biological samples which cannot withstand high
accelerating voltages and beam currents. These latter specimens can be preserved
by using quick freezing capabilities such as with a cryopreservation unit and a
propane jet freezer already available in the BMF. It is also important to
observe with increased resolution surface structures and fracture faces of
specimens and, at the same time, to provide x-ray elemental analysis of
localized substances within these surfaces. Compositional information and
corresponding surface ultrastructure can also be determined and analyzed with a
backscattered electron detector. Six specific research projects have been
identified on the Iowa State University campus which would directly benefit from
a new-generation, high-resolution, and variable-vacuum SEM with the above
capabilities. There are a number of other projects that would also benefit from
this new-generation SEM by a wide variety of other users of the BMF.