* 9512905
* Acquisition of a High-Speed Video System for Motion Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Christopher Sanford, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 74,880.00

The analysis of motion is crucial in understanding the biomechanical basis of
fundamental physiological processes. Funds are requested to purchase a high-
speed imaging system that will allow the quantitative analysis of the
musculoskeletal system in both vertebrates and invertebrates. The criteria for
selection of a high-speed imaging system is followed by the direct comparison of
the top three systems currently available. The imaging system chosen is the NAC
HSV-SOOHSG. This video system can operate in low light conditions, has dual
camera capabilities, can film at rates up to 500 frames per second in standard
VHS format for 43 minutes, and has direct analog overlay. All these features are
required for the proposed research. Questions to be addressed include: (1) Are
phylogenetic constraints controlling the evolution of a novel feeding system in
fish? (2) What is the effect of temperature on skeletal muscle performance? (3)
What role does chemoreception play in the modulation of a stereotypical behavior
in lobsters? (4) Can biomechanical models be used to test the direction of
evolution in functional novelties? (5) Can kinematic analysis of wing movement
in flies be used to generate models of character evolution? All behaviors that
are the subject of this research occur at very high frequency and are beyond the
scope of study using conventional film or video. Furthermore, these projects
require the analysis of complex movements in three dimensions, thus, the NAC
HSV-500 best meets our needs. A university contribution of 50% matching funds
towards the purchase of the video equipment has been provided.