* 9512628
* Acquisition of a Free Air CO2 Enrichment Instrumentation for Studying the Effects of Changes in Atmospheric CO2 Concentration & Precipitation on Mediterranean-type Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Walter Oechel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 258,000.00

This request is for construction of state-of-the-art instrumentation which would
allow study of the effects of changes in CO2 concentration on regenerating oak
woodland in southern California. There is an urgent need to develop and make
available new instrumentation allowing the study of ecosystem-level responses to
elevated CO2. Currently available data from chamber-based studies, while
valuable, do not allow confident predictions of ecosystem-level responses.
Obtaining ecosystem-level responses to elevated CO2 requires ecosystem-level
manipulations of CO2. At present, Free-Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) is the most
promising technology available for such large-scale manipulations. We propose to
expand our existing Free-Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) facility, which currently
consists of a single FACE ring in the California chaparral, with plans to build
a second, control ring, by constructing six more rings in adjacent regenerating
oak woodlands. Our FACE system allows the experimental manipulation of
atmospheric CO2 concentration over relatively large areas (177 m2) of ecosystems
without the use of chambers, presumably eliminating or minimizing "chamber"
effects. These additional rings will each be maintained at one of five CO2
concentrations from current ambient (350 ppm) to more than twice current ambient
(750 ppm) in 100 ppm increments. This expanded FACE facility will allow large
collaborative studies of the effects of elevated CO2 on ecosystem source/sink
status, water flux, energy balance, productivity, soil nutrient processes, and
community-level processes. We anticipate this facility will attract cooperation
with numerous scientists and students from around the world, because of the
unique opportunities to study CO2 effects on intact ecosystems at a relatively
large scale, because of the likelihood that semi-arid woody ecosystems will
respond positively to CO2, and because of the international interest in semi-
arid ecosvstems in ~eneral and in Med iterranean-type ecosystems in particular.
Our expanded FACE facility will not only contribute to greater knowledge about
the responses of semi-arid ecosystems to elevated CO2, but will also lead to
better predictions of how ecosystem-level processes, including ecosystem
source/sink status, may change in the future. The facility will also allow
enhanced collaboration on an international scale and will result in unparalleled
opportunities for student training. 11