* 9512402
* ARI:  Acquisition of Equipment for a Customized Production  Systems Laboratory
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Daniel Bogen, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 473,238.00

9512402 Kumar This grant provides funding to purchase equipment for a new Center
for Customized Production Systems (CCuPS) at the University of Pennsylvania. The
purpose of this center is to draw together an interdisciplinary team of
academics and industrial leaders to develop engineering technologies and
management practices that will support the rapid design and production of
customized goods and services that are tailored to the needs of a specific
consumer. Through a variety of educational initiatives, CCuPS will be the nexus
of training and information on customized production technology and management.
The research is interdisciplinary. The main technical foci include: Data
Acquisition: Measurement of the User, Task, and Environment, Virtual
Prototyping, Product Design for Customized Production, Rapid Production and
Logistics Technology, Life-Cycle Product and Process Development, Systems
Integration and Concurrent Engineering. To assure that problems of fundamental
importance to industry are addressed, a partnership with a variety of
organizations will be developed. The main benefit from the research will be the
development of a technological base of knowledge needed for rapid design and
manufacture of customized goods and services. In addition, the research will
result in a better understanding of the product development and management
practices required to move production systems from the traditional mass
production model to systems where products and services can be customized to the
individual needs of a consumer.