* 9512373
* Acquisition of Integrated Imaging and Image Analysis        Equipment for the Archaeology, Cultural and Biological      Anthropology Programs at Hunter College, CUNY
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* William Parry, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1997
* USD 249,469.00

With partial support from the National Science Foundation, the Anthropology
Department of Hunter College, CUNY, will purchase an image analysis system
including a Leica Steroscan 440 Scanning Electron Microscope, a Leica Q600 HR
Image Analysis System, a Leica-Leitz DMRX/E Universal Microscope and a Leica-
Wild Stereo Microscope. This equipment will permit evolutionary, ecological,
functional and adaptational research on the biology and culture of living and
fossil human populations, as well as the ecology and evolutionary biology of
living and fossil nonhuman primates. Many of the projects to be conducted look
at the microscopic structure of bone and the morphological data thus collected
will allow investigators to address a number of questions. These will provide
insight into: facial development variation and the origins of anatomically
modern humans; the effects of brain development and other factors on primate
facial form; the adaptive morphology of African great apes; the microstructure
of osteological landmarks and their correlation with mechanical function and
biological role; collagen fiber orientation and the biomechanics of bone. Taken
together these projects will increase understanding of how the form of bones
relates to the functions they perform and will permit paleoanthropologists to
reconstruct the morphology and behavior of extinct animals based on the analysis
of fossil bones. A second major area of research falls within the scope of
archaeology. Scientists will use this equipment to examine microscopic scratches
on stone tools and determine the functions these implements served. They will
also allow faunal analysts to determine the seasons during which prey animals
were killed and to reconstruct the hunting strategies of prehistoric peoples.
The equipment will be widely used by graduate and undergraduate students for
teaching and research purposes and by scientists from other institutions in the
New York City area.