* 9512697
* Nanofabricated Devices for Picoliter-Scale Analyses of      Embryonic Gene Regulation
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,12/31/1998
* Michael Harrington, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1998
* USD 255,822.00

Many important analytical studies of biomolecules are not feasible because
current technology is both too insensitive and at a scale too gross for
experimentation with extremely small sample volumes. The overall objective of
this proposal is to explore the potential of micro- and nanometer scale
technology to overcome these limitations. Two underlying principles motivate
this work: molecular detection capability can be greatly enhanced in
micro/nanometer scale devices. small volumes, from micro- to pico-liters or
less, can be more appropriately handled in small devices. The ultimate objective
in these endeavors is to realize integrated instruments that permit in situ
extraction and analysis of targeted molecular components from an individual
cell. In these initial efforts, the immediate goal is to study a specific class
of molecules involved in the process of sea urchin embryogenesis using
prototypical microdevices specifically designed for this research. Transcription
factor (TF) proteins regulate differential gene expression in temporally and
spatially restricted regions of the embryo by binding with high affinity to
specific DNA sequences. With existing technology, functional TF/DNA binding
studies can only be achieved using hundreds of thousands of embryos. To study
TF/DNA binding from small regions within an embryo, or from individual cells,
microdevices that provide the following functions will be sequentially
constructed, evaluated, and optimized in this research pro~ram: Manipulation and
transport of cells, small tissue fragments, and solutions. Lysis of
cells/organelles to open their contents for further analysis. Reagent mixing, to
combine synthetic, fluorescent oligonucleotides and unlabeled, non-specific DNA
with cell extracts. Electrical conductivity measurements/optical absorption
spectroscopy upon picoliter solutions. Electrophoretic separation and detection
of fluorescent molecules. Many materials systems widely employed in contemporary
nanostructure research are chosen to optimize electronic or photonic properties,
but these are not necessarily ideally suited, nor perhaps even compatible, with
biological systems. An important thrust in this initial program is the
development of materials/processing combinations, especially highly-anisotropic
dry etching procedures, which permit high resolution microfabrication while
retaining biological compatibility. Devices will be constructed using both high
resolution optical and electron beam lithography, dry and wet etching processes,
and both thermallyand sputter- deposited thin film materials. At each step of
their development, the instruments created will be applied to the aforementioned
TF/DNA binding assays. This iterative and interactive research, carried out on
both nanofabrication and biological fronts, will drive the practical attainment
of new classes of high resolution instruments for biological science. It is
anticipated that this work will spawn new research efforts at the nanometer
scale in both the science of biological phenomena and the technology of
bioinstrumentation.