* 9512512
* Acquisition of a Low Vacuum Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* David Lentz, New York Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 75,100.00

Funds are being requested for the acquisition of a low vacuum scanning electron
microscope (SEM) with a digital image storage and output capability. The model
proposed for purchase, a JEOL JSM-5410LV, can achieve a resolution of 4 nm in
the high vacuum mode and 5.5 nm in the low vacuum mode. Accelerating voltages
range from 0.5 to 30 kV and magnifications can be as high as 200,000X or as low
as 15X. Specimen chamber pressures vary from 270 Pa (2 Torr) to 7 X 10-4 Pa (5 X
10-6 Torr) in the low and high vacuum modes, respectively. A SEM with these
specifications has many advantages for botanical research, but the main asset is
that plant tissues can be observed directly without the need for chemical
fixation, dehydration or metal coating in the low vacuum mode. This will not
only represent a savings in preparation time, but also will provide more
accurate representations of delicate specimens to be observed and in some cases
will obviate the need to alter or actually destroy specimens that are unique in
character, e.g., paleobotanical material. Furthermore, digital images of
specimens can be stored electronically and added as TIFF files to databased
botanical specimen records. The high vacuum mode also can be used to provide
high resolution imaging comparable to currently-marketed, conventional SEM's
that employ a tungsten electron source. The SEM is an indispensable instrument
for systematic and morphologic plant research. The New York Botanical Garden
(NYBG) requests funds to purchase a new SEM to replace the currently used
10-year-old instrument, which is nearing the end of its useful life. The SEM is
used at the NYBG to investigate pollen grains, spores and various plant tissues
such as epidermises, vascular elements and floral components. Such
investigations provide micromorphological data that are essential to the
research of the Garden's staff and graduate students. The instrument also will
be used for the identification of varying plant samples as a key compo nent of
paleoethnobotanical investigations and for the purpose of supplying essential
information to the public and certain government agencies. The proposal includes
detailed descriptions of research activities and identification services
performed at the NYBG using the SEM. Results from Prior NSF Support: D. L. Lentz
has not received an NSF grant within the last five years.