* 9512847
* An Automated 15N, 13C Analyzer for the University of Texas  Marine Science Institute, Port Aransas, Texas
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Ronald Benner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 102,988.00

Purchase of an automated 15N, 13C analyzer for the University of Texas Marine
Science Institute to replace a &gt;25 year old isotope ratio mass spectrometer
and associated high vacuum sample preparation lines is proposed. Although tens
of thousands of samples have been analyzed using the present system, it is
currently inoperable and requires a major overhaul. However, because of the
system's age, its relatively primitive technology, and demand by several users,
any repairs to the instrument are unlikely to be cost effective over the long
term or meet the expectations of the scientific research staff at the Institute.
Instead, the purchase of a new analyzer represents a substantial advance in
technological capabilities which will open additional avenues of research for
the scientists at the Institute as well as providing isotopic data for currently
funded research programs. The proposed and currently funded research avenues
include microbiological, ecological, physiological and chemical studies. This
research will use the stable isotope compositions of bioactive elements, such as
C and N, to delineate metabolic pathways, understand food webs in natural
environments, and determine the sources, transformations and fates of these
elements in ecosystems. The proposed analyzer is a compact instrument which
determines the carbon and nitrogen isotopic ratios of gases, solids and liquids
in their natural state with minimal sample preparation. Expensive and time
consuming sample preparation on high vacuum lines with subsequent transfer of
purified sample gases to a mass spectrometer is avoided in the proposed system
since sample processing and isotopic analysis are integrated into one unit. An
additional advantage of the proposed system over those presently available to
Institute scientists is that samples with natural abundance of the 13C and 15N
isotopes as well as isotopically amended samples used in tracer studies can be
analyzed on one instrument.