* 9512269
* Acquisition of Instrumentation for an Oklahoma Statewide    Shared NMR Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Warren Ford, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1998
* USD 735,000.00

Support is requested for the purchase of a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer to be housed
in the Department of Chemistry at Oklahoma State University, for an upgrade of
an on-site 400 MHz instrument, and for data stations to link students and
researchers at institutions all over the State of Oklahoma to the NMR Facility.
The key to statewide use of the facility is communication via the Oklahoma
ONENET, a 45 Mb/sec Ethernet system that links Oklahoma State University
(Stillwater), the Oklahoma Health Sciences Center (Oklahoma City), and the
University of Oklahoma (Norman). The data stations at the research universities
will be used for remote control of the 600 MHz spectrometer, off-line data
analysis of multidimensional spectra from the 600 MHz instrument, and off-site
instruction of research associates and graduate students in modern NMR
spectroscopy. The Oklahoma ONENET has 1 Mb/sec service to link the NMR facility
to data stations at 6 regional universities for the education of undergraduate
science majors in modern NMR spectroscopy and for analysis of spectra from the
400 MHz instrument. A state-of-the-art 300 MHz NMR spectrometer dedicated to the
study of solid state materials and installed at OSU in 1993 will also become
part of the statewide NMR Facility. The centerpiece of the proposed Facility is
a 600 MHz NMR spectrometer to be used by researchers at the Oklahoma Health
Sciences Center (OHSC), University of Oklahoma (OU), and Oklahoma State
University (OSU) for the study of glycopeptides, derivatives of ubiquinone bound
to proteins, structures of paramagnetic proteins, microstructures of synthetic
polymers, components of primary plant cell walls, and organic natural products
from marine sources. For this research, high spectrometer frequency is needed to
disperse spectral signals that overlap at lower frequencies. The proposed
3-channel 600 MHz spectrometer will be equipped with pulsed field gradient (PFG)
and waveform generation capabilities required for state-of -the-art NMR
experiments, and with probes ranging from a microprobe for study of submicromole
amounts of natural materials to a 10 mm probe with an enhanced shim set for
study of proteins of limited solubility. The 400 MHz NMR spectrometer at OSU,
which was installed in 1988, will be upgraded to a 3-channel unit and have many
of the same capabilities as the 600 MHz unit: pulsed field gradients, waveform
generation, direct and indirect probes. It will be used for experiments that do
not require the 600 MHz spectrometer and for preliminary experiments on certain
samples that may later require the 600 MHz spectrometer. Policies of the
Facility will be established by a statewide committee of users and administered
by an OSU Faculty Director. Daily operation of the Facility will be the
respmnsibility of the Facility Manager, a full time Ph.D. spectroscopist with
responsibilities to assist and train users in the design, execution, and
interpretation of experiments. An electronics technician dedicated full time to
the Facility will maintain the equipment. Linkage of the Facility spectrometers
at OSU to the research centers at OU and OHSC and to the regional universities
in Oklahoma via the Oklahoma ONENET will provide both rapid communication
between the NMR facility and off-site users and the mechanism for instruction of
students at all levels by the Facility Manager and OSU faculty in modern NMR
spectroscopy. OSU is a leader in providing instruction via telecommunication.
Thus the project will both markedly enhance research capabilities for
determination of structures of natural and synthetic macromolecules at three
research universities, and expand education in modern NMR spectroscopy to more
than 85% of the undergraduate students majoring in chemistry and biochemistry in
Oklahoma. The office of the Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education
envisions the proposed Olclahoma Statewide Shared NMR Facility evolving into a
distributive facility with major NMR inst ruments at various sites in Oklahoma
all connected by Internet to scientists throughout the state.