* 9512552
* Instrumentation for Laser Spectroscopy
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Thomas Netzel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 400,000.00

As part of major initiatives in advanced materials, telecommunications,
biotechnology, and environmental research, Georgia Institute of Technology (GT)
is building a world-class timeresolved spectroscopic facility. This facility
will form the nucleus of modern time-resolved spectroscopy in the Southeast, and
will be available to researchers at Georgia Tech, Georgia State University
(GSU), and Clark Atlanta University (CAU), a historically black university.
Availability to users outside this core group will be on a case-by-case basis.
Professors Schuster and E1- Sayed have moved instruments from their former
universities for state-of-the-art measurements of picosecond and nanosecond
fluorescence lifetimes as well as for time- resolved absorption experiments
ranging from picosecond to millisecond timescales. These complement existing
instruments for nanosecond fluorescence and picosecond absorption spectrometers
available currently at GT and GSU. In addition, Georgia Tech has provided funds
for time- resolved (3-5, us) Fourier transform infrared and Raman spectrometers.
Prof. El-Sayed has also moved a subpicosecond (~ . 5 ps) absorption spectrometer
from UCLA. However, this instrument is based upon a dye laser pumped by a mode-
locked YAG laser, and its poor stability and lack of wavelength tunability limit
its utility and reliability. Therefore, funds on a 50% cost sharing level are
requested from NSF to complete the laser spectroscopy laboratory by the
acquisition and installation of a Ti-sapphire-based femtosecond absorption
spectrometer, including capabilities for infrared and resonance Raman
measurements with a time resolution of ~ 100 fs. This instrumentation will be
located in newly renovated space and will be managed by a full-time laser
spectroscopist, Dr. Li Song, under the direction of Prof Mostafa El-Sayed.
Salary support at a 50% level is also requested for Dr. Song. This facility will
also complement existing facilities for fast signal processin g in
telecommunications through the Georgia Center for Telecommunications Technology,
funded by the state, and will provide much intellectual synergism with the
research community at that center. At the moment, four different groups will be
major users of the requested equipment. The primary user group of Prof. El-Sayed
will eludicate the molecular mechanisms of the solar-to-electric energy
conversion by the other photosynthetic system in nature, bacteriorhodopsin (bR).
In this system, the absorption of light leads to rapid retinal isomerization
which results in charge separation, ion migration, protein conformation changes,
and proton pumping from inside the cell to its membrane surface, leading to the
conversion of ADP into ATP. The subpicosecond transient optical absorption and
fluorescence equipment will be used to understand the molecular origin of the
protein catalysis of the primary process (the retinal photoisomerization) of bR
photosynthesis, using bR, and its different mutants. In separate studies,
femtosecond dynamics of photoinitiated bond-breaking will he deterrnined.
Schuster's group will study the nature of transients produced upon irradiation
of substituted anthraquinones in DNA complexes, leading to double strand
cleavage, and will also investigate the dynamics and energetics of electron-
transfer in cyanine borates. Tolbert's group will study ultrafast proton
transfer in "super" photoacids, as well as charge migration in polymethine dyes.
Netzel's group will study energy and electron transfer between pyrene
chromophores on a DNA backbone. Schwerzel proposes studies of energy and
electron transfer in colloidal semiconductors. Although space does not permit
detailed descriptions, additional studies in electron and energy transfer are
anticipated by the groups of Dabney Dixon (GSU), Mark Mitchell (CAU), and Paul
Wine (GT).