* 9512354
* Acquisition of Equipment to Establish a Molecular           Biology Training Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Leonard Davis, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 70,000.00

A major need exists in the training of minority students in the sciences.
Delaware State University, a public land-grant institution, provides an ideal
setting for initiating a significant change in the number of appropriately
prepared students. With the opening in 1995 of a new Science Center (750 sq. ft.
new laboratory space dedicated to this training facility), we propose to develop
programs that will train students, both undergraduate and graduate, in the uses
of molecular biology techniques. We selected this area due to its broad
application in biological sciences and the anticipated benefit to minority
students in particular who have been traditionally under-represented in
molecular biology fields. The expertise of the faculty is well suited to train
students in the diverse uses of the techniques of molecular biology. Although
the listed investigators will be the initial users, the facility will be open to
all faculty in order to develop the scientific expertise needed for the students
to become competitive in their career advancement. Obtaining this equipment and
the establishment of the training facility for students will also form the basis
for additional research grant moneys to enhance minority training in the
sciences and allow us to more aggressively pursue industrial collaborations. The
proposal specifically describes the needs and rationale for the equipment and
the broad principles of training that will be used.