* 9512977
* An Oocyte Expression/Patch Clamp Analysis System for the    Study of Membrane Channel Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Gerald Berkowitz, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 39,291.00

Several research groups at Rutgers/UMDNJ have focused on the molecular
characterization of newly-identified membrane proteins (channels, receptors,
transporters) in animal and plant systems. Use of molecular genetic approaches
has led to the cloning of putative cDNAs encoding polypeptide components of
these membrane proteins. Rapid advancement of the research programs
characterizing these cDNAs will, in the near future, depend on the capability to
characterize the transport functions facilitated by the translation products of
the cDNAs. One state-of-the-art technology which can be employed to facilitate
this characterization is oocyte expression/patch clamp analysis. This involves
the microinjection of cRNA transcribed from these cDNAs into frog (Xenopus
laevis) oocytes, leading to translation and functional expression of the
transport proteins in oocyte membranes. Monitoring of ion currents across the
plasmalemma of oocytes expressing these proteins by use of patch/voltage clamp
equipment can then be employed to study the specific transport functions of
these gene products. This proposal seeks funds to set up the first oocyte
expression/patch clamp analysis system at Rutgers. The research programs
described in this proposal will all make use of this equipment to gain insights
into the structure/function relationships of the target membrane proteins. The
specific research objectives which will be perused by investigators using the
proposed equipment are as follows. 1 ) lon channel genes heretofore not known to
be present in plants will be characterized. Specifically, cDNAs encoding a
subunit of plant K+ channels, a ligandgated type 11 (30-40 kD polypeptide) K+
channel native to an intracellular plant membrane, and a K+ channel which has a
unique pore sequence (unknown previously in plant or animal membranes) and is a
likely candidate for the Na+ uptake pathway in plants will be studied. 2)
Polypeptide components of the enzyme complex involved in plant ce ll wall
callose (cellulose) biosynthesis will be characterized. The cDNAs encoding these
polypeptides share sequence homology with members of the MIP (major intrinsic
protein) or aquaporin gene family. 3) A cDNA encoding a novel member of the
family of glutamate (Glu) family of excitatory amino acid receptors will be
characterized. Glu receptors (GluRs) mediate rapid excitatory neurotransmission
in the mammalian central nervous system. GluRs are a type of cation channel
known as ionotropic receptors. The cloned cDNA encodes a unique splice variant
that is a truncated receptor form of a GluR. 4. Nuclear-encoded proteins are
imported into plant cell chloroplasts via specific channels spanning the double
membrane delimiting the organelle. A complex of six chloroplast envelope
membrane proteins have been identified as components of the chloroplast protein
import machinery. A cDNA encoding one of these proteins, IAP75, has been cloned.
Sequence analysis of IAP75 indicates that it has secondary structure similarity
to channel proteins such as bacterial outer membrane porins. The porinlike
nature of IAP75 will be characterized.