* 9512812
* Photonic Band Gap Materials and Devices, U.S.-Turkey        Collaborative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Kai Ming Ho, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1999
* USD 18,776.00

Description: This project supports collaboration between Drs. Gary Tuttle and
Kai-Ming Ho of the Department of Electrical Engineering at Iowa State
University, in Ames, IA, and Dr. Ekmel Ozbay of the Department of Physics at
Bilkent University, in Ankara, Turkey. The research will involve experimental
and theoretical research in the area of photonic band gap materials. Using a new
layer-by-layer photonic band gap structure, invented and demonstrated by the
Iowa State group, as a basis, the scientists propose to work on four different
issues of photonic crystals: THz crystals, defects, novel materials, and
fabrication at infrared wave scales. The collaboration of the two research
groups in the U.S. and Turkey should lead to the development of new
experimental, and theoretical tools which will be used to understand the
characteristics of these new materials. Such understanding will help to design
and build photonic crystals which may be used for a variety of applications in
millimeter-wave, infrared, and visible wavelengths such as millimeter-wave
antennas, and thresholdless semiconductor lasers. Scope: This project will
extend the collaboration between a senior scientist (Ho), a junior scientist
(Tuttle), both from the U.S., with a junior Turkish scientist (Ozbay) after the
latter has joined one of Turkey's most respected universities, Bilkent
University. Dr. Ozbay has recently spent two and half years as a post-doctoral
research fellow at Iowa State, where he, Tuttle, and Ho, have published four
papers and submitted two more for publications in U.S. journals, in the area of
condensed matter physics. The two sides intend to initiate the collaboration
between Iowa State and Bilkent. At Iowa State, where Dr. Ho is the leader of the
theoretical group, they have high performance computational facilities including
massively parallel computing machines, appropriate computational programs, as
well as excellent facilities for photonic band gap related fabrication. At
Bilkent there is a newly completed microfabrication facility with a class 100
clean room, and various fabrication and testing equipment. The team at Bilkent
will use that facility to fabricate photonic crystals at micron and submicron
dimensions which require a true clean room environment, and will also use
network analyzer to test the properties of crystals at microwave frequencies.
The project meets the objectives of the Division of International Programs in
linking US scientists with foreign scientists where the talents and capabilities
are complementary, and by involving young scientists in international
cooperation.