* 9512547
* Acquisition of Networked Imaging Cluster for                Characterization, Analysis, and Visualization of Materials, Processes, and Engineering Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Kenneth Ebeling, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 08/31/2000
* USD 288,640.00

9512547 Ebeling The acquisition of a networked infrastructure of imaging
equipment will enhance the potential and cohesiveness of interdisciplinary
research activities being conducted in the College of Engineering and
Architecture at North Dakota State University. The scope of the research
includes materials, processes, engineered structures, and is aligned with and
embodied in the mission of the College. Specific activities include material
quantification and analysis, flow and combustion imaging, visualization and
animation of dynamic systems, real- time imaging, and infrared imaging. The
faculty group in the college is a distinctly multidisciplinary body engaged in
interdisciplinary research. The equipment will be used to enhance
interdisciplinary connectivity between researchers and projects, creating
technological channels for sharing image data and processing routines relevant
to visualization, characterization, and analysis. Through this imaging network,
the convergence of traditional civil, mechanical, electrical, agricultural,
industrial, construction, and architectural engineering research expertise will
yield new findings in surface image evaluation, pictorial integration of design
and analysis, motion, estimation, interferometry, intelligent processing,
visualization of sound, displacement, thermal flow, and robotic control. ***