* 9512108
* Family Social Capital and Academic Achievement of Immigrant Children
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Lingxin Hao, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 80,132.00

This is a study of family social capital and academic achievement of immigrant
children. Four kinds of family social capital are identified as relevant to
child educational outcomes: 1) Networks with members of the extended family,
such as grandparents; 2) parent involvement in school, for example attending
parent-teacher meetings; 3) immigrant and ethnic culture; 4) parent-child
interaction, such as supervising homework and discussing materials learned in
class. Theories on how these factors operate to enhance education will be tested
using data from NELS:88, a longitudinal survey that collected data on eighth
graders in 1988 with two follow-up waves at two-year intervals, including
oversamples of Asian and Hispanic students. The analysis will involve three
phases. First, cross-sectional analysis of data on eight and twelfth graders
will examine the creation and maintenance of family social capital and identify
its level effects. Second, longitudinal analysis of academic achievement growth
among Asian and Hispanic immigrant students from eighth to twelfth grade will
identify the effect of changes in family social capital on achievement growth.
Third, the analyses in the first two phases will be extended to compare
immigrant results with those for the native-born children. %%% This study will
contribute to the advancement of our knowledge about the role of the family in
children's academic achievement, by testing the effect of family social capital
on the reproduction of human capital in children and comparing the results
across immigrant and native-born ethnic groups. It will also provide evidence
for designing policies to strengthen the family and school-family connections
and help in the allocation of public resources to improve parents' human capital
and family social capital.