* 9512223
* Acquisition of a Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Gerald Baker, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

Funds acquired for the addition of academic research instrumentation for multi-
user purposes have become extremely valuable during these times of expanding
collaborative research efforts and times of tight funding. Equipment for
academic research which is accessible to investigators from various disciplines
is a beneficial and realistic approach to obtaining funds for large pieces of
equipment that would normally be out of the realm of possibilities for
individual laboratories. Mississippi State University is a Land-Grant
Institution and as such, research is an integral part of the mission of the
university. There is an electron microscope core facility on campus that has
been a valuable service to the University's research community for 20 years. One
of the scanning and one the transmission electron microscopes in the facility
have been upgraded in the previous five years. Despite the many established and
productive collaborations resulting from this resource, we feel it is important
to take advantage of recent developments in optical microscopy to take us to an
even higher level of sophistication. We have taken a team approach and
strategically planned to enhance particular areas across campus and demonstrated
strength and excellence in these specific areas of research and instruction. The
university is building the research infrastructure by bringing together groups
of researchers with different specific aims and scientific expertise and
enhancing interaction across the disciplines. We believe that this cross-
disciplinary approach to research has proven successful as evidenced by the
success of the common facilities already in place and are confident that the
multi-user instrumentation requested in this proposal will be as successful.
This proposal requests funds to purchase a Molecular Dynamics CLSM 2010 Confocal
Laser Scanning Microscope. This instrument will serve the research needs of a
number of faculty from var ious Colleges throughout Mississippi State
University. We have a critical mass of investigators whose work involves
microscopy of viruses and iving cells extending from the molecular level to
interactions between pathogens, cells and tissues. Dr. Thibaudeau, investigates
processes of embryonic development, particularly the neural crest, using the
axolotl and zebrafish as model organisms, Dr. Wise, microtubule dynamics and
microtubule motors during mitosis, Dr. Hanson, biochemical characteristics of
channel catfish viruses, Dr. Baker, the functional morphology of cuticular
sensory receptors and identifies patterns of sensory neurons and muscles of
insect legs, antennae and palps, and studies patterning of neurons within the
insect CNS, and Dr. Bumgardner, aspects of cell/material interaction. These
investigators at Mississippi State are conversant with the advantages and
limitations of digital imaging fluorescence and reflectance microscopy. The
diversity in expertise is apparent from the above list and includes light,
electron and optical microscopy, molecular biology, spectroscopy, image graphics
and structural and computational biology. Researchers in other departments
across campus have also expressed an interest in the availability and use of the
confocal microscope should purchasing funds become available. The benefits of a
laser confocal microscope are severalfold; (1) superior spatial resolution of
the often subjective interpretation of cellular phenomena is provided by
multiwavelength confocal microscopy, (2) information as to the three-dimensional
organization of cellular and subcellular structures and the time dependent
change in their organization during development and in response to specific
perturbations can be obtained, (3) quantification of cellular features and/or
processes (e.g. dimensions, frequency of occurrence, rate of uptake, organelle
movement) and representation of this data in number form is possible. These a re
only a few applications of the technology envisioned by the applicants.
Investigations from the molecular level to cell/cell and cell/tissue
interactions have reached the limits imposed by the subjectivity of less modern
microscopic methods and by the difficulty and labor-intensiveness of manually
processing sufficient information to create 3-D images and databases for
statistical analysis. Collectively this group of researchers at Mississippi
State University have the experience and collaborations established to utilize
state-of-the-art multiwavelength confocal instrumentation to collect and analyze
new kinds of qualitative and quantitative information, thus increasing the
productivity and value of our ongoing research. The acquisition of a confocal
microscope would help insure that Mississippi State maintains state-of-the- art
microscopy equipment and would be directly useful to research efforts in several
laboratories across campus and eventually to neighboring institutions in the
state of Mississippi.