* 9512670
* The Long-Term Effects of Early Education Intervention
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2002
* Duncan Thomas, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2002
* USD 382,778.00

9512670 Currie Head Start is one of the most popular and widely-known early
intervention programs in the country. Policy makers and the general public
appear to believe that the benefits of Head Start and well-known and well-
documented. However, a careful reading of the literature shows that the evidence
in support of lasting effects of Head Start is limited. Previous research by the
investigators indicates that Head Start has significant effects on the test
scores and schooling attainment of young white children and these effects
persist into adolescence. But among black children, there is no evidence that
the immediate gains associated with any lasting effect on human capital
outcomes. However, their research is based on a very small sample and few of the
differences are statistically significant. This project will provide further
evidence about who gains from Head Start by examining the form of the benefits
and the persistence of the benefits using data from the National Longitudinal
Survey of Young (NLSY) in combination with the National Longitudinal Survey s
Child-Mother files (NLSCM) and the Panel Study of Dynamics (PSID). The NLSY and
NLSCM provide an extensive set of information on an array of child human capital
outcomes including cognitive test scores and educational attainment. Children in
those data are relatively young and so it is not possible to fully examine the
longer run effects of Head Start. This gap will be filled by exploiting a
special module of the PSID that was designed, in part, by the Principal
Investigators of this project. The module contains a rich education history
which will be combined with over twenty five years of longitudinal data on labor
market outcomes of respondents and their parents. More specifically, this
project seeks to answer three questions raised by previous research about Head
Start. First, can a case be made for early intervention programs or are child
outcomes really largely predetermined by maternal endowments as some have
claimed. Second, are cognitive test scores a meaningful yardstick for measuring
the effects of early intervention programs, and are racial and ethnic
differences in average scores meaningful when judged in terms of more concrete
outcomes? Answers to these questions will set the stage for the analysis of the
fundamental question: does Head Start participation affect long-term outcomes
such as high school completion, teenage pregnancy, criminal activity, and the
schooling attainment of the former participants' own children?