* 9512459
* An Event Related Brain Potential Analysis of Affect and     Attitudes
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Gary Berntson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/1998
* USD 148,500.00

Self-report and behavioral measures of attitudes and persuasion processes have
relied on the bivalent action disposition aroused by the attitude stimulus
despite the potential for response distortion. When peripheral somatovisceral
measures have been used to investigate communication and attitudes,
investigators have traditionally sought to identify responses that were
inherently linked to specific affective states. The multiple determinants of
somatovisceral responses and the tenuous links between inherent physiological
responses and specific affective states have placed strong limits on the
usefulness of prior physiological assessments of attitudes. Rather than relying
on response dispositions or peripheral physiological responses, the proposed
research exploits a more robust relationship between the late positive component
of the event-related brain potential (ERP) and categorization processes to study
attitude phenomena. In this approach, a subject's attitude serves as the
criterion along which stimuli are categorized while ERPs are recorded. In
research to date, a late positive potential (LPP) in the ERP has been found to
vary as a function of the discrepancy between subjects' attitude toward a target
stimulus and their attitude toward the stimuli that preceded the target stimuls.
Thus, the more negative (positive) the attitude stimulus embedded within a short
sequence of very positive (negative) stimuli, the larger a late positive
potential (LPP) amplitude over the centroparietal scalp region (Cacioppo,
Crites, Berntson, & Coles, 1993; Cacioppo, Crites, Gardner, & Berntson, 1994);
this relationship was found even when overt or verbal responses did not
accurately reflect a subject's attitude (Cacioppo et al., 1993; Crites,
Cacioppo, Gardner, & Berntson, 1995), and this relationship generalizes across
gender, seasons of the year, head sizes, simple phobia status, and experimental
(semantic, pictorial) stimuli (Cacioppo et al., 1993, 1994; Crites et al., 1995;
Gardner, Cacioppo, Crites , & Berntson, 1995). These results suggest that the
LPP amplitude in this paradigm reflects attitude categorization (in contrast to
response selection or execution) processes. Finally, the results of five
different studies indicate that the LPP amplitude is larger over the right than
left hemisphere when a subject's attitude serves as the criterion along which
stimuli are categorized; when subjects perform a semantic rather than an
evaluative categorization task, in contrast, the LPP amplitude is not
lateralized (Cacioppo, Crites, Gardner, & Berntson, under review; Crites, 1994).
The primary goal of the proposed research is to use ERPs to test hypotheses
regarding affective organization and processing from Cacioppo and Berntson's
(1994) model of evaluative space and to contrast these predictions with those
made by the circumplex model of affective organization. Self-report and
behavioral measures of attitudes and persuasion processes have relied on bipolar
measures (e.g., "agree" to "disagree"). These measures are not only susceptible
to response distortions (e.g., lying) but they also fail to differentiate
individuals who feel neutrally about a stimulus or decision from those who feel
ambivalent or conflicted. For instance, individuals who feel neither positive
nor negative about abusing drugs or alcohol cannot be differentiated from those
who feel both strongly positive and strongly negative about drugs or alcohol
(e.g., a remorseful addict). The reasons for the onset or continuation of drug
or alcohol abuse, however, differ dramatically between these groups of
individuals. In the current research, we continue work on developing a brain-
based measure of attitudes and underlying motivational bases that (1) does not
require that individuals be willing to report accurately how they feel about
persons, objects, or issues; and (2) differentiates not only between the
positive and negative motivations underlying attitudes and decisions but also
the force (intensity) of each motivational su bstrate. In this approach, a
subject's attitude serves as the criterion along which stimuli are categorized
while event related brain potentials (ERPs) are recorded. In research to date, a
late positive potential (LPP) in the ERP has been found to vary as a function of
the discrepancy between subjects' attitude toward a target stimulus and their
attitude toward the stimuli that preceded the target stimuls. Thus, the more
negative (positive) the attitude stimulus embedded within a short sequence of
very positive (negative) stimuli, the larger a late positive potential (LPP)
amplitude over the centroparietal scalp region; this relationship is observed
even when overt or verbal responses do not accurately reflect a subject's
attitude. The primary goal of the research to be conducted over the next two-
year period is to use ERPs to contrast competing theoretical models of affective
organization and processing to better understand the psychological and cerebral
mechanisms underlying productive and counterproductive decisions and behaviors.