* 9512001
* Labor Market Dynamics and Public Policy During the          Transition
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Jan Svejnar, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 08/31/1997
* USD 325,740.00

SBR-9512001 Katherine Terrell This project will extend previous NSF-funded work
on the transition to a market economy and its effect on the labor market. The
project will take advantage of a "natural experiment" involving the Czech and
Slovak Republics. The two countries began with common institutions, laws,
policies, regulations, currency, prices, wages and labor productivity, yet have
followed very different paths away from communism. The Slovak Republic has seen
its unemployment rate soar while the Czech Republic has experienced among the
lowest unemployment rates in Europe. Finding the causes of these very different
experiences is an important policy question since chronic high unemployment has
begun to threaten the viability of the newly democratic governments in the
former Soviet bloc. This project will build on previous work that focused on
unemployment duration and the flow out of unemployment by looking also at the
flows between unemployment, employment, and out-of-the labor force as well as
job-to-job flows. The project will also look at wage adjustment and its effects
on the labor flows. An important part of this project is the creation of new
data sets on labor market experiences of workers in the two countries. A follow-
up questionnaire on a randomly selected set of 6,000 newly unemployed workers
will look at their destination after unemployment. In addition, a retrospective
questionnaire will be administered to 5,000 individuals in both republics. Those
sampled will be asked for a retrospective employment history going back to 1991.
This will allow the P.I.s to distinguish employment in jobs held under communism
from employment in new jobs created since the transition to democracy and free
markets.