* 9512912
* Analytical Ultracentrifuge for Biochemical Studies
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* H. Spivey, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1999
* USD 88,133.00

We are requesting the acquisition of the Beckman model XL-A analytical
ultracentrifuge. This instrument is a state-of-the-art ultracentrifuge built
along guidelines developed by the leading research experts. Though scarcely
three years old, this instrument has made an impressive impact in the field with
nearly 100 references to its use in a recent bibliography. It is clear that
virtually all biological researchers pursuing structure-function studies will
include this method in their repertoire in the near future. No comparable
instrument is manufactured elsewhere. The past near abandonment of this approach
is due to several factors, but the difficulties in maintenance and use of the
old model E instrument are sufficient reasons by themselves. It is true that
accurate alternative methods now exist in many cases for determining molecular
weights of proteins, e.g., DNA sequencing and mass spectrometry. However,
analytical ultracentrifugation (AUC) excels in its versatility to accommodate a
wide range of experimental conditions and different types of macromolecules.
Perhaps most important is the superiority of AUC in many cases for analyzing
complex associating macromolecules. Another advantage of AUC is that it is based
on rigorous model equations and is a primary method unlike secondary methods
that require standards and the assumption that these standards behave in the
same manner as the molecule being studied. In addition, AUC can provide
hydrodynamic parameters from which shapes of macromolecules can be estimated.
Another important advantage of this new AUC instrument is that it is compatible
with computer programs for controlling and analyzing experiments giving it an
extraordinary advance in user-friendliness. Now even non-experts can analyze
very complex macromolecular systems utilizing powerful calculation-intensive
methods with relative ease and a modest amount of training and advisement. These
programs continually being improved, are available through th e internet users
groups that also allows users to access all leaders in this field. The PI (HOS)
of this application has nearly 20 years of experience using the model E
analytical ultracentrifuge and related methods for studying simple and complex
associating systems. He has even more extensive experience in computer methods
of data analysis - methods that are especially valuable in analyzing data from
the new AUC instrument. The projects described in this application depend
extensively on the special advantages of the requested AUC instrument. For
example, the majority of the studies are concerned with macromolecular
associations. It is often true that two (or more) methods can provide greater
insights than either method alone. Such is the case with AUC also as illustrated
in the project below on polysaccharide structures. Here the combination of
intrinsic viscosity and sedimentation velocity data provide information on
molecular shape that is independent of the molecular hydration. Fortunately, we
have top-of-the line viscometry and other modern methods that are complementary
to AUC. In summary, the projects described below are at the forefront of basic
research and will be greatly enhanced by, and in some case critically dependent
on, analytical ultracentrifugation. This method has remarkable versatility and
the current instrument sought provides outstanding advances in technology and
ease of use. Currently there is no functional AUC instrument in the State of OK.
However, in ~ relatively short time we have identified an impressive array of
scientists in OK (about 25) who have expressed both a keen desire and an
important need for the XL-A. In addition, many others in OK will undoubtedly
find the instrument extremely helpful to their research as they become familiar
with its capabilities and their research develops. Because of its central value
in molecular biology and polymer chemistry and its expected prevalence in future
labs, it is important that our students become familiar with this instrument and
method. We have vigorous research activities for both undergraduate through
postgraduate students. In addition, we have recently obtained two major grants
serving minorities: a Howard Hughes grant, "Undergraduate Biological Sciences
Education Program," of $1,000 000. over the next 4 years, and an NSF grant,
"Oklahoma State Alliance for Minority Participation in Science" for $5,000,000
over the next 5 years. Both of these grants were obtained and are administered
by faculty in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Upon acquisition of the
instrument, numerous students supported by these programs will have the
opportunity to become trained in this eminent technology.