* 9512049
* Acquisition of a Liquid Chromatography Mass Spectrometry    System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Carol Haney, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 165,230.00

This proposal is for the acquisition of a high performance liquid
chromatography, ionsprayTM mass spectrometry system, the API-100 produced by
Perkin-Elmer Sciex. This instrumentation will complement the existing equipment
in the Mass Spectrometry Facility and will significantly enhance the mass
spectral capabilities at the University and throughout the region by providing
access to modern research instrumentation for the academic and industrial
research community. For example, the existing equipment in the Mass Spectrometry
Facility cannot currently address the needs of investigators looking at small
polar molecules, neither can the existing equipment detect high molecular weight
species, features the proposed equipment will address. This proposal contains
brief research plans from ten investigators from a variety of departments
including Civil Engineering, Chemistry, Botany, Chemical Engineering,
Microbiology, Biochemistry, Food Science, Textile Chemistry and Wood and Paper
Science. Acquisition of this instrumentation will substantially impact a large
number of programs in biotechnology, engineering and environmental research. The
API-100 will offer improved sensitivity, accurate and extended molecular mass
detection limits, structural characterizations, identification of post
translational modification of peptides, the ability to perform on-line
separations, and the possibility of exploring higher order structures and
nonconvalent interactions currently not accessible. One of the most significant
advances in mass spectrometric analyses has been the development of the
electrospray ionization and pneumatically assisted electrospray ionization
(ionsprayTM) sources. The ionspray source design permits effective coupling of
the analytical techniques of high performance liquid chromatography and mass
spectrometry. The desorption ionization process, which occurs at atmospheric
pressure, generates ions from thermally unstable and nonvolatile species. Even
more important, is the fact that the desorption process can deposit multiple
charges on the molecule, effectively extending the mass range of a standard
quadruple mass spectrometer. While highly sensitive and accurate molecular
weight determinations of large biomolecules are important, structural
information necessary for identification can also be obtained through collision
induced dissociation's in the ionspray interface. When combined with appropriate
enzymatic digestion's and liquid chromatography, primary structure information
can be obtained. This combination of techniques provide important information in
the characterization of proteins, oligonucleotides and other biomolecules. This
technique is not limited to the analysis of biomolecules. Small, polar molecules
such as phospholipids, polar metabolic products, and environmental contanimants
can be identified using the combination of liquid chromatography mass
spectrometry. Previous liquid chromatography mass spectrometry interfaces such
as flow-faqt atom bombardment (flow-FAB) are ineffective for the analysis of
small molecules. For these applications chromatography is critical for
separation of the complex mixtures while the mass spectrometry provides the
molecular mass and structural characterization needed for identification without
interferences from matrices. The administrative and scientific infrastructure is
already in place to assure maximum benefit to the researchers who will utilize
this equipment. A Mass Spectrometry User Committee exists and is responsible for
establishing policy, operational guidelines and fee structure for the Facility.
Operation and maintenance of the equipment will be the responsibility of the
Mass Spectrometry Facility Staff which includes a Director, postdoctoral fellow,
laboratory supervisor and undergraduate students working on their senior
research. This administrative structure guarantees open and impartial access to
all Facility equ ipment, not only by NC State researchers but by researches at
other system schools including N.C. A&T and UNC-Chapel Hill. The proposed
equipment will be incorporated into the existing Mass Spectrometry Facility
which was established more than a decade ago and has maintained a reputation for
excellence within the University and throughout the local scientific community.
Currently fifty percent of the staff are women. The experience of the staff in
both chromatography and mass spectrometry assures the immediate and successful
utilization. A clear and urgent need, plus the advantages of improvements in
sensitivity, flexibility, and accuracy indicates that acquisition of the API-I
00 is justified.