* 9512985
* An Ultraviolet Laser For a Multi-User Confocal              Microscope Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1997
* W. Jonathan Lederer, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 09/30/1997
* USD 48,965.00

The central goal of this project is the development of advanced time-resolved
FTIR instrumentation which will allow for the first time the investigation of a
wide variety of biological systems at the sub-nanosecond to millisecond range.
The proposed instrument will incorporate novel features which will address the
major short-comings of current time-resolved FTIR instruments. The project will
be supported by the newly formed Center for Photonics Research at Boston
University and Bruker Instruments, Inc., a leader in time-resolved FTIR
instrumentation In recent years it has been demonstrated that Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) difference spectroscopy can provide detailed information about
dynamic changes in the protonation state, local environment and orientation of
specific amino acid residues in proteins. This ability is enhanced by the recent
development of powerful new methods for band assignments by the introduction of
site-directed isotope labels (SDIL) into proteins. However, the current
generation of FTIR instruments have fallen short of their promise for probing
rapid conformational changes in biomolecular systems. Existing limitations are
related to the lack of sufficiently powerful broad-band infrared sources, the
relatively slow cycle-time or irreversible response of most biological systems
upon activation, the prevalence of biological systems activated by mechanisms
other than light, and the need to simultaneously monitor changes in the infrared
and UV-visible absorption of a sample. We propose to develop a unique step-scan
FTIR system with the ability to record simultaneous sub-nanosecond to
millisecond infrared and W-visible absorption changes in biomolecular systems.
The instrument will be based on recent breakthroughs in technology for ultra-
high intensity broad-band continuous (CW) and pulsed IR sources, rapid sub-
nanosecond transient recorders and infrared detectors and step-scan
interferometers. The development of a novel synchronized sampl e step translator
(SSST) will make it possible to shorten dramatically measurement times and open
the door to the investigation of dynamic processes in a wide variety of
biomolecular systems under physiological conditions, including systems not
activated by light, systems with very slow cycle times and systems with
irreversible processes. By combining this proposed FTIR instrumentation with the
recently developed method of SDIL and site-directed non-native amino acid
replacement (SNAAR), breakthroughs are expected in the fields of protein
folding, enzyme mechanism, ion transport and signal reception. Transfer of the
developed technology for future commercial use will be facilitated by the close
interaction during the project with Bruker Instruments and through the Center
for Photonics Research This request is for funds to purchase a Molecular
Dynamics PhosphorImager for use in research and teaching in molecular biology.
This instrument will be critical for research applications of at least eight
faculty as well as in training undergraduate and graduate students in molecular
biology. Autoradiography using storage phosphor technology offers several
advantages over traditional detection methods. Quantitation of amounts of
radioactive protein or DNA on gels or filters has traditionally been done using
X-ray film and densitometry or using scintillation counters. Storage phosphors
are up to 100 times more sensitive than X-ray film, enabling measurements well
below levels of detection for film. Also, screens are quantitatively accurate
over five orders of magnitude as compared to X-ray film which has a linear range
over only two orders of magnitude. The new technology is also environmentally
advantageous because it eliminates the heavy metal waste disposal problems
associated with film processing, and when it replaces scintillation counting it
reduces mixed organic and radiochemical waste disposal problems. This technology
will enable new experimental appro aches, improve quantitation, enhance
productivity, and it will afford our students state of the art training.
Significant advances in digital imaging technology provide capabilities not
otherwise available. The overall objective of this proposal is to obtain a
16-bit/pixel digital imager that will permit investigators in the Plant Sciences
Building at The University of Georgia to profit from this technology. A single
instrument that will provide images of media labelled with both radioisotopic
and non-radioisotopic probes is requested. Supporting items include a
microcomputer essential for operation of the imager, one high energy phosphor
screen cassette for each major user, one low-energy phosphor screen cassette to
be shared among all users, four chemiluminescence screen cassettes to be shared
among all users, a grey-scale laser printer for routine and inexpensive output,
and site-licensed image-analysis software. All will be integrated into an
existing computer network that will not only permit data to be moved readily
from the imager to each user s laboratory, but will also provide direct access
to a publication quality color printer and to a CD recorder for archiving data.
The imaging system (1) will permit us to obtain quantitative information with
greatly enhanced sensitivity and accuracy, and (2) will dramatically decrease
exposure times, permitting experiments to progress at a much more rapid pace.
Current usage of film for imaging media in the Plant Sciences Building exceeds
4,700/year, indicating that a digital imager will receive extensive and
efficient use. The instrument will be used primarily with DNA, RNA and protein
blots, labelled with 32p, 1251, 35S, 14C, or with enzymes that yield
chemiluminescence given appropriate substrates. Research programs that will
benefit from the equipment range from mission-oriented (e.g., H. Roger Boerma)
to fundamental (e.g., Kelly Dawe). These programs include the regulation of
virulence genes in a plan t pathogen (Timothy Denny), intercellular movement of
plant viruses and intracellular movement of viral glycoproteins (C. Michael
Deom), characterization of root-knot nematode secretions (Richard Hussey and
Celeste Ray), genetic improvement of pest resistance and stress tolerance in
soybean (H. Roger Boerma), use of molecular markers in plant breeding and
evolution (Gary Kochert), characterization of two pathways of polyamine
synthesis in plants (Russell Malmberg), the genetics and cell biology of the
maize meiotic centromere and kinetochore (Kelly Dawe), and a comparative
evaluation of the phytochrome gene family and its expression in tomato and
soghum (Lee Pratt and Marie-Michele Cordonnier-Pratt). In transmission electron
microscopy of biological structures, there are two phenomena that often prevent
imaging at the molecular level: radiation damage and contamination. These
problems can be reduced by two approaches: protecting the specimen and/or
improving the microscope. In the first approach, significant progress has been
achieved. Firstly, a special apparatus has been developed for rapid
cryoimmobilization of a living cell during light microscopic observation for
further imaging as this cell's cryo-whole-mount. Cellular architecture is
retained at the molecular level and therefore can be referred directly to the
behavior of the living cell (Malecki 1992, Proc. EMSA 50: 566-567. Secondly, the
deep negative staining / embedding procedure has been developed. A thick and
uniform layer of embedment supports and protects the three-dimensional structure
within the whole-mount. This electron-dense preparation is only transparent for
electrons with high energies attainable at high accelerating voltages
(Ris&amp;Malecki 1993, J. Struct. Biol. 111:148-157). In this project, as the
second approach, the aim is to improve the microscope for work