* 9512718
* Japan STA Program:  Environmental Protection:               Titaniumdioxide as a Photocatalyst for Waste Water          Treatment
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1995,02/28/1998
* K.Satya Reddy, OH Fellowships
* Fixed Amount Award
* Larry H. Weber
* 02/28/1998
* USD 11,560.00

9512718 Reddy This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. Satya Reddy, Department of Chemistry, the
Ohio State University, at the Chemical Synthesis Laboratory, National Institute
of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMCR), Tsukuba, Japan. Dr. Reddy will work
with Dr. Keiichi Tanaka, Director of the Chemical Synthesis Laboratory at NIMCR
on a research project entitled, "Environmental Protection: Titaniumdioxide as a
Photocatalyst for Waste Water Treatment." The main objective of the research is
to develop a potential catalyst which is able to concentrate the organic
pollutants from the environment and thereby mineralize them into harmless
chemicals. Special attention will be paid to the volatile organic halocarbons
that are causing the depletion of atmospheric ozone layer and are potential
dangers to the global ecosystem. The research is also designed to explore
advanced techniques to remove aromatic hydrocarbon pollutants from drinking
water. The proposed research is considerable interest in the United States and
Japan and the facilities at the Chemical Synthesis Laboratory in Tsukuba will
provide an excellent location for research efforts. The research will provide a
valuable learning experience for Dr. Reddy, and will likely yield positive
results for the United States and Japan as well as the international community
as a whole. As such, the research satisfies the objectives of the program in its
emphasis on the exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through
international collaboration. ***