* 9512240
* Acquisition of Mass Spectrometers for the Cornell           Laboratory for Natural Abundance Isotope Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Robert Howarth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 750,000.00

The development of stable isotope mass spectrometry has revolutionized the
ability to pose and answer questions of how interactions between biological and
geological processes define the Earth's environment. At this interface between
biology and geology lies the rapidly evolving discipline of biogeochemistry.
Stable isotope mass spectrometry allows biogeochemists to ask questions - at
scales ranging from microbial to global processes - that are critical to
understanding how the Earth's ecosystems function, and how the biosphere is
linked to human activities. A particular value of analyzing the natural
abundance of stable isotopes is that they integrate information in space and
time, and they allow an analysis of the net result of complex interaction of
processes. Also, these approaches free researchers from the "Heizenberg
uncertainty" principle as it applies to biogeochemistry; we sample the end
result of processes without affecting them, whereas most other approaches to
studying the biogeochemistry of ecosystems result in alterations in functioning
due to sampling. A brief look at leading scientific journals shows that stable
isotope techniques increasingly contribute to our most important advances within
biogeochemistry. In fact, studies employing stable isotope data are now a norm,
rather than an exception, in prestigious journals such as Nature or Science.
Despite this growing importance, there are a relatively limited number of state-
of-the-art mass spectrometry facilities available for biogeochemical research
within the U.S. and internationally. Formal training programs for the next
generation of biogeochemists are even more limited. In this proposal we seek
funds to establish a mass spectrometry facility at Cornell University, "The
Cornell Laboratory for Natural-Abundance Isotope Analysis." This facility will
provide a state-of-the-art laboratory for isotope analysis and methods
development, and will serve as a center for interaction betwe en different
faculty and students at Cornell that currently work at the conceptual interface
between geology and biology. With funds from other sources, we plan to develop a
formal training program in isotope techniques for students and visiting
scientists. This program will provide on-site expertise and training fellowships
for graduate and post-graduate researchers as well as opportunities for visitors
to obtain the skills to run instrumentation and develop isotope techniques for
their research. The program will also provide a forum for exchanging ideas,
fostering interdisciplinary research, and enhancing training in isotope
instrumentation. We believe that this balance between instrumentation, research
and training will make this facility uniquely important for biogeochemical
research, nationally as well as internationally. The facility will feature three
major instruments and appropriate laboratory facilities for preparation and
analysis of samples by a wide range of isotope applications. Two Finnigan MAT
stable isotope ratio mass spectrometers (IRMS) will provide isotopic ratio
analysis of C, N, O, S and H, with capabilities to analyze liquid, particulate,
and gaseous samples, and will have the appropriate interfaces for compound-
specific mass spectrometry. One IRMS (delta S, Finnigan Mat) will be used to
process and analyze the very large number of samples (&gt; l 0,000/year)
generated by the 14 core faculty and their graduate and post-graduate
associates, and off-campus scientists who are currently using isotope techniques
in their research. The second IRMS (model 252, Finnigan Mat) will be used for
high precision (+ 0.005 parts per thousand) analyses (compound specific, as well
as high precision gas ratio determination), for training, and for methods
development. One Hewlett Packard inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometer
(ICP-MS) will provide rapid and efficient analyses of concentrations of up to 40
or more elements , allowing trace-element analyses at part-per-trillion levels.
Such information can "fingerprint" the movement and mixing of different elements
from different sources through complex flow paths within ecosystems, as well as
provide detailed information on chemical environments and transformations. This
ability to coincidentally measure isotope ratios together with concentrations of
elements provides a powerful capability to follow the biogeochemical movements
and cycling of elements and water within and between the Earth's natural
ecosystems. This facility will enhance research for a spectrum of Cornell
faculty and lab groups that use natural abundance stable isotope approaches to
study the interface between biology and geology. Currently, these groups have to
send their samples to outside labs, with relatively long turn-around times and
with little opportunity for methods development or student training.