* 9512009
* Differential Effectiveness of Schools
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Joseph Altonji, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1999
* USD 178,881.00

9512009 Altonji The question of whether private schools are more effective than
public schools is at the center of the current national debate over the role of
vouchers, charter schools, and other reforms that would increase choice in
education. The question has been the subject of much controversy among
researchers. If private schools do in fact provide better education at lower
cost, then the case for expansion of choice in schooling is strengthened. Since
Catholic schools account for about two thirds of private school enrollment in
the U.S., assessing the effectiveness of Aatholic schools is an important part
of the assessment of private schooling. The disagreement surrounding the effects
of Catholic schools on achievement scores and other outcomes centers around the
problem of nonrandom selection into Catholic schools. This project will
investigate how Catholic school effects vary with individual characteristics
such as race, gender, parental education, family income, and with neighborhood
characteristics and school characteristics. The project will address the
selection problem for Catholic schools by taking advantage of the fact that
proximity to Catholic schools has a strong effect on the probability of Catholic
school attendance for Catholics but not for non-Catholics. This permits the use
of the interaction between religious preference and proximity to Catholic
schools to statistically identify Catholic school effects. Separate controls for
both proximity and religious preference will be used. The approach will be
implemented using the National Longitudinal Survey of the High School Class of
1972, which reports zipcode of resident, and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,
which reports Census tract. The project will take advantage of an education
supplement in the 1995 PSID the provides information about type of school
attended and the extension of the PSID geocode data through 1994. The panel data
sets will be matched to information on th e neighborhood and community, local
public schools, and the distance to and characteristics of the nearest Catholic
schools. Various instrumental variables and control function estimators will be
used to estimate Catholic school effects, with the interaction between religious
preferences and proximity as the key exogenous variable.