* 9512268
* Development of an Outdoor Seawater Facility to Increase     Research Capabilities
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* David Secor, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* None
* 03/31/1999
* USD 83,594.00

The Chesapeake Biological Laboratory (CBL) will be suggested to construct an
Outdoor Seawater Facility to study the ecology, toxicology, energetics, and
biochemistry of organisms from a wide spectrum of taxa (bacteria, algae,
invertebrates and fishes). The facility will enhance current research
initiatives at CBL in trophic transfers of contaminants, trophic and community
dynamics, migration, and recruitment. These initiatives depend upon both
laboratory and field approaches which often cannot be reconciled because of
scaling considerations. The outdoor Seawater Facility will provide a critical
mesocosm-scale level to complement current CBL strengths in laboratory and field
investigations. The Outdoor Seawater Facility will be available to CEES
scientists, graduate students, and visiting scientists in several disciplines.
The facility comprises a 167-sq. meter cement pad with seawater plumbing,
drainage, portable canopies, and flexible-design tanks and raceways. The
facility will significantly enhance the range of research and training programs
at CBL and will also be a unique facility in the region available to
visiting/collaborating investigators. When completed, the facility will be a
major contributor to the success of CBL's mission in its three programmatic
areas: Ecosystem Studies, Fisheries Science/Ecology, and Environment
Chemistry/Toxicology.