* 9512717
* U.S.-Taiwan R.O.C. Cooperative Research: On the Application of Deep X-Ray Lithography in the formation of Microsensors  and Microstructures
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Chung-Chiun Liu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 06/30/1999
* USD 11,796.00

This is a three year award proposed by Dr. Chung-Chiun Liu, the Case Western
University and Dr. Yao Cheng, the Synchrotron Radiation Center (SRRC) in
Hsinchu, Taiwan. This proposal requests travel funds to support research
cooperation between these two institutes for exploring and developing the
application of deep X-ray lithography in the formation of microsensors and other
microstructures. The LIGA process, first developed in Germany, has demonstrated
unique capabilities for creating a wide variety of microstructures through
precision lithography. It is an important technology and can have a major impact
on many aspects of modern life. The integration of LIGA, sensors and actuators
can benefit a large range of microfabrication industries. The number of
investigators engaged in this area of research is limited in the United States.
Dr. Liu is an expert in the microfabrication of sensors, uniquely suited for
carrying out this cooperation. The synchrotron system in Taiwan is a state-of-
the-art facility and will provide beam time and structure flexibility for this
project. This is a unique opportunity not generally available from the U.S.
facilities. This project is jointly funded by the Taiwan National Science
Council, which is providing the logistical costs, while the NSF supports the
investigator's travel.