* 9512320
* Acquisition of Facilities for Structure Determination       and Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* George Rose, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 09/30/1998
* USD 402,128.00

Acquisition of Facilities for Structure Determination and Analysis Due to
parallel developments in molecular biology, instrumentation, and computers, the
field of structural biology has been growing at an explosive rate over the past
5 years. This has been manifested both by a significant increase in the
productivity of existing researchers and a tremendous growth in the number of
the active research groups. Several units at The Johns Hopkins University have
been active participants in this growth. Building on a long- standing history in
X-ray crystallography, the Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry at
The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine has grown from three faculty
members in 1990 to seven in 1995, all of whom are actively involved in
macromolecular structure determination and analysis. In addition, united by the
Institute for Biophysical Research on Macromolecular Assemblies, founded through
a National Science Foundation Biological Research Center grant in 1989, a much
larger group of researchers throughout the School of Medicine, the School of
Hygiene and Public Health, and on the Homewood Campus in the School of Arts and
Sciences and the Engineering School, are pursuing research and training young
scientists in this area. With this large number of active researchers, our needs
for instrumentation have continued to grow. The powerful methods of gene
cloning, protein expression, and biomolecular synthesis have greatly increased
the number of important problems that can be addressed at a detailed structural
level. This explosion has increased the demands on instrumentation
infrastructure. With over 20 currently active crystallographic projects and a
number of others in earlier stages of development, our current facilities for
data collection, data processing, structure refinement, and structural analysis
are no longer adequate. In the same way, both the power of computer modeling
techniques and our faculty representation in this area have increased. Our
ability to carry out both computer modeling and crystallographic and NMR
structural calculations is increasingly limited by our present computer
facilities. Access to these facilities and their inherent speed have become rate
limiting in our research efforts. To address these issues, the acquisition of a
new high performance computer system and an additional X-ray diffraction
position sensitive detector are proposed. The computer system, such as the
Silicon Graphics Power Challenge XL system, will provide a ten-fold (or greater)
increase in computation speed with parallel increases in memory and data storage
capabilities over our current facility. Such an increase will remove current
impediments to structure refinement and will make accessible computer- based
approaches to important problems in macromolecular folding, dynamics, and
thermodynamics that are currently out of reach. Examples include calculations of
side chain entropies at individual sites within structurally characterized
proteins, Monte Carlo calculations related to protein folding and to the
properties of unfolded peptides and proteins, and molecular dynamics simulations
of membrane proteins including ion channels. The detector system, such as an
R-Axis II imaging plate system, will increase the rate at which structural
problems of current interest can be solved and will allow development of new
projects that are not being actively pursued due to limited detector time at
present. These projects include proteins and proteins fragments involved in
interactions with DNA, in mediating cell-cell interactions, and in catalyzing
important metabolic processes. Both systems will significantly improve the
training environment for graduate students and postdoctoral fellows in
macromolecular structure determination and analysis methods both as part of our
graduate training programs which include formal courses in X- ray
crystallography and in molecul ar modeling methods and as part of research
laboratory experience.