* 9512883
* Fluorometric and Electrophoretic Instrumentation for the    Identification and Scoring of Genetic Markers
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Carl Batt, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 29,400.00

A core facility will be established to assist in the formatting of assays to
score genetic markers in a large number of progeny. Funds for an Perkin Elmer
LS5OB fluorometer are being requested that in conjunction with existing
equipment in the Analytical Chemistry and Peptide/DNA Synthesis Facility will
serve the needs of the collaborating Users. The facility will be unique in
providing the User access to state-of-the-art technology for marker screening. A
core technology to be explored is a multi plex PCR allelic discrimination assay
(TaqManTM recently developed by Perkin Elmer/ Applied Biosystems Division and
demonstrated useful in a number of applications by the Pl. The PE LS50B will be
used to establish a capability in designing and formatting TaqManTM assays to
score for existing and newly discovered markers. This technology is a robust,
quantitative PCR-based assay that can be applied to marker identification or
allelic discrimination assays. It can be used to screen literally hundreds of
samples with either qualitative or quantitative readouts. An integral need in
both of these techniques is an oligonucleotide synthesis facility capable of
phosphoramidite chemistry and oligonucleotide analysis. The collaborating
scientists have as their common focus the identification and usage of genetic
markers to assist in the selection of progeny. Individual efforts range from
marker assisted selection of agronomically valuable traits (biochemical
pathways, disease resistance) in plants to genotyping cattle for alleles linked
to superior milk production. This facility will enhance existing expertise and
make available state-of-the-art equipment for carrying out these studies. It
will complement existing programs by establishing a core facility with equipment
beyond the funds currently at the disposal of any single investigator or
collectively through pooling their resources. Results from this effort will,
through their publication in the public domain further the know ledge base in a
variety of applications of marker assisted selection. Further the equipment will
help enhance the educational mission of the university both through traditional
training of graduate students as well as special workshops offerings. The PE
LS50B will be housed in the Analytical Chemistry and Peptide/DNA Synthesis
Facility, maintained through an existing supervisory structure and operated with
the assistance of an existing technical staff .