* 9512258
* Acquisition of Thermal Analysis Equipment for Advanced      Materials Development
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Mark Fink, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 140,630.00

9512258 Mitchell A comprehensive ensemble of thermal analysis equipment will be
acquired in support of researchers in several departments at Tulane University.
Thermo-gravimetric, thermo-mechanical , differential thermal , and dynamic
mechanical analysis instrumentation will be used for interdisciplinary, advanced
materials and polymer-related research. Characterization of materials such as
catalysts, membranes, colloids, superconductors, and enzymatic polymers will be
performed with this equipment. Many of theses materials are the products of
advanced-materials processing research, including sol-gel and melt-processing
technologies. In addition, some of the materials to be characterized have direct
applications in the civilian infrastructure, such as calcia-alumina fibers for
reinforcement of Portland cement. Still other materials will have applications
in environmental remediation, for example, specialized separation membranes. The
thermal analysis equipment has an educational component to it as well, as it
will pay a key role in the implementation of an interdisciplinary materials
laboratory course devoted to the synthesis, characterization, and processing of
materials. %%% The thermal analysis instrumentation will impact a variety of
research and education programs. It will be installed, maintained and operated
by a coordinated instrumentation facility, ensuring that the equipment will
achieve its maximum potential for university-wide use. ***