* 9512943
* A Phosphorimager for Research in Plant Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Stephen Wolniak, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 11/30/1997
* USD 32,425.00

A multi-user phosphorimager is requested by a group of investigators in the
Department of Plant Biology and the Center for Agricultural Biotechnology. This
instrument is often referred to as a fast, accurate, filmless autoradiography
system. It facilitates the rapid and sensitive quantitation of radioactivity on
gels or blots without scintillation counting or autoradiography. Highly
sensitive storage phosphor screens capture the image of the experimental sample
ten times faster than film. The broad linear dynamic range of the phosphoimager
permits quantitative detection of both strong and weak signals in a way that
film simply cannot. Digital images are compiled and analyzed with a
microcomputer. We propose to use this powerful instrumentation in a wide range
of applications, including the quantitative analyses of DNA-protein interactions
by gel retardation, measurement of transcript levels by RNA gel blots or RNase
protection assays, and kinetic measurements of enzyme activity and protein
phosphorylation. The acquisition of a phosphorimager will permit us to obtain
quantitative information and answers to research questions that would otherwise
be impossible to obtain using conventional X-ray film and autoradiography. Six
of the seven investigators are currently supported by competitive grants from
federal agencies. In all cases, the proposed experiments requiring analyses by
the phosphorimager are essential to the long-range goals of understanding the
molecular basis for plant pathogenesis, signal transduction, membrane transport
and mitosis.