* 9512658
* The Sevilleta Field Station:  Enhancements to Station       Computation, Information, and Transportation Capabilities
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Robert Parmenter, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 123,120.00

The Sevilleta Field Station serves a large number of research scientists and
students who study the extensive and ecologically diverse region of central New
Mexico. The region incorporates transition zones among numerous biomes,
including Great Plains Grassland, Chihuahuan Desert, Colorado Plateau Shrub-
Steppe, Interior Chaparral, Mogollon Pi on-Juniper Woodland, and Montane
Forests. Current scientific research in the region focuses on biotic responses
to climate change at various spatial and temporal time scales (seasonal, annual,
and long-term), biodiversity issues, and ecosystem restoration following natural
and anthropogenic disturbance. Funding for research activities on the Sevilleta
has exceeded $15.6 million, and continues to increase. From 1990 to 1995, there
were 357 scientists and students working on 109 research projects in the region
served by the Sevilleta Field Station. The Sevilleta Station provided logistical
support to a large proportion of these projects. This project addresses
improvements in three areas of station operations requiring enhancements to meet
growing demands by field research scientists. Computation - the addition of
graphical/GIS and ARC/INFO workstations and computer server, with terminals for
station residences; Information - installation of a Differential GPS Community
Base Station for field GPS work, the addition of a computerized Ariel Library
Reference Station for literature searches/inter-library loan computer
transmissions, and the acquisition of station library reference materials;
Transportation - the addition several vehicles for use in field studies covering
large areas of central New Mexico. With these enhancements, the station's
capabilities will finally match the logistical demands for field support by the
Sevilleta's scientific community.