* 9512425
* Acquisition of Processing Instrumentation for Advanced      Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Stephen Ralph, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 125,000.00

9512425 Gilliland An advanced materials processing facility will be established
at Emory University which will complement existing surface, electrical, and
optical characterization capabilities in the physics and chemistry departments.
The processing instrumentation, consisting of an electron beam evaporator, a
lithographic mask aligner, and a surface profilometer, will be utilized to
process and fabricate simple devices and to characterize small structures based
on compound semiconductor thin films. Research programs which will make use of
the processing instrumentation include electric field effects on photoexcited
carriers in III-V compound semiconductors, fundamental studies as well as
fabrication of high speed photodetectors, processing and characterization of
wide bandgap III-V nitride films grown by organometallic epitaxy, and
development of multiple point metal film probes for thermal anemometry studies
of turbulence. %%% Emory has established sizable research efforts focused upon
the optical and electrical characterization of semiconductor structures. Despite
this investment in human resources and in characterization equipment, a
materials preparation and processing capability is lacking. The processing
instrumentation will provide the researchers with the necessary tools to conduct
a vigorous research effort focused on the physics and chemistry of semiconductor
microstructures. ***