* 9512579
* Acquisition of a Field Emission Scanning Microscope with    Automated Orientation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Thomas Kelly, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 370,000.00

9512579 Kelly A high resolution field-emission scanning electron microscope
(FESEM) will be acquired and installed at the Materials Science Center of the
University of Wisconsin, Madison campus. The proposed FESEM has two features
that make it an essential tool for advancing several areas in materials science.
First, the high image resolution capability makes it possible to study
microstructural features at the nanometer scale (above 1.2 nanometers) and to
examine large sample areas. This allows for the study of materials that are
difficult to prepare for transmission electron microscopy (TEM). The high
resolution capability will be used to study the microstructure of high critical
current superconductors, of surfaces modified by ion implantation, and of
nanocrystalline ceramics. Second, the instrument is equipped with an electron
backscatter diffraction pattern (EBSP) detection and analysis system which makes
possible the determination of the orientation of individual grains in a sample.
This capability will be used to map the grain orientation in high temperature
superconductors and can provide information on the critical current path in
these materials. %%% The high resolution scanning electron microscope will serve
several research groups on campus working in materials related problems. It
replaces an instrument which has five times lower resolution and which is
eighteen years old. The new instrument's ability to image large samples at high
resolution will make possible routine characterization of advanced materials and
will impact a broad range of ongoing programs in materials science. ***