* 9512739
* A Planning Visit to China:  Collaboration Research in       Ecological Planning for Sustainable Urban Development
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Bai-Lian Li, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 02/28/1997
* USD 5,037.00

*** 9512739 Li This proposal requests funds to support a planning visit to China
on ecological planning for sustainable development of urban ecosystems. The
topic is an important concern for both the U.S. and China which face rapid
economic growth and urbanization. The need for a comprehensive ecological
analysis and modeling approach that supports sustainable development of urban
and regional systems is universal; assuming productive relationships are
established though this project, the potential is great for both countries to
benefit. The visit of the US PI, Dr. Bai-Lian Li of the Center for Biosystems
Modeling at Texas A&amp;M University to the Department of System Ecology,
Research Center for Eco Environmental Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
will provide the opportunity for two centers with acknowledged expertise in
urban ecology and systems modeling to define a research program. China has large
data bases collected over a ten year period that cover environmental and
socioeconomic issues of significance for the research topic proposed. Texas
A&amp;M's Center for Biosystems Modeling has been working on a number of new
modeling approaches such as neuro-fuzzy based ecological risk assessment which
will be further refined through the cooperative project envisioned using the
large data bases available in China. ***