* 9512778
* Hemodynamic Model of Skeletal Muscle Microcirculation
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Benjamin Zweifach, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 185,000.00

9512778 Schmid-Schoenbein Skeletal muscle represents the largest organ in the
body. Normal contraction of muscle fibers depends on an intact blood flow in
this organ, especially in the smallest blood vessels known as the
microcirculation. The blood flow in the skeletal muscle microcirculation can be
adjusted according to the activity of the muscle fibers. Understanding of blood
flow in this organ is an essential element in understanding muscle performance
and its failure. The overall objective of the PI's research project is to
develop an analysis of blood flow in skeletal muscle from a basic point of view
at the cellular and molecular level using rigorous physical language. The PI's
previous NSF project has served to obtain basic elements of the analysis,
including the actual network microanatomy of the vast number of blood vessels in
the microcirculation, the biophysical properties of the blood vessels (arteries,
capillaries and veins) and the blood fluid, the display of nerves, lymphatics,
and other cells in the muscle. This information was integrated into an analysis
of blood flow in resting non-contracting skeletal muscle which is based on basic
biomechanical principles and implemented in form of a numerical computation on a
digital computer by means of highly efficient algorithms. The predictions of the
analysis were compared with all suitable experimental results in the skeletal
muscle literature. In addition, the PI has carried out additional experiments on
blood flow in skeletal muscle to test the analysis in quantitative details. The
analysis provides the first time a comprehensive picture of skeletal muscle
blood flow with physical precision. While this approach serves to explain a
large number of experimental observations in the past, it has also lead to
several discoveries including the following: 1) The basis for the specialized
relationship between pressure, which drives the blood in skeletal muscle and
blood flow, was identified and its physical origin was identified. 2) The
identification of the mechanism that leads to cessation of muscle perfusion
during pressure pulsations. 3) The identification of a previously undescribed
mechanism for lymph flow in skeletal muscle. Recently, evidence has been
obtained for a second valve system in the lymphatics of skeletal muscle, in
addition to the well-known intralymphatic valve system. This observation
provides the first time a comprehensive understanding of the mechanism by which
lymphatics transport fluid and cells. 4) The identification of a new membrane
function of the cells lining the blood vessels, i.e. the endothelial cells. 5)
Analysis that served as the basis in leading to the discovery of a mechanism by
which the small arteries in the microcirculation grow (research by the PI's
former student Dr. T.C. Skalak at the University of Virginia, Charlottesville).
6) The discovery of a significant influence that circulating white blood cells
have on the perfusion of skeletal muscle, especially when these white blood
cells are activated. The PI has also identified a mechanism by which endothelial
cells project small cytoplasmic extensions into the lumen of the microvessels in
the activated state. These observations are important in regards to muscle
fatigue. The proposed research serves as a direct expansion of the current
analysis. The future analysis is directed at the following: 1) Expansion of the
current analysis to the case of contracting muscle. During contraction, the
skeletal muscle fibers compress the blood vessels of the microcirculation and
therefore strongly influence the blood flow to the organ. 2) Identification of
the biomechanical mechanism by which relatively few circulating white blood
cells exert a significant influence on the perfusion of muscle microcirculation.
3) To study the influence of cytoplasm extensions on endothelial cells lining
blood vessels on perfusion of the muscle microcirculation. The PI will continue
to carry out the experiments on skeletal muscle in rats, so that all prev ious
information serves as a basis for the future work without uncertainties
regarding species differences. ***