* 9512844
* U.S.-Japan Collaborative Project on Post-Earthquake         Reconstruction Strategies
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* George Lee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9512844 Lee This is a three-year continuing award supporting a collaboration
between engineering research centers in the United States and Japan. The U.S.
principal investigator is Professor George C. Lee, Director of the National
Center for Earthquake Engineering Research (NCEER), State University of New
York, Buffalo. This award is jointly funded by the Japan Program of the Division
of International Programs and the Earthquake Hazard Mitigation Program, Division
of Civil and Mechanical Structures, Directorate for Engineering. During the
course of this cooperative project, the investigators in NCEER will work with
researchers in the International Center for Disaster Mitigation Engineering
(INCEDE), University of Tokyo, led by its Director, Professor Tsuneo Katayama.
They will attempt to identify exemplary strateeies for post-earthquake
reconstruction and recovery that have potential cross-societal applicability
through coordinated and cooperative case studies in the United States and Japan.
The devastating events in Northridge, California in 1994 and in Kobe, Japan in
1995 have shown that dense population centers are very vulnerable to major
earthquakes. These events further show that earthquake mitigation research
efforts to improve design and construction methods and emergency response
policies and procedures can substantially reduce the loss of life and damage to
buildings and lifelines. By convening a multidisciplinary team of engineers and
social scientists to address these issues, this U.S.-Japan project will build
upon the "systems integrated" approach in earthquake hazard mitigation research
implementation that has been the underlying theme of the NCEER since 1986. For
the most part, this grant supports research visits in Japan by U.S. senior
investigators, postdoctoral researcheps, and graduate students. Scientists from
several universities and research institutes are involved in the work of both
centers, NCEER and INCEDE, thus giving a national character to the cooperative
work. ***