* 9512333
* Proposal for Establishing a Mobile Gas-Exchange and         Emission Research Facility at the School of the Environment, Duke University
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,02/29/2000
* Gabriel Katul, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 02/29/2000
* USD 274,605.00

A major recent thrust in research has focused on ecosystem emission,
deposition, and uptake of greenhouse and trace gases. This research is needed
because predictions forecast that a doubling of carbon dioxide (CO2) will have a
significant impact on ecosystem processes and productivity, and because the
natural emission or deposition of gases is critical in regulating air pollution.
To achieve understanding of processes in both areas, efforts are being made to
evaluate the effect of alteration od ecosystems in the vicinity of industrial,
urban, and agricultural areas. As a result, many scientific and government
agencies have formed programs to support research on the interaction between the
soil, biosphere, and atmosphere in relation to greenhouse and trace gas
production, consumption, or deposition. Duke University proposes to develop a
mobile laboratory that will be used for both basic and more applied research on
the mechanisms of the emission and uptake of gases between the soil-biosphere
and the atmosphere. The integrated laboratory will include state-of the art
trace gas analyzers, water vapor and CO2 gas analyzers, ultra-sonic anemometers,
leaf-level porometery, a geoprobe, time domain reflectometers, xylem heat flux
systems, and a wide range of environmental monitoring devices such as net
radiometers, short and long-wave radiation sensors. The data from this
instrument array will be collected by a central work station within the mobile
laboratory. Instruments will be housed in a research vehicle containing two
movable towers and a soil probe which will permit a rapid installation of the
sensors at remote sites high in tree canopies and deep in the soil regolith. The
great advantage of a mobile facility is that it can support research at many
experimental s ites and can be used concurrently for several projects, each of
which requires periodic gas flux measurements rather than continuous monitoring.
With its flexibility and enhanced capabilities, this facility will allow
researchers both within the School of the Environment and throughout the
research community to address key scientific questions that range across the
physical, biological, and chemical sciences in new ways. It will enhance the
investigation of such fundamental questions as 1) how environmental conditions
(e.g., mean meteorological conditions, energy, and moisture content) control
leaf- level gas diffusion, 2) how the air flow inside the forest canopy
interacts with the air flow above the car,opy to disperse or deposit greenhouse
and trace gases, 3) how atmospheric pressure and subsurface soil processes
control gas and moisture storage and flux in a variety of ecosystems. Questions
about the amount of biogenic or other trace gases emitted or consumed by
ecosystems will be directly measured by the equipment requested for this
facility. We believe that the mobile laboratory will have a profound impact not
only on the interdisciplinary research but on teaching at Duke University's new
School of the Environment. Students interested in ecology, biogeochemistry,
ecotoxicology, water resources, air quality, forestry, and wetlands will benefit
from the opportunities of using the new technology in research projects and
coursework, analyzing data from a wide range of ecosystems, and acquiring
experience in multidisciplinary field experiments. These students include
undergraduate environmental science majors, young graduate-level environmental
management students, mid-career professionals in Duke's continuing education
program, and future Ph.D researchers. Finally, we expect that the laboratory
will attract further funding from DOE and EPA and open new sources for funding
from private industry research interests, the Forest Service, the Agriculture
Research Service of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA), and the
National Science Foundation (NSF).