* 9512811
* Genetic Dissection of Disturbances of Meiosis and           Spermatogenesis in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Terrence Lyttle, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* linda hyman
* 10/31/2001
* USD 687,000.00

9512811 Lyttle The Segregation distorter (SD) system of meiotic drive in
Drosophila melanogaster is important for several reasons: 1) It is involved in
the regulation of an important developmental process which is relevant to many
eukaryotic organisms, 2) It involves the interaction of regulation of chromatin
structure in products from genetic elements in both euchromatin and
B-heterochromatin and thus can be considered a model for such interactions, 3)
Knowledge of the physical and genetic map of the responder region (Rsp) can
provide information on the centromere and adjacent DNA sites regulating position
effect variegation and 4) because the SD system exists in a stable polymorphic
equilibrium, it offers an excellent model for the evolution of meiosis and
spermatogenesis. Two groups of experiments designed to answer questions about
the structure and function of the SD system in Drosophila will be done. The
first will focus on DNA mapping and cloning of the Rsp region of the 2R
heterochromatin. The map will be used to define both genetic deletions and
heterochromatic DNA clones which will be introduced. The constructs will be used
to quantitate the dependence of SD-mediated sperm dysfunction on Rsp structure.
The second is designed to introduce DNA "tags which will allow E(SD) to be
cloned. %%% Cytogenetic, molecular and population genetic information will be
integrated to provide a dynamic picture of the SD system, its effect on the
evolution of gametogenesis and chromosome structure, and its potential as a tool
for artificially controlling sex ratio in biocontrol schemes as a long term
goal. The more immediate goal is to characterize the DNA structure and function
of the second chromosome heterochromatin of Drosophila melanogaster in as much
detail as possible. **(