* 9512686
* Effects of Quantum Fields on Black Holes
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Paul Anderson, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Isaacson
* 11/30/1997
* USD 20,000.00

A new research program in theoretical gravitational physics will be undertaken
by Prof. Anderson. He will address three important issues relating to the study
of black holes. These are the questions: What is the end point of the black hole
evaporation process? What happens to the information about how a black hole
formed? How do quantum fields alter the thermodynamic properties of a black
hole? The investigations will center around the ways in which quantum fields
alter the spacetime geometry both inside and outside of a black hole. These
alterations affect the thermodynamic properties of the black hole. They also
have a strong influence on what is left after the black hole finishes
evaporating. What happens to the information about how a black hole formed may
depend on both the spacetime geometry inside its event horizon and what is left
after the black hole finishes evaporating. Another proposed investigation is the
development of a practical way to make computations in quantum field theory when
the mode equation for free quantized fields is not completely separable. The
results should significantly enhance our ability to study the details of
processes such as black hole evaporation, the decay of a strong electric field
due to particle production, and particle production due to heavy ion collisions
in nuclear physics.