* 9512599
* Acquisition of a Tandem Accelerator for the Support of      Materials Research Programs
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* John Williams, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 322,390.00

9512599 Weete The ion accelerator laboratory at the Nuclear Science Center at
Auburn University will be upgraded through acquisition of a tandem accelerator
equipped with a radio frequency (rf) exchange ion source, a high voltage source
injector system, and a high energy quadrupole focusing lens. The new machine
replaces a twenty-six year old accelerator which is nearing the end of its
serviceable life. The accelerator laboratory functions primarily in support of
various materials research programs in different colleges and departments. These
efforts focus primarily on thin film systems and interactions, such as silicon
carbide and III-V compound semiconductor epitaxial film characterization, ion-
induced radiation damage in insulators, materials oxidation processes, and
electronics packaging and diamond film technology. Analysis techniques available
in the accelerator laboratory for materials studies include proton induced x-ray
emission (PIXE), Rutherford backscattering spectrometry (RBS), light ion
channeling (LIC), fast neutron activation analysis (FNAA), and some ion
implantation capabilities. Most of these techniques will be available in the
upgraded facility, and the new machine will facilitate development of expanded
analysis capabilities such as neutron activation/time-of-flight techniques. %%%
The new tandem accelerator will allow the laboratory to provide efficient
research support for materials science programs through improved access to
modern analytical techniques. It replaces an ancient unit which currently
consumes large material and human resources for its maintenance. The accelerator
laboratory has a long history of collaborative research with nearby minority
institutions, and the program has a long-term commitment in support of
educational opportunities for minority students in the physical sciences which
the new accelerator will enhance. ***