* 9512199
* Development of Apparatus for Nuclear Astrophysics Utilizing Stable and Unstable Nuclear Beams
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* James Kolata, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Rolf M. Sinclair
* 08/31/1997
* USD 218,000.00

A unique type of apparatus will be developed jointly by the University of
Michigan and Notre Dame University that will permit studies of low-energy
nuclear reactions key to better understanding the production of energy and
synthesis of the elements in astrophysical processes. The latter include BigBang
nucleosynthesis and the production of energy and heavy elements in stars and
supernovae (exploding stars). Improved nuclear measurements will help clarify
some of the outstanding mysteries that exist in astrophysics. The proposed
apparatus will consist of a small but highintensity electrostatic ion
accelerator coupled to a specially designed, high-efficiency magnetic detection
device. The latter will consist of two large superconducting magnets which will
be designed and built in the U.S. as a collaborative effort with a U.S.
industrial partner. The apparatus proposed will be part of a Midwest low-energy
nuclear accelerator facility located at the University of Notre Dame. A unique
feature of the facility will be the production of relatively intense, short-
lived unstable nuclear beams for the study of reactions related to explosive
nucleosynthesis. The new apparatus will also be available for new types of
applied research in atomic physics, biophysics and materials science. It will
serve a dozen or more universities and colleges in the immediate area with
extensive participation by undergraduates, graduate students, and faculty from
those institutions (U. Michigan, U. Notre Dame, Oberlin College, Ohio State U.,
U. Indiana-So. Bend, U.W. Kentucky, Hope College, MSU, U. Illinois,...).