* 9512208
* Acquisition of a Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Time of   Flight (MALD-TOF) Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* George Newkome, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 164,444.00

The instrument requested in this proposal is the Bruker BIFLEX Matrix-Assisted
LASER Desorption Time-of Flight Mass Spectrometer (MALD-TOF-MS) with HIMAS
Detector, FAST accessory, SCOUT multisample membrane target and observation
optics, an Nd:YAG laser and PolyMASS software for Mn, Mw and polydispersity
index measurements with easy comparison to GPC data. The Bruker BIFLEX is
specifically designed for research in bio-analytical and polymer sciences.
External mass calibration for both molecular ions and structurally significant
fragment ions is typically 0.01% to 0.1%. The BIFLEX is extremely sensitive and
provides molecular weight information for sub picomoles of a sample. The HIMAS
detector, when used in place of an EM detector, provides increased high-mass
sensitivity and is recommended by the manufacturer for the linear analysis of
high mass molecules, particularly polymers. This detector has a dynamic range of
20,000 to 150,000, providing maximum mass accuracy. The use of the mass
spectrometer will be overseen by the Institute for Biomolecular Science (IBS)
with the daily use, maintenance and scheduling of the instrument supervised by a
Research Assistant Professor and graduate research assistant in the new
Bioscience Facility at University of South Florida. IBS is a consortium of 78
scientists from four USF colleges and research institutes in the Tampa Bay area
that promotes research interactions that cross the boundaries between biology,
chemistry and molecular biology and offers a mechanism for collaboration. In
addition, Dr. Rebecca O'Malley will act as a consultant on all the projects
included in this proposal. She holds a Ph.D. in mass spectrometry and operates
an active mass spectrometry research program that has been in existence since
1980 at the USF. She also established a research program in multiphoton
ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry and, more recently, one in laser
desorption time-of-flight mass spectrometry. Research projects using the MALD-
TOF-MS will center on the characterization of polymers, peptides and proteins.
Dr. Newkome (PI), Drs. O'Malley, Harmon, and Garcia-Rubio, concentrate their
efforts on polymers. Their projects involve the characterization of novel
dendrimeric polymers- the investigation of the factors that affect cation
attachment to synthetic polymers; radiation resistant polymer scintillators and
optical polymers that optimize optical radiation resistance in scintillator and
fiber cladding polymers; and the characterization of complex polymer molecules
such as copolymers and branched polymers. Drs. Solomonson, Barber, Neame and
Ferreira focus their efforts in the area of protein and peptide
characterization. Typical experiments include the analysis of disulfide bond
arrangements, analysis of sites of post-translational modification, and the
conformation of attachment of prosthetic groups. The requested instrumentation
has a broad mass range that is small peptides and polymers, as well as intact
proteins and larger polymers. Its extreme accuracy at low mass levels is
critical for synthetic chemists and investigators who are defining peptide
fragmentation patterns. These features make this instrument uniquely suited to
the research activities conducted at this institution. Furthermore, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no mass spectrometer at USF or in the Tampa Bay area.
This is a serious problem for education and research at this large (35,000
students) Research II university. Having a MALD-TOF Mass Spectrometer will allow
the integration of "hands-on" experience into established graduate courses,
increasing students' understanding of the applications of MS to chemical and
biochemical problems. In addition, the instrument will be available for thesis
and dissertation research and thus improve the quality of the graduate student
investigations. When IBS faculty were polled about the instrument most needed at
USF to augment ongoing research and att ract excellent young faculty and
students, they overwhelming voted for a mass spectrometer that could handle
large polymers and peptides. For some of the protein and polymer chemists the
need is central to their research programs and for others it will allow them to
expand into new directions. The use of mass spectrometry for large synthetic
polymers and biomolecules is relatively recent but is a growing and exciting
field. The combination of cooperative, diverse and interactive scientists, large
graduate and research programs and the participation of the Institute for
Biomolecular Science should ensure that this instrumentation is used to its
fullest extent to improve the biomolecular science program at USF.