* 9512937
* A Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope for           Biological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Mark Farmer, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1998
* USD 200,250.00

The proposal is for the acquisition of a Field-Emission Gun Scanning Electron
Microscope (FEG-SEM) and associated X-ray microanalysis system. Field emission
electron sources are very stable even at low accelerating voltages (1 KeV) and
their usage in a SEM greatly enhances the capabilities of a FEG-SEM when
compared with instruments that use a thermionic emitter electron source. The
most significant advantage of a FEG-SEM is its ability to image specimens that
are below the limits of resolution of a conventional SEM. A FEG-SEM can have a
resolution that is 1 to 1.5 orders of magnitude greater than a comparable
conventional SEM. The fact that a FEG-SEM can operate at low accelerating
voltages means that one is often able to examine samples that do not require
much additional conductive coating. Despite the large number of researchers at
the University of Georgia who routinely use scanning electron microscopy, a SEM
of suitable quality for high resolution/low KeV work is presently not available
anywhere on campus. The ability to create SEM images of microscopic specimens is
of critical importance to a wide variety of researchers at the University of
Georgia. This is especially important when one is working at very high
magnifications where the coating itself may be what is visualized and not the
object of study. As configured, this FEG-SEM would also enable researchers to
conduct elemental analyses using EDS X-ray at a much higher level of precision
than is possible with the Center's present instrument. A final advantage that a
FEGSEM has over the Center's present SEM is the ability to capture the images
digitally in a high resolution format that can then be further processed or
analyzed either on the Center's imaging computers or on any computer linked to
the Ethernet. The Center for Ultrastructural Research is the central facility
that provides University of Georgia researchers a variety of specialized
equipment and expertise in the area of electron and light mic roscopy. For the
past five years the Center has assisted with an average of 60 different research
laboratories representing 25 different departments or academic units per year.
The Center also teaches formal courses (Scanning Electron Microscopy,
Transmission Electron Microscopy, Techniques in Modern Microscopy) to both
graduate and undergraduates students. The addition of a FEG-SEM to the Center
would greatly enhance the research capabilities of those working with both
biological and non-biological specimens and is seen as a critical acquisition in
ensuring that researchers and students have access to state of the art imaging
instruments.