* 9512501
* Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer for Structural    Analysis of Biological Macromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Linda Nicholson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 400,000.00

We propose to establish a Biomolecular NMR Center in Cornell's Biotechnology
Building through acquisition of a state-of-the-art 600 MHz high resolution
multinuclear NMR spectrometer, to be dedicated for research and training in
structural biology. The interdisciplinary biophysics program at Cornell is
highly committed to studies of macromolecular structure. This group has
established internationally recognized facilities and faculty for X-ray
crystallography, theoretical/computational studies of acromolecular structure
and dynamics, and biochemical and molecular genetic studies of protein function.
The proposed 600 MHz NMR spectrometer will complement existing resources by
providing capabilities for solution studies of structure and dynamics. A single
500 MHz NMR spectrometer which is not equipped with the latest technological
advances (e.g. fourth radio frequency channel, XYZ pulsed field gradient
amplifiers and probes, 10 mm triple resonance probe and enhanced room
temperature shims) is housed in Cornell's Chemistry NMR Facility. This machine
is routinely booked to full capacity with an extensive user base composed of
both "small molecule" and "macromolecule" users. Past progress in solution NMR
studies of proteins at Cornell has occurred largely through utilization of
outside resources either in the laboratories of collaborators or at public
facilities. Over the past decade, triple- and quadruple-resonance
multidimensional NMR spectroscopy has become a critical component of modern
structural biology. In order to keep pace in this accelerating field of
research, and to prepare our undergraduate and graduate students for careers in
one of the fastest growing areas of science, this technology must be brought to
Cornell. The Director of the Biomolecular NMR Center will be Professor Linda
Nicholson who joined the Cornell faculty last fall. Professor Nicholson brings
up-to-date expertise in the application of multi-dimensional NMR to dynamical
and stru ctural studies of proteins, as evidenced by her recent work on the
HIV-l protease performed at the NIH. She brings knowledge of the latest double-,
triple- and quadruple- resonance techniques for application to biological
macromolecules. This expertise is highly complemented at Cornell by the long-
established programs of Harold Scheraga and Robert Oswald that extensively
utilize multi-dimensional NMR for structural studies of proteins. progress in
these research groups has been made only Day to day direction of the facility
will be provided by a staff scientists who will assist and train users, provide
technical support and facilitate collaborative interactions. External review of
the NMR facility will be provided by the visiting committee described in section
5d. Allocation of resources will be decided by a committee that consists of the
director, the staff scientist, one major user and one other user. Scheduling of
spectrometer time will be the responsibility of the staff scientist. Cost
sharing for this project will be provided by funds from the College of Arts and
Sciences and from the Program in Molecular Structure. Nicholson, Oswald and
Scheraga comprise the "critical mass" of major users that will launch the first
structural and dynamics studies in the proposed Biomolecular NMR Center. Several
additional faculty members, including Begley, Jelinski, Rodriguez, and
Feigenson, have a demonstrated expertise in solution NMR spectroscopy, and will
comprise a strong core of additional users. Research activities encompass
investigation of two ubiquitous biophysical switching mechanisms (protein
phosphorylation and GTP binding, Nicholson and Oswald), protein folding and
protein- protein interactions (Scheraga), the basic forces that hold proteins
together (observing the effects of pressure on protein flexibility, Ealick),
basic forces governing lipid behavior (Feigenson), the role of structure and
dynamics in mechanisms of enzyme catalysis (Begley), and the bi ophysical basis
of regulation of gene transcription (Lis and Tye), the biophysical basis of
high-performance biopolymers (Jelinski), and interactions between bioactive
natural products and DNA (Rodriguez). Methodologies include gradient- enhanced
multidimensional experiments to obtain sequential assignments, distance
restraints and dihedral angle restraints for structure determination and
relaxation parameters for protein dynamics. Studies of larger and less soluble
systems will also be possible with the requested instrumentation. In addition to
scientific research, the NMR facility will provided educational opportunities
through formal courses and training sessions, through graduate and post-graduate
research projects and through independent studies and field trips for
undergraduate students.