* 9512438
* Acquisition of High-Resolution Electron Microscopy          Facilities for The Johns Hopkins University
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Kevin Hemker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 06/30/1999
* USD 680,000.00

9512438 Veblen This Academic Research Infrastructure grant provides $680,000 as
one-half support of the costs of acquiring and installing a new high-resolution
transmission electron microscope with a field emission gun (FEG-HRTEM) at The
Johns Hopkins University. Matching funds will be provided through the Keck
Foundation. Funding is split between the Earth Sciences Facilities and
Instrumentation Program's ARI allocation and Engineering's Civil and Mechanical
System's ARI allocation in amounts of $570,000 and $110,000, respectively. The
need for HRTEM facilities at Johns Hopkins University extends beyond traditional
departmental and divisional boundaries and includes a broad range of engineering
and scientific disciplines. This microscope will be the keystone of an
interdepartmental/interdivisional electron microscopy laboratory that will
benefit Hopkins researchers in biomedical engineering, chemical engineering,
chemistry, earth and planetary sciences, environmental engineering, materials
science and engineering, mechanical engineering, and physics. Specifically, a
300 keV atomic resolution TEM with a field emission gun capable of point-to-
point characterization of material at the nanoscale (&lt;0.2 nm) and equipped
with a high current probe capable of extremely high resolution (~ 1 nm) chemical
analyses will be acquired and installed. Development of many advanced materials
and the advancement of fundamental understanding in environmental chemistry,
geochemistry, and physics are occurring at nanometer or even atomic dimensions
and research in these areas is highly dependent on the ability to observe and
characterize solids at these length scales. Examples of specific research
projects that will be conducted in the new electron microscopy facility are
processing and characterization of nanoscale materials, dislocation core
structures in intermetallic alloys, environmental chemistry (addressing sorption
of toxic metals and other pollutants on soil minerals), development and
characterization of rare-earth magnetostictive materials, nanoscale observations
of porous semiconductors, the identification of failure mechanisms in materials
with applications to manufacturing processes, and investigations in crystal
chemistry and geochemistry. ***