* 9512813
* Improved Processing Technolgy for the Recovery of Boron     Minerals from Saturated Salt Solutions, U.S.-Turkey         Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Jan Miller, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 01/31/1999
* USD 23,670.00

Description: This project supports a cooperative project by a US scientist, Dr.
Jan Miller, from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, and Dr. G. Onal from the Mining Engineering Department,
Istanbul Technical University, Turkey. The research aims at improving the
understanding of the floating chemistry of boron minerals, to make more
efficient use of boron resources, and to minimize environmental impact of the
process operations. Specifically, recent studies at the U. of Utah have
identified the importance of surface charge and collector colloid adsorption
phenomena in the selective flotation of soluble salts, and the significance of
these findings in the flotation of boron minerals will be examined. Based on
this flotation chemistry information, a process strategy will be developed for
the more effective recovery of these boron minerals by flotation technology.
Plant samples obtained from boron processing plants in the U.S. and Turkey will
be used to examine the viability of flotation technology for boron recovery.
Scope: This project allows cooperation of two well known scientists, whose
capabilities complement each other, to do important scientific work; they will
be joined by a young American scientist at the U. of Utah and another at I.T.U.
in Istanbul. The results of the project are expected to contribute towards the
development of a flotation separation strategy for more effective recovery of
boron minerals from saturated solutions. The U.S. is the largest producer of
boron compounds while Turkey has the largest boron reserves in the world. Both
countries will benefit from this collaboration. This project meets a number of
important objectives of the Division of International Programs.