* 9512331
* Acquisition of 400 MHz Nuclear Magnetic Resonance           Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* David Vander Velde, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 221,905.00

This proposal outlines the need at the University of Kansas for a new 400 MHz
NMR spectrometer. This instrument will fill the dual role of augmenting an
existing 500 MHz instrument, which is running at capacity, and superseding the
older of two existing 300 MHz instruments (11 years old and increasingly
unreliable). The instrument would be housed in the university-wide NMR
Laboratory under the supervision of two experienced NMR spectroscopists, who
will maintain it, train users, and perform many of the more complex experiments.
Approximately 100 graduate students, postdocs, and undergraduates will use the
instrument for chemical and biochemical research annually. The instrument
requested is a Bruker DRX-400 with a UNIX (Silicon Graphics Indy) based data
system and the capability to perform all of the major liquids NMR experiments.
These include inverse (HMQC, HMBC) and spin- lock (ROESY, HOHAHA) experiments
which can currently only be performed on the 500 and are much in demand. The
lack of a versatile alternative instrument currently constitutes a serious
bottleneck for this large and diverse NMR user group. The 400 MHz instrument is
highly suitable for molecules up to the complexity of small peptides, which
includes most of the samples generated by the major user group of ten faculty
whose research programs are described herein. The NMR Lab staff, in consultation
with users, will allocate time on the two high field instruments in order to
ensure high quality results, optimum efficiency, and equitable access. In
addition to more throughput and fewer delays in data acquisition, increased
hands-on involvement by graduate students and postdocs in more complex
experiments will be a positive result of the new instrument in the NMR Lab--
making these individuals more proficient at practical NMR spectroscopy. The
instrument will also be used in various graduate and undergraduate courses,
including hands-on use in the junior level physical chemistry lab oratory.
Besides producing students versed in using a modern instrument, the proposed
instrument will aid in recruiting and retaining faculty and graduate students.
NMR is essential to many areas of chemical and biochemical research and access
to it is a key component of the research environment for individuals working in
these areas. The proposed instrument is especially important for adequate
support of young investigators who have recently joined the faculty or who will
be hired in the near future.