* 9512110
* Kin Recognition in Polyphenic Species
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* David Pfennig, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* David Vleck
* 08/31/1998
* USD 140,000.00

Pfennig, David 9512110 Abstract This research will use amphibians as a model
system to understand how and why certain animals identify their relatives.
Larval Arizona tiger salamanders are unusual in that they occur in nature as two
distinct types: a 'typical' morph and a 'cannibal' morph. The cannibal morph is
produced only when larvae are crowded at high densities, and this morph feeds
primarily on other tiger salamanders. When housed with smaller larvae that
differ in relatedness, cannibals preferentially consume less related
individuals, both in the laboratory and in the field. This discrimination is
most pronounced among larvae from families that are especially likely to produce
cannibal morphs. This research will test two non-exclusive evolutionary
hypotheses on why cannibals recognize their relatives. First, by not eating a
relative, with whom the cannibal shares some genes due to common descent,
cannibals can indirectly increase their own genetic representation or
"inclusive" fitness in the population. Alternatively, cannibals may avoid eating
kin to lessen their chances of dying from disease. In nature, a deadly bacterium
can infect these animals, and cannibalism is an especially efficient way of
acquiring the disease. Moreover, this infectious agent may be highly
transmissible among close relatives, perhaps because kin have similar immune
systems. This research will use field observations and field and laboratory
experiments to test specific predictions made by each hypothesis. Tiger
salamanders are an ideal model system for separating the direct and indirect
inclusive fitness consequences of kin discrimination. This study thus promises
to help resolve why certain animals recognize kin, which is important to current
theories concerning the evolution of altruism. The research will also increase
understanding of the role of kinship in disease transmission.