* 9512949
* Microscopic Imaging Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Mariano A. Garcia-Blanco, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 32,956.00

This proposal requests partial funding for a Microscopic Imaging Laboratory to
be used by members of the Departments Molecular Cancer Biology of the Duke
University Medical Center and Department of Botany of Duke University. The users
already have a Zeiss AxioSkop microscope outfitted for fluorescence microscopy,
which was purchased with funds from Duke University. This application proposes
to purchase a Hamamatsu cooled charged coupled device (CCD) camera with a
thermal printer and monitor that would provide the capability of high resolution
and high sensitivity imaging. Accessories that would greatly enhance the
flourescent capabilities of the instrument and the camera are also proposed.
Moreover, a Z-axis stepper is proposed in order to be able to obtain 3D
reconstructions. Two areas of great interest are represented by the work
proposed here: first, the understanding of key regulatory events in the cell
cycle of eukaryotes and second, the unraveling of the architecture of the
eukaryotic nucleus. The work on the cell cycle is carried on by Drs. Lew,
Garrett, Horowitz, Kombluth and Swenson. The relationship between regulatory
events in the cell cycle and cellular morphology is studied by Dr. Lew using the
baker's yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Dr. Swenson is elucidating signalling
pathways controlling entry into meiosis in surf clam and amphibian oocytes. Dr.
Horowitz's laboratory focuses on the regulation of the cell cycle in mammalian
cells. The regulation of DNA synthesis as an integral decision of cycling cells
is investigated in Xenopous laevis eggs by Dr. Kornbluth. Work on nuclear
architecture is ongoing in the laboratories of Drs. Garcia Blanco, Kohorn and
Kornbluth. The project in Dr. Garcia Blanco's laboratory focuses on the
relationship between nuclear architecture and the machineries that processes
pre-rRNA and pre-mRNAs. Dr. Kohorn, in collaboration with Dr. Garcia Blanco, is
investigating the nuclear architecture in Chlamydomonas. Th is organisms
provides the possibility of doing biochemical and genetic analysis of nuclear
functions and is much better than Saccharomyces cerevisiae for studies that
visualize nuclear structure. These projects require precise image acquisition
and storage systems. The continuation of the work requires a high sensitivity
and high resolution camera to elucidate new cellular structures.