* 9512370
* Equipment for Chemical Analysis to Serve Interdisciplinary  Research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,04/30/1999
* Dulasiri Amarasiriwardena, Hampshire College
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 04/30/1999
* USD 412,785.00

An interdisciplinary group of chemistry, biology and geology faculty at
Hampshire College will use recent advances in analytical and separation
chemistry to study a varied yet unified group of problems, centering on the
chemical analysis of natural and anthropogenic materials. Because of its unique
interdisciplinary structure and strong history of involving students in
research, Hampshire College's School of Natural Science is in a strong position
to take advantage of new technologies for interdisciplinary research as well as
for research training. For example, in order to track the path of trace elements
such as zinc into teeth and understand nutritional stress, a biological
anthropologist, geologist and chemist will collaborate in chemical analysis of
the degree to which nutrient elements in dietary sources predict the
concentrations of these elements in teeth. A chemist, an ecologist and a
geologist will follow the different species of aluminum in a local pond. The
interdisciplinary focus of research and research training at Hampshire College
argue strongly for a widely accessible, flexible chemical analysis laboratory.
Funds are requested for purchase and update of the equipment listed below that
will enable analysis of heavy metals, light metals, and organic compounds: 1) An
Inductively Coupled Plasma Mass Spectrometer (ICP-MS). Along with an existing
AA, an ICP-MS will provide increased sensitivity and multi-element capabilities
in the quantitative analysis of trace metal concentrations in diverse biological
and environmental materials. 2) A High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC)
system, to replace an old system, for quantitative analysis of biological and
environmental systems for organic compounds and for the separation of biological
compounds of interest to physiologists and ecologists. 3) A Fourier Transform
Infrared Spectrophotometer (FTIR), to replace older units, along with
instrumentation already available (NMR, GC-MS) will enable qualitative, and in
some cases quantitative, structural information for chemical species isolated by
HPLC. 4) A Flow-Injection Analyzer (FIA) will allow on-line analysis of water-
soluble compounds such as nutrients, rapidly analyzing for multiple nutrients in
numerous samples. 5) A Gas Chromatograph/Isotope Ratio Mass Spectrometer (GC/IR-
MS) will aid in separation, isolation and identification of organic compounds;
the IR capability will enable stable-isotope studies on animals in vivo. 6)
Auxiliary equipment for sample preparation and data manipulation include a
microwave digester and other sample preparation equipment and computers to
control experiments and for data analysis. Chemical analysis is an
interdisciplinary meeting ground, central to both faculty and student research
in biology and the environment. The following project areas form one coherent
focus of research in interdisciplinary chemical applications: 1) development of
analytical techniques for characterization of metal species (applied to problems
in aqueous environmental problems), 2) remineralization of nutrients from the
benthos of Waquoit Bay, a Land Margin Ecosystem Research site, 3) volcanic
geochemistry (magma mixing in the origin of granitic rocks), 4) plant-insect
chemical ecology (studies of plant chemicals produced as deterrents to insect
feeding), 5) analysis of nutrient elements in teeth in relation to known diet
and 6) nutritional biochemistry of proteins in ruminants. The new instruments
will support faculty and undergraduate research and research training in a
variety of settings. Students' research training will be enhanced through use of
instrumentation in advanced courses, research-type projects in courses, and
senior theses. Increased collaborative faculty research (involving students as
well) will improve faculty productivity.