* 9512595
* Acquisition of Biophysical and Computational Instruments for Studies of Proteins and Protein-Ligand Interactions
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Wim G. Hol, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 197,794.00

This proposal requests biophysical instrumentation and computing equipment to
enable a broad interdisciplinary investigation of fundamental aspects of protein
folding and protein-ligand interactions. The participating research groups are
from the Biomolecular Structure Center and the departments of Biochemistry,
Biological Structure, and Bioengineering at the University of Washington. The
dramatic increase in the power of computers over the last five years has ushered
in a truly exciting new era in structural molecular biology. There is now hope
of understanding the multitude of complex interatomic interactions in proteins
at the level of protein folding and proteinligand interactions. The development
of adequate computational models, however, requires detailed biophysical
characterization of relevant experimental systems. We propose to take a combined
biophysical and computational approach to understanding the interactions which
underlie the structure and function of proteins. Spectroscopic methods will be
used to probe the kinetics and thermodynamics of protein folding and protein-
ligand interactions in detail. These results will be used to develop
computational models that have as their long range goals the understanding of
the rules linking amino acid sequences, protein 3-dimensional structures, and
protein-ligand interactions. The work described in this proposal has three main
thrusts. The first part is focused on understanding the dependence of protein
folding on amino acid sequence, using extremely simple model proteins. The
second part is focused on the detailed understanding of a model proteinligand
interaction: the binding of biotin to streptavidin. The third part seeks to
extend knowledge gained in parts one and two to develop more general methods for
experimentally and computationally charactelizing a wide valiety of protein
ligand interactions, and for understanding the "restricted folding" of a short
peptide which is enclosed by a larger multimeri c protein assembly. The links
between three areas are not merely conceptual; the biophysical and computational
methods required to address all three issues are highly overlapping. In each
case the range of scientific questions currently accessible is limited by our
current inability to experimentally determine such key kinetic parameters as on-
rates and off-rates and to monitor protein folding reactions. We are similarly
limited by current computational resources as to the size and complexity of
model systems which may be simulated. The requested instrumentation therefore
consists of (1) absorption and circular dichroism spectrometers with associated
stopped-flow apparatus to follow the thermodynamics and kinetics of protein
folding in solution, (2) surface plasmon resonance (SPR) apparatus which allows
exquisitely sensitive measurement of the kinetics of protein-ligand binding, and
(3) computer equipment to support the theoretical and predictive side of the
investigation as well as visualization of the model systems under study.