* 9512092
* Character Based Methods for Reconstructing the Evolutionary History of Natural Language
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Tandy Warnow, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/1999
* USD 161,000.00

We address the problem of inferring the evolutionary history of a set of natural
languages. The methodology we propose can be used when languages are described
by qualitative characters, where qualitative characters are functions (based
upon linguistic properties, such as sounds and lexical items) which define
partitions of the set of natural languages into distinct equivalence classes.
Evolutionary trees are also inferred for biological taxa described by
qualitative characters, and perhaps the most popular method for constructing
evolutionary trees in biology is based upon the parsimony criterion. We have
developed a methodology for encoding linguistic information as qualitative
characters and efficient algorithms for constructing the most parsimonious trees
for linguistic data which promise to provide robust and significantly more
informative trees than can be obtained using any of the previous methods to
date. A direct consequence of the methodology we are developing is the ability
to test hypotheses; in particular, this methodology enables the linguist to
determine whether the particular linguistic information is evolutionarily
relevant, and whether the interpretation of the information is correct. We will
produce algorithms and software which will quickly generate the most
parsimonious trees for a given data set. These methods have the promise of
greatly improving the ability of historical linguists to derive evolutionary
trees because of the following: Character data has not been fully used by
historical linguists, who have instead had to rely upon distance data or only
those characters which are completely directed. Character-based methods, since
based upon primary data. provide information about evolutionary history that
cannot reliably be obtained through the use of distance data (distances are
compressions of multi-dimensional information into a single dimension). The
methods we will develo p will probably return optimal trees in polynomial time,
and will also determine those aspects of phylogenetic trees which hold for all
solutions to the input.