* 9512962
* A Confocal Fluorescence Microscope for the Study of the     Cytoskeleton
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1997
* David Asai, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 11/30/1997
* USD 98,000.00

This is a group proposal to purchase a scanning laser confocal fluorescence
microscope. The microscope will be the centerpiece of a new Shared Facility for
Fluorescence Microscopy which will serve as the focus of the investigators'
research projects and as the key element in a new laboratory course for
undergraduates. Each of the six investigators studies aspects of the
cytoskeleton in a developing system, focussing on the elucidation of
cytoarchitectural remodeling and the organization of motile organelles. The goal
of all of the projects is to utilize high resolution fluorescence microscopy to
determine how the cytoskeletal components organize and re-organize during
development. Because of the complexity, thickness, and optical opacity of the
experimental systems used by the investigators (plant cells, sea urchin eggs and
embryos, Drosophila embryos, leech nervous system ciliated protozoans),
conventional immunofluorescence is often of insufficient quality for the
studies. The problem is solved by the application of confocal fluorescence
microscopy; this is clearly demonstrated in the preliminary confocal microscopy
work by the investigators. Unfortunately, the existing instruments, located in
other departments and which might be used for these studies, are heavily
oversubscribed and costly. Thus, although the investigators are asking
fascinating questions in excellent model systems and with highly specific tools,
they are severely limited by a lack of equipment. The group of investigators is
of the ideal size to share a microscope. And the microscope will prove to be a
natural stimulus for the continued close interactions among these research
groups. A second important feature of the proposal is that the confocal
microscope will be utilized in the education and training of many students.
Currently, among the six laboratories, there are 18 graduate students and 17
undergraduate students; these 35 students include 14 women, 4 African Americans,
and 4 Asian Ameri cans. The projects described here will be performed by these
students, and they will therefore be able to work directly with state-of-the-art
equipment. A second exciting way the equipment will be utilized is as the
centerpiece in a new undergraduate laboratory course, taught by the six
investigators. The course will enable undergraduates to design, implement, and
discuss mini-projects focussed on the cytoskeleton in developing systems using
conventional and confocal immunofluorescence microscopy.