* 9512324
* Acquisition of Scanning Electron Microscope and X-Ray       Diffractometer for Multi-disciplinary Research and Education
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Scott Dorman, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 111,601.00

9512324 Kumar A scanning electron microscope and x-ray diffractometer will be
acquired and utilized for multi-disciplinary research and education at the
University of South Alabama. These are two basic pieces of instrumentation for
materials research. The scanning electron microscope permits analysis of the
microstructural characteristics of materials whereas the X-ray diffractometer
identifies their crystallographic structural properties. The instrumentation
will be used in support of several research programs which include laser
deposition and processing of hard coatings and of high temperature
superconductor films, synthesis and characterization of molecular sieve zeolites
and of metal doped glassy carbon for electrocatalysis, and development of
crystal growth inhibitors for medicinal purposes. The instruments will also be
used to support curriculum development. Students in the Materials Science
Laboratory will utilize the instruments for several experiments on the
relationship between structure, properties, and processing of materials. %%% The
scanning electron microscope and X-ray diffractometer are essential instruments
for materials research. Both are entry level instruments, quite appropriate for
undergraduate and masters level education and research programs. As such they
will have a substantial positive impact upon the infrastructure at the
University of South Alabama. ***