* 9512014
* U.S.-France Cooperative Research:  Highly Parallel Branch-  and-Bound Algorithms for Solving Optimization Problems      (with INRIA)
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Shantanu Dutt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 04/30/2001
* USD 27,000.00

This three-year award will support U.S.-France cooperative research in numeric
computation with researchers Shantanu Dutt, Vipin Kumar at the University of
Minnesota and Catherine Roucairol at the Rocquencourt campus of INRIA (the
French National Institute for Research in Computer Science and Applied
Mathematics). The objectives of their research are to develop highly parallel
branch-and-bound algorithms for solving combinatorial optimization problems
(COPs) and software for optimization computations on parallel computers. Branch-
and-bound algorithms are used widely in solving combinatorial optimization
problems that appear in a variety of applications like computer vision, robot
motion planning, and integer programming and computer-aided design of very large
scale integrated circuits. These problems take a long time to solve. The U.S.
investigators propose to develop time and memory efficient techniques for
solving these problems using parallel processing. The U.S. investigators bring
to this research their expertise in parallel computing and techniques for
solving COPs using distributed memory machines and workstation clusters. This is
complemented by the French investigator's expertise in operations research and
her work on branch-and-bound algorithms techniques suitable for shared-memory
multiprocessors.