* 9512508
* Acquisition of a Transmission Electron Microscope for       Research and Research Training in the Liberal Arts College  Environment
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,09/30/2000
* Daniel Blackburn, Trinity College
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2000
* USD 251,000.00

Five natural science departments and programs at Trinity College (Hartford CT)
join to request matching funds from the NSF to purchase a Transmission Electron
Microscope (TEM) and ancillary equipment, in order to incorporate their use into
faculty research, undergraduate research training, and collaborative
faculty/student research at the college. As a highly-selective, secular,
liberal-arts institution, Trinity College maintains a long-standing commitment
both to quality undergraduate education and to faculty research. Trinity's
laboratory facilities are excellent, and its science faculty is highly
productive in research and scholarship. Nevertheless, until last year the
college entirely lacked electron microscope facilities. Drawing on its own
resmurces, the college has now procured and installed both a scanning electron
microscope (SEM) and an atomic force microscope (AFM), and has located and
designed space for a TEM facility. The college has made acquisition of the TEM a
top priority, and requests NSF assistance in order to make this acquisition a
reality. The presence of a TEM on campus will have a multitude of benefits. It
will (1) provide an important instrument needed in research by existing faculty;
(2) substantially increase the opportunities for research by Trinity
undergraduates; (3) permit development of upper-level courses that provide
training in EM techniques; (4) allow incorporation of EM technology into several
existing laboratory courses that deal with research methods; and (S) help the
college recruit science faculty for several key positions that will become
vacant during the next few years. It should also help the college in recruitment
of undergraduates to programs in the natural sciences and engineering. TEM
capabilities are needed for investigative research currently being conducted by
nine members of the science faculty in five departments/ programs: Biolog y,
Engineering, Neuroscience, Chemistry, and Physics. Each of these faculty members
would expect to develop collaborative student/ faculty research projects
involving TEM. In addition, acquisition of TEM technology will permit
development of two new research-oriented courses ("Electron Microscopy" and
"Principles of Crystallography and Transmission Electron Microscopy") and the
addition of new laboratory exercises for at least ten upper-level science
courses. Most students majoring in the sciences at Trinity choose careers in
scientific research or the health professions. Consequently, introduction of EM
technology will have a substantial impact on the college's ability to attract
and train students who will be research scientists and medical professionals
well into the next century. Trinity College is committed to providing 50%
matching funds.