* 9512338
* Construction of a Filtered Seawater System at the Baruch Field Station
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* David Bushek, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 72,000.00

This project will support an upgrade of the existing seawater system by
constructing a filtration system which will constitute a major advancement in
the ability of resident and visiting investigators to conduct important new
research at the Baruch Marine Field Laboratory (BMFL). With the reconstruction
of facilities destroyed by Hurricane Hugo in 1989 now complete, the availability
of laboratory space and supporting equipment has resulted in increases in user
traffic and a strong spirit of a new beginning. A diverse program of research
which ranges from landscape level ecology to cellular biology is supported at
the BMFL and new faculty associates have identified new directions and
approaches to studying the structural and functional aspects of estuarine
systems. Reconstruction of facilities included a seawater delivery system,
however, funds were not sufficient to include any filtration. Current research
is limited by high sediment and plankton loads in the existing, unfiltered
system. Many studies conducted at the facility require unfiltered raw water and
the careful design of the current system, partially funded by NSF, has provided
uninterrupted service for the past two years. An equal or greater number of
studies could be carried out at the facility if high quality filtered seawater
were also available. The enhanced opportunities for graduate student and
visiting researchers would undoubtedly increase use of the BMFL facility in the
years ahead. This project will allow the purchase installation operation and
maintenance of a large volume, seawater filtration system at the new Baruch
Marine Field Laboratory.