* 9512226
* Acquisition of MALDI-TOF Mass Spectrometer for the          Characterization of Biopolymers
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Richard Vallee, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 107,100.00

The Worcester Foundation is an independent nonprofit research institute devoted
to basic research in the biological sciences. Much of the research conducted in
the 22 laboratories at the Foundation deals with the functioning of proteins in
cells. To provide the high quality sequence information required for the
research programs at the Foundation, a protein chemistry core facility was
established in 1989. The core facility is used extensively by faculty members
for protein microsequencing projects, using two state-of- the-art
peptide/protein sequencers. The project described in this proposal involves the
acquisition of a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization (MALDI) mass
spectrometer with a time of flight (TOF) detector to be used as shared equipment
in the protein chemistry core facility. Applications of mass spectrometry (MS)
for protein analysis are developing rapidly and the mass spectrometer must now
be considered an integral component of the modern protein chemistry lab. The
Worcester Foundation core facility does not currently have a mass spectrometer.
The acquisition of a MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer will complement the existing
microsequencing capabilities and add important new capabilities to the protein
chemistry core facility. MALDI-MS is particularly useful for projects involving
biological samples because of its soft ionization technique (polypeptides are
not fragmented), the ability to resolve complex mixtures, sensitivity in the
femtomolar range and enhanced tolerance to sample impurities. The MALDI-TOF mass
spectrometer that has been selected is the LASERMAT 2000 manufactured by
Finnigan MAT Corp. The considerations affecting the selection of this particular
instrument are its sensitivity, resolution, high throughput, computer
capabilities and ease of operation. These characteristics are most desirable for
an instrument with multiple users that will be extensively used to analyze small
quantities of protein obtained from biologic al samples. Ten investigators have
described research projects that can benefit immediately from the incorporation
of MALDI- MS into their research programs. The number of users is expected to
increase as results are communicated within the Foundation community and as new
applications are developed. The projects described here cover a wide range of
subjects, including the development of advanced materials, studies of protein
damage and post-translational modification, the identification of regulatory
proteins in cells and chemical adducts formation resulting from environmental
proestrogens. Many of the projects combine mass spectrometry and peptide
sequencing to identify modified peptides and provide information regarding the
modification itself. Understanding the distribution of a protein between
modified and unmodified forms is a critical element in elucidating signal
transduction pathways and understanding the regulation of protein activities and
functions in cells. The femtomolar sensitivity of the instrument permits
analysis of very small quantities of cellular protein. The instrument will also
be used routinely to screen samples prior to sequencing. MALDI- MS can readily
establish the presence of contaminants in protein and peptide samples. In
addition, proteolytic digests of newly isolated proteins can be mass mapped and
compared to protein sequences in the existing databases, possibly leading to
much earlier identification of the protein and reduced sequencing requirements.
The instrument will also be used as an analytical tool to evaluate the integrity
of recombinant proteins with a much greater resolution than the commonly
employed electrophoretic systems. Plans are to develop MALDI- MS as a primary
sequencing tool, as well, using new degradation chemistries. Dr. John Leszyk,
the director of the protein chemistry core, will be responsible for instrument
supervision and the training of new instrument users. It is an ticipated that
the instrument will be used by at least half of the laboratories at the
institution and that users will include approximately 8 principal investigators,
26 postdoctoral associates, 8 graduate students and 4 professional research
assistants.