* 9512201
* Acquisition of 10 Broadband Seismographs for Enhancement    of TERRAscope
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Egill Hauksson, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 09/30/1999
* USD 450,000.00

9512201 Kanamori This grant provides partial support (48%) for the costs of
acquisition and installation of state-of-the-art digital seismographic stations
in southern California. Each station consists of a broadband Streickeisen
(STS-2) seismometer, a force balanced accelerometer, and a 6 channel 24 bit
Quanterra Inc. data logger. Five new stations are planned. This instrumentation
can measure seismic waves from small and large earthquakes as well as from
teleseisms and regional earthquakes accurately and completely. The new proposed
instrumentation complements the existing network of broadband seismographic
stations, called TERRAscope. Currently, TERRAscope consists of 17 stations. The
new instrumentation will significantly increase the spatial resolution of
TERRAscope by reducing current station spacing of 150 km by tens of kilometers
within the central part of the network. Currently, most existing earthquake data
for Southern California are of limited dynamic range or are measured over very
narrow frequency bands and thus their usefulness for general research is
limited. Furthermore, pre-TERRAscope instrumentation was not calibrated with
sufficient accuracy to provide quantitative amplitude data. The location of
these instruments in southern California provides the additional benefit of
being able to record large California earthquakes on scale and study their
source physics in unprecedented detail. The type of research and research
training to be conducted will be fundamental seismological studies of earth
structure and earthquake physics, as well as training of Ph.D. candidates and
postdoctoral fellows in observational and theoretical seismology. Examples of
the projects that will be carried out using the new data are: 1) determination
of the structure of the core mantle boundary; 2) imaging of the Pacific-North
America plate boundary in southern California; 3) studies of earthquake source
physics of both teleseisms around the world and regional earthquakes in the
Western US, 4) new theoretical and computational methods for modeling the
seismic data will be developed. This project will benefit from existing and
other proposed projects at Caltech related to the earthquake monitoring effort.
The Pacific Bell foundation (CalREN) is providing digital data transmission at
no cost. Other projects are providing software support and data processing
facilities. The Data Center of the Southern California Earthquake Center located
at Caltech and the IRIS DMS will distribute the data to the seismological
research community via INTERNET. ***