* 9512769
* Japan STA Program:  The Behavioral Ecology of the Mid-water Community of the Kuroshio Current
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,04/30/1998
* James Hunt, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 04/30/1998
* USD 3,000.00

9512769 Hunt This award supports a 24 month Science and Technology Agency of
Japan (STA) Postdoctoral Fellowship for Dr. James C. Hunt, Monterey Bay Aquarium
Research Institute, at the Japan Marine Science and Technology Center (JAMSTEC),
Yokosuka, Japan. Dr. Hunt will work with Dr. Jun Hashimoto at JAMSTEC in a
project entitled, "The Behavioral Ecology of the Mid- Water Community of the
Kuroshio Current." The proposed research will examine the role of squids within
the mid-water community through the use of deep-sea submersibles. These squids
are important commercially and biologically. By combining in situ observations
with laboratory experiments, he will consider several specific hypotheses
relating distribution patterns and feeding behaviors to information acquired
from sonar equipment. The result will provide an understanding of the mid-water
food web, how this web might change as environmental conditions change, and how
to accurately assess and manage marine resources. The proposed research
addresses topics that are both current and important in the field of biological
oceanography and JAMSTEC will provide the applicant with some of the most
advanced crewed and robotic submersible systems available in the world. The
applicant will pioneer significant exploratory use of the diving equipment for
midwater biological research. Both applicant and host scientist have discussed
the project in detail, they have provided plausible and testable hypotheses, and
it is likely the research will yield positive and mutually beneficial results
for both the United States and Japan. ***