* 9512308
* Acquisition of Pulsed Laser Deposition System and Associated Film Characterization Equipment
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Fred Cadieu, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 267,560.00

9512308 Cadieu A pulsed laser deposition (PLD) system and ancillary thin film
characterization equipment will be acquired and used to fabricate and examine
magnetic and optical films. Three research programs will make use of the PLD
facility. One program aims at developing metallic magnetic films that exhibit
highly specific textures and optimal magnetic properties. As part of this
effort, textured films of rare earth transition metals and of ferrites will be
fabricated and their magnetic properties will be examined. A second program will
utilize the PLD facility to explore new approaches to photoinduced gradient
index formation, tailoring sol-gel glasses, and photodeposition in microporous
glass. A third program evolves around the structural and compositional
characterization of the PLD-grown films. In this effort, the defect and stacking
fault densities of the laser deposited magnetic films will be examined by
transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and their stoichiometry will be probed
by secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). %%% Pulsed laser ablation allows for
the deposition of a wide range of dissimilar materials with exceptional
intrinsic properties. The pulsed layer deposition system will be utilized to
synthesize new types of super magnet systems that are important for microwave
device development. It will also be utilized for photodeposition and
photopatterning processing with applications in optical waveguides and
diffractive optics. The instrumentation will benefit researchers from several
departments in a predominantly undergraduate institution. ***