* 9512940
* High Resolution Microdensitometer for Structural Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Peter Vibert, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 119,265.00

In this application we describe research programs in structural biology at two
different institutions, each of which requires the ability to analyze data
obtained from our high resolution electron microscopes. In order to be able to
fully utilize the capabilities of our EM Facilities and to overcome a major gap
in the technological resources available to the life sciences communities at
Brandeis University and at Boston University School of Medicine, we are
proposing to purchase a high resolution precision microdensitometer scanning
system. Considerable effort has been devoted to insure that the Rosenstiel Basic
Medical Sciences Research Center (the Center) and BUSM, Department of Biophysics
have the EM facilities necessary to pursue high-resolution structural studies.
Over the past few years several projects have developed specimens extremely well
suited for Cystallographic and single particle study using EM techniques.
Optical diffraction of film recorded EM images and/or direct observation of film
recorded electron diffraction patterns of a variety of these specimens have
indicated that the information content of much of this data is great and that
Programs for high-resolution structural determination are feasible. Central to
working with any film recorded data is the ability to convert this information
into digital form for computer-based processing and analysis. In neither
institution is there currently a device able to digitize EM film recorded data
in a form suitable for high-resolution structural studies. (The digitization
equipment currently available is inadequate even for moderate resolution
studies.) The few EM based high-resolution reconstructions performed on
biological samples (bacteriorhodopsin, light harvesting complex and porin) in
other laboratories were exclusively determined with data (images and diffraction
patterns) digitized through precision microdensitometers. Both the Center's high
resolution electron microscopes (Philips CM12 and Model 420) are routinely
providing high resolution images for our structural biology research programs.
However, in order to digitize these images for computer analysis it has been
necessary for our investigators to travel to Albany, NY as there are no suitable
scanners in New England. The instrument of choice for this application is
currently being manufactured by Orbital Sciences Corporation (Pomona, CA). It is
a flat-bed microdensitometer and is essentially identical to the Perkin-Elmer
instrument which is no longer manufactured. It is widely regarded as the state-
of-the-art instrument for image digitization and far exceeds the capabilities of
our current scanner. The technique used in the Orbital microdensitometer system
is almost completely free of optical aberrations and produces high fidelity
data. The major advantage of this instrument is that an illuminated area of the
specimen is optically projected onto a sample defining aperture as small as 3~m.
Only that light which passes through the aperture is measured and digitized.
Scanning is accomplished by laterally translating the specimen relative to the
optical axis. The aperture maintains a fixed location on the optical axis,
thereby minimizing distortions and the effects of optical aberrations. The
Center's only available instrument is an Eikonix digitizer which operates by
projecting a real image of the specimen to be digitized using a 35mm
photographic lens. This real image is digitized via a linear photodiode array
which is translated across the image plane. This approach, though relatively
inexpensive, is subject to a multitude of optical and mechanical defects. The
Eikonix scanner cannot support our high resolution structural studies reliably.