* 9512424
* Development of a High Throughput Genetic Analysis Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Lawrence Schook, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 220,000.00

Technologies derived from the genome projects for humans and other model systems
offer an extremely effective and economical approach for studying many important
biological questions as well as mechanisms of animal and plant pathogenesis.
Furthermore, the availability of the necessary equipment and training in modern
technologies is clearly an important role of the University of Minnesota in
serving its Land Grant Mission. Recent and future faculty recruitment on the
University of Minnesota, St. Paul Campus has necessitated the development of a
core High Throughput Genetic Analysis Laboratory. In addition, university
strategic planning including the Colleges of Agriculture, Biological Sciences,
Medicine, and Veterinary Medicine lead to the recognition that the University of
Minnesota now has the opportunity to establish an internationally recognized
center focusing on emerging DNA technologies on the St. Paul Campus. Most
importantly, as illustrated by the individual project descriptions, is the
already present critical mass of researchers who have existing needs for high
throughput DNA sequencing and genotyping capabilities. Such technologies will
permit the utilization of DNA sequencing of nuclear and mitochondrial DNA genes
to address questions concerning speciation patterns, phylogenetic relationships
among plants, bacteria, protozoan, birds and mammals. Technologies developed by
the laboratory will provide insights into strategies for monitoring
environmental changes, the identification of emerging plant and animal
pathogens, and direct genotypic selection for specific physiological
characteristics. The intellectual environment associated with such technologies
will foster new partnerships both between colleges as well as with the private
sector. Finally, this infrastructure will serve to enhance undergraduate,
graduate and professional student recruitment while providing new training
opportunities for current undergraduate and graduates. Critical for this
strategic venture is the presence of appropriate faculty who will stimulate new
interdisciplinary research programs and who will bring new skills associated
with these emerging technologies. At present on the St. Paul Campus, the Food
Animal Biotechnology Center encompasses several different research programs that
have as their goal to develop new molecular technologies associated with animal
production through the identification and modulation of genes affecting growth,
development, reproductive performance, efficiency of feed conversion, lactation
and disease resistance. The goal of the Plant Molecular Genetics Institute on
the St. Paul Campus is to span the molecular, cellular, and whole plant levels
and to complement the University's plant breeding programs. Finally, faculty in
the College of Biological Sciences play a leadership role in genetics and
developmental biology at the University of Minnesota. In order to provide for
efficient and effective utilization of this multiinvestigator laboratory,
technical support will also be provided as part of the institutional match. To
complement these existing programs, the College of Veterinary Medicine is
committed to hiring new faculty who will bring new skills associated with these
emerging technologies that require extensive instrumentation. These individuals,
who will have an already established track record, will serve to stimulate
future applications and further intercollegiate interactions. Several of the
participants of this proposal will serve on theses search committees. In
addition, to stimulating faculty recruitment, this core laboratory will also
provide trained support staff, within and outside the university, to permit
contemporary usage of the equipment throughout the region.