* 9512204
* Acquisition of a Scanning Electron Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Karen VanWinkle-Swift, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 140,000.00

The following proposal is a multi-departmental effort requesting funds for the
acquisition of a new scanning electron microscope (SEM) with X-ray microanalyzer
(EDX) and cold stage to replace the outdated SEM at Northern Arizona University
(NAU). The new SEM will incorporate numerous technical features necessary for
research and teaching not now available at Northern Arizona University. The
Electron Microscope Facility services the NAU campus and Northern Arizona
community. Since the current SEM (an Amray 1000) was acquired in 1974, it has
been continuously used in teaching and in a variety of primary research
investigations and has been operated under regular maintenance contracts.
Recently, maintenance calls have become more frequent, down time has increased,
and replacement parts are becoming more difficult to obtain. The number of
research faculty (40), graduate and undergraduate students (25), and courses
(10), making regular use of the facility in the past few years has sharply
risen. The AMRAY 1000 is no longer capable of providing the services required of
a rapidly growing university community now exceeding 18,000 students and 550
faculty. This proposal incorporates the present and future needs for a modern
SEM facility wit integrated X-ray capabilities and cryostage unit. The principle
investigators listed are 9 faculty members representing 6 university
departments. This proposal is being submitted to the ARI Program for the
following reasons: 1) The EM facility is used by the entire NAU community and
thus exists as an interdisiplinary center. 2) a number of the co-PI's, and the
PI himself, are not presently funded by the NSF and as stated in the ARI Program
brochure (page 1), to qualify for ARI funding, "research activities...need not
be supported by NSF or the Federal Government". 3) acquisition of the instrument
requested herein is the first major step in a modernization effort planned for
the NAU EM facility. The long term plan is for an integrated imaging facility in
which digital images from light, fluorescence, confocal, scanning and
transmission microscopes will be stored (TIFF format) in an EM Image library and
made available to NAU researchers, teachers and students, located both on campus
and at the 9 NAU remote sites via the Internet (see Section I, EM facility
Vision Plan).