* 9512877
* An Automated DNA Sequencer for Analysis of Gene Structure   and Function
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Benjamin Hall, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 10/31/1997
* USD 94,749.00

This application requests partial support for the development of an Automated
DNA Sequencing Facility. Seven independent laboratories in the Departments of
Biochemistry, Botany, Genetics, and Zoology at the University of Washington, for
whom DNA sequencing represents a major research focus (major users), and an
additional seven laboratories in these Departments with a significant but less
extensive need for DNA sequencing (minor users), are participating in this
proposal. The impetus for this application derives from the realization by these
individuals that existing methods for manual sequencing of DNA are slower, more
work-intensive, and more expensive than are automated methods that employ
fluorescent compounds to track DNA fragments. All 14 faculty members involved in
this application have concluded that the need to rely on manual methods for DNA
sequencing is having a distinctly negative impact on the progress of their
research. The 14 projects that comprise this application are all funded by one
or more research grants from the National Science Foundation, National
Institutes of Health, and other granting agencies. The major projects involve:
an analysis of genes required for cell migrations during oogenesis in Drosophila
(C. Berg); the structure and function of the mammalian metaxin gene family (P.
Bornstein); a molecular analysis of marine plant systems (R. Cattolico); large-
scale sequencing of the MHC class II region in birds (S. Edwards); comparative
sequence analysis of the two largest subunits of nuclear RNA polymerase II from
different taxa (B. Hall); regulatory analyses of muscle creatine kinase genes
(S. Hauschka); and hormonal regulation of insect development (L. Riddiford). The
minor projects involve: characterization of the revolta gene of Arabidopsis
thaliana (L. Comai); identification of components of the microtubule organizing
center in S. cerevisiae (T. Davis); genetic control of the yeast cell cycle (L.
Hartwell); regulation of mesodermal patterning in Xenopus and zebrafish (D.
Kimelman); origin of polarity in Drosophila development (H. Ruohola-Baker);
heterochromatic genes and position effects in Drosophila (B. akimoto); and
evolution of a regulatory protein and its target gene in yeast (E.Young). We
request the purchase of a model 377 ABI Prism Automated DNA Sequencer with
associated computer software, and a GeneAmp PCR System 9600. These instruments
will be housed in space provided by the Department of Biochemistry. The facility
will be run on a fee-for-service basis (cost center). It is anticipated that
80-90% of the capacity of the facility will be utilized by the participating
laboratories and that the remaining capacity will be made available to
investigators at the University of Washington on a first-come, first-served
basis.