* 9512398
* Acquisition of a Computer Facility for Hydrologic and       Environmental Research
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Robert Carlson, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

The Water Resources Research Institute (WRRI) of Kent State University (KSU)
seeks to establish a computer facility for the analysis and distribution of
graphical data for research in water resources. The facility will consist of a
central file and compute server, a network of graphical workstations for
processing and displaying three-dimensional data and PowerPC workstations for
processing and displaying two-dimensional data, and the necessary input-output
support for high quality image acquisition (scanners, digital cameras, video
cameras) and output (color and black-andwhite printers, slide maker).
Environmental research requires a collaborative, interdisciplinary approach
because of the complexity of natural systems. Field observations must be
integrated with laboratory experiments. Knowledge from one discipline must be
applied to interpret data in another. The sheer size of some systems (spatial
and temporal) requires data sets too large for a single group of investigators
to acquire or to evaluate. The proposed facility is specifically intended to
enhance collaborative research related to water in the environment, including
on-campus, in-state and out-of-state collaborations. The network will simplify
transfer of graphical data among WRRI members and between KSU and off-campus
workers. The file/compute server will provide on-campus access to large
environmental and climate-modeling databases and will facilitate the numerically
intensive calculations required for modeling complex systems. Graphical
workstations will enable 3D visualization of climatological, hydrological and
chemical structures in real time. The facility will be administered by WRRI, an
interdisciplinary organization created to foster interdepartmental,
collaborative research on water resource problems. Current research in WRRI
which would be supported by this facility includes projects on water quality,
climate and global change, ecosystem health, and the application of molecular
level tools to macroscopic environmental problems. All the PI's are engaged in
water quality research, with specific interests in developing biological and
chemical methodologies (Leff, Cabaniss), system level studies of chemical and
biological perturbations of ecosystems (Heath, Leff, Smith), modeling of
catchment-basin flow and pollutant transport (Carlson, Maurice), and mapping of
water quality on a regional or national scale (Carlson, Lee). Drs. Maurice and
Smith (Geology) are also examining the role of water in climate and global
change. Drs. Carlson, Heath, Leff (Biological Sciences) and Lee (Geography) are
examining ecosystem health on microscopic and macroscopic levels. Drs. Cabaniss
(Chemistry), Heath (Biological Sciences) and Maurice are exploring the
application of molecular-level tools- molecular spectroscopy, biochemical
assays, atomic force microscopy- to environmental problems.