* 9512299
* Second U.S.-Korea Seminar on Science and Technology Policy, Arlington, VA, December 7-11, 1995 and Taejon, Korea,       March 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1997
* J. Thomas Ratchford, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1997
* USD 51,632.00

9512299 Ratchford This award provides funds to permit Dr. J. Thomas Ratchford,
Director, Center for Science, Trade, and Technology Policy, George Mason
University, to conduct with Dr. Dr. Young Gul Kim, Director, Research Center for
Catalytic Technology, Pohang University of Science and Technology, Korea, the
Second U.S.- Korea Joint Seminar on Science and Technology Policy. This joint
seminar will be held in two sessions, the first, in December 1995, at George
Mason University, the second, in the spring of 1996, in Daeduk Science Town,
Korea. Eight U.S. scientists from outside the Washington area will be supported
for the first session, while 12 U.S. participants will be supported for the
second session, in Korea. The joint seminar will have three major foci, namely:
R&D strategies of industries; the promotion of basic research in universities;
and increasing U.S.-Korea S&T cooperation. The December 1995 session will be
timed to immediately precede the Third U.S.-Korea Science and Technology Forum,
a major annual event held in Washington, D.C., and financed by the Korean
Ministry of Science and Technology. This timing should attract, at little
additional cost, a number of concerned U.S. and Korean specialists who will
participate in the Forum. The second session of the joint seminar will be made
to coincide with the time period (probably March 1996) in which representatives
of U.S. companies will be attending a joint meeting of the Industrial Research
Institute (IRI) and its Korean counterpart, the Korea Industrial Technology
Association (KITA). U.S. participants in the second session will tour major
manufacturing industries, industrial and government research laboratories, and
research universities, in order to provide them a first-hand exposure to Korea's
S&T activities. The IRI Executive Director is expected to participate in both
sessions. The collaborators are exceptionally well qualified to organize and
conduct such a joint seminar. The pa rticipants supported by this award are
recognized experts whose presentations will be of mutual interest and benefit.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest
and benefit. Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).