* 9512721
* U.S.-The Philippines Cooperative Research (Dissertation     Enhancement): Coral Reef Restoration
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* C. Drew Harvell, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 11/30/1999
* USD 77,107.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o o
l 4 @ ! " # $ % & ' ( ) * F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9512721 Harvell This is a three year dissertation enhancement
award proposed by Dr. Drew Harvell and Ms. Laurie Raymundo, Cornell University.
The funds requested are to support primarily Ms. Laurie Raymundo, a Ph.D.
student whose project involves developing optimal procedures for coral reef seed
transplantation, survival and growth, and recruitment and colonization on bare
substrates in the Philippines. Silliman University in the Philippines will
provide the logistical support for this project. Coral reefs are important to
coastal productivity, but susceptible to damage from human activity. The extent
of coral reef degradation throughout Southeast Asia has accelerated throughout
the past 20 years. The goal of this project is to test two methods for coral
transplantation as a means of accelerating restoration of coral reefs. The
results can provide the basis for new and improved technology. It can also help
coral reef ecologists and related scientists in the U.S. and the Philippines to
better understand how coral reefs regenerate. @ Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r
m a t i o n ( $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT ABSTRACT Arletha Mayfield
Arletha Mayfield @ @ @ a @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e 6 6 p p p p p p p Q
0 2 2 2 Q m T L < p p p p p 0 p p p p 0 9512721 Harvell This is a three year
dissertation enhancement award proposed by Dr. Drew Harvell and Ms. Laurie
Raymundo, Cornell University. The funds requested are to support primarily Ms.
Laurie Raymundo, a Ph.D. student whose project involves developing optimal
procedures for coral reef seed transplantation, survival and growth, and
recruitment and colonization on bare substrates in the Philippines. Silliman
University in the Philippines will provide the logistical support for this
project. Coral reefs are important to coastal productivity, but susceptible to
damage from human activity. The extent of coral reef degradation throughout
Southeast Asia has accelerated throughout the past 20 years. The goal of this
project is to test two methods for coral transplantation as a means of
accelerating restoration of coral reefs. The results can provide the basis for
new and improved technology. It can also help coral reef ecologists and related
scientists in the U.S. and the Philippines to better understand how coral reefs
regenerate. @ 6 >