* 9512772
* U.S.-Italy Cooperative Research:  Numerical and Analytical  Methods for Simulation and Control of Fluids
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1995,11/30/2000
* Stanley Osher, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 11/30/2000
* USD 20,000.00

This three-year award supports U.S.-Italy cooperative research between Russel
Caflisch, Bjorn Engquist, and Stanley Osher of the University of California at
Los Angeles and Giovanni Russo at the University of Aquila, and Maurizio
Falcone, University of Rome, `La Sapienza,` in Italy, on analytical and
numerical methods for simulation and control of fluids. Their research will
focus on five topics -- singularity formation, level set methods for capturing
multivalued solutions and for computing unstable fronts, numerical
homogenization, bubbly flow, and approximation schemes for Hamilton-Jacobi
equations and control applications. The two research groups possess
complementary areas of expertise in scientific computation, fluid mechanics, and
partial differential equations. The level set and shock capturing methods
developed at UCLA will be extended and applied to control problems as formulated
in Rome. Particle methods developed in L'Aquila will be applied to vortical
flows to look for singularities and validation of the level set method. The
credentials of the L'Aquila group in the study of particle methods will
contribute to the integration of the expertise of the UCLA group on conservation
laws into active CFD codes. The cooperation of these two groups should lead to
an expansion of the understanding and the numerical methodology in several
important classes of problems in fluid dynamics.