* 9512209
* Acquisition of Plant Growth Chambers for Plant Biotechnology Research and Teaching
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Kirk Cammarata, Salem International University
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 07/31/1996
* USD 27,765.00

Salem-Teikyo University (S-TU) is a not-for-profit United States institution of
higher learning located in rural Appalachia. Although no financial support is
derived from Teikyo University, the merger has brought about the opportunity for
sharing research resources and faculty with the international science community.
At the same time, we continue to have a special impact on the Appalachian
region. About 60% of the S-TU student body comes from around the U. S. S-TU is
committed to developing both undergraduate and M.S. programs in molecular
biology/biotechnology within the Natural Science and Mathematics Department,
which also offers majors in mathematics, environmental science, and biology. New
courses related to biotechnology include an intensive course on research
techniques and advanced courses in cell biology and molecular biology. Near
completion of the program, undergraduates will conduct independent research. The
undereraduate program was established in 1992. The offering of the master's
program is pending approval from the North Central Association. S-TU's molecular
biology/biotechnology research is in cooperation with Tampa Bay Research
Institute (TBRI) in St. Petersburg, FL and with Teikyo University School of
Science and Engineering in Utsunomiya, Japan. S-TU is specializing in the
biology and genetic engineering of plants, and it is for this research that
support is being sought. Drs. Suzanne Rogers, Takashi Ueda, and Kirk Cammarata
have established active research programs and several undergraduate students are
now involved. Presently, the development of research is hampered by inadequate
culture facilities. A small laboratory which was converted into a dedicated
plant tissue culture area has proved inadequate for two reasons: temperature and
humidity variations in the room, and the different conditions required by
separate investigators. Hence, funds are requested to purchase four separate
plant growth chambers with controls for temperature, li ght, and humidity. These
should provide the necessary control of environmental conditions for all current
and foreseeable research. The areas of research that will benefit from the NSF
funding are directed either toward elucidation of control of gene expression in
plants or toward genetic transformation of plants to improve quality or economic
use. Dr. Rogers is developing methods for propagating rare and fragile plants by
cloning and regeneration procedures. Dr. Ueda is studying the genetic program
controlling plant seed development7 particularly those genes regulating
production of the storage protein zein in corn. Dr. Cammarata is examining roles
of various defense and stress-related genes encoding chloroplast localized
products (polyphenol oxidase, etc.).