* 9512431
* Development of the Nanomanipulator: A Real-Time Scanning    Probe Microscope Interface for Nanometer Science
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Leandra Vicci, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 230,000.00

9512431 Superfine Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) has given scientists and
engineers the ability to map a wide range of physical properties of surfaces,
such as topography, friction, conductance, with lateral resolution measured in
nanometers. However, instruments are needed which allow us to change the sample
with the same ease that we now characterize it. The nanomanipulator project will
develop an intuitively natural user interface for scanning probe microscopy and
manipulation. The interface addresses the two aspects most important when using
SPM: representing the data and controlling the SPM tip. For the former, the
project will develop a virtual-reality interface which presents data from the
SPM with a stereoscopic three-dimensional rendering presented on a monitor. For
the latter, the interface uses a manual force feedback input device which allows
the user to control the position of the SPM tip on the nanometer scale through
the lateral motion of a hand-held stylus, and simultaneously feel the tip/sample
force through the force feedback feature. This enables a user to place the
nanometer-sized microscopic tip on a specific feature, and to sense its changing
topography while the feature is being modified. In this way, the finest features
of an electronic device or the dissection of a chromosome can be efficiently
tailored. %%% The nanomanipulator project will develop a unique instrument for
the manipulation and modification of materials on the nanometer length scale,
which will be used in a wide range of experiments in materials science, physics,
biochemistry, and computer science. The nanomanipulator is designed to be
assembled from commercially available components and a major commercial
instrument company is an integral part of the project. This assures that the
instrument, as designed and completed, will address the generic needs of the
microscopy community. ***