* 9512310
* Construction of Winterized, Self-Contained (Kitchenette),   Family-Accommodating, Researcher Housing (Duplex) at the    Southwestern Research Station
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Wade Sherbrooke, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 69,003.00

The Southwestern Research Station (SWRS) of the American Museum of Natural
History (AMNH), located in southeastern Arizona, offers field biologists from
numerous U.S. and international institutions a field research facility with
access to a wide range of biological communities and a great diversity of
species. The primary objective of the Station is providing accommodations and
scientific facilities to support research at a remote site. This project
addresses a variety of housing needs for researchers working at the Station. The
duplex residence will solve housing problems, at various times of the year, for
a diverse scientific clientele. First, it will provide additional sleeping
quarters for up to twelve individuals, relieving acute crowding during peak use
by scientists in spring and summer. Second, as a winterized building with
kitchenettes in each unit, it will serve as winter (November- March) housing for
researchers when the dinning room is closed for the season. Third, it will be
used to house researchers and their assistants who are engaged in studies on
nocturnal organisms, providing an isolated, quiet location for daytime sleeping.
And, fourth, by incorporating two sleeping areas in each unit, the duplex will
be appropriate housing for families with children who are the Station for
extended periods. The building will provide housing conditions not currently
available at SWRS, thus facilitating use of the Station by scientists, and
creating opportunities not previously available.