* 9512631
* Improvements at Las Cruces Biological Station to Enhance    Tropical Training and Research
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Donald Stone, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 350,680.00

The Organization for Tropical Studies, Inc. (OTS) has three biological field
stations in Costa Rica that are used by a broad spectrum of the international
scientific community; La Selva (wet lowland rainforest) is developed and well
along the way to achieving its training and research potential; Palo Verde
(seasonally dry lowland forest) is a diamond is the rough with primitive
facilities that have been stressed beyond capabilities to service the demand --
so upgrading activities are underway here; and Las Cruces (we mid- elevation
premontane rainforest) did lie somewhere between the above two stations in terms
of infrastructure, but suffered a disastrous loss of buildings, equipment and
supplies when fire struck on the evening of November 23, 1994. This loss has
come at a particularly critical time in the development of the Las Cruces
station as it struggles to accommodate the demand by courses and researchers,
particularly those interested in highly diverse mid- elevation ecosystems that
are most heavily preferred and used by human populations. The recent surge in
activity by conversation biologists, foresters, and agroecologists has added a
sustainable development dimension to the traditional by systematists and
ecologists. Because of the importance of this station on the regional, national,
and international scene, plans are underway to streamline and rebuild the
station. This project will support activities to: 1) remodel an existing house
to replace some of the capacity that was lost for accommodating groups of
students and researchers; 2) refurbish the general-purpose laboratory that
survived the fire; 3) construct a number of spatially separated buildings to
replace the balance of what was lost in the fire (viz. long-term researcher
housing, research laboratory, and a general services building that will house
the kitchen, dining room, office, supply room and laundry); and 4) replace the
lost equipment and supplies. Like the rise of the phoe nix from the ashes, Las
Cruces has taken this calamity as a challenge and is making the most of a sad
situation to develop a sound and frugal plan for its resurrection. OTS is
seizing on this opportunity to tailor the new facilities to the user's needs.