* 9512602
* Acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR)            Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Ernest Peralta, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/1997
* USD 137,550.00

As a consortium of five faculty members and their research groups in the
Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, we propose the
acquisition of a Surface Plasmon Resonance (SPR) Spectrometer. This instrument
can detect the binding of biomolecules in solution to a surface-immobilized
ligand. The SPR instrument is extraordinarily sensitive because it uses a laser
at a precise angle to excite the surface plasmons at the glass-gold interface of
the SPR chip (upon which the measurements are made). The change of angle of the
reflected minimum of intensity as a function of time is correlated with binding
of the biomolecule(s) in solution with the immobilized ligand. Using this
machine, it is possible to measure association and dissociation rates of binding
thereby providing both kinetic and thermodynamic data from the same
measurements. With the recent addition of variable temperature capability
entropic and enthalpic contributions to binding energy can be separated. We plan
to follow several lines of research with the new instrument, pertaining to: (a)
the mechanism of transcription; (b) the mechanism of the immune response; (c)
signal transduction pathways; and (d) drug/target inhibitory effects. In
parallel with the experiments mentioned above, we will develop new SPR
technologies; in particular we plan to design new SPR chips as follows: We
propose a new paradigm for surface immobilization of biomolecules: the use of
mixed, self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) of thiols, a small percentage of which
have been derivatized to target particular classes of biomolecules. We have
already demonstrated the efficacy of this strategy for a chip which selectively
immobilizes histidine-tagged proteins through binding to Ni(II). Use of the
technique resulted in an enhanced sensitivity of at least an order of magnitude.
In addition to further development of this chip, we plan to contruct a similar
chip for binding biomolecules to immobilized DNA. Lastly, we propose the
development of a chip to display an array of small drugs to potential putative
target molecules.