* 9512166
* Acquisition of Transient Kinetic Equipment
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Michael Schimerlik, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 138,440.00

Funds are requested to purchase transient kinetic equipment to be employed in
research projects from eleven different laboratories at C)region State
University. The users represent four departments: Biochemistry and Biophysics,
Agricultural Chemistry, the College of Pharmacy and the Department of Food
Science and Technology. The equipment will allow the users to pursue new
approaches to their respective research problems in the areas of protein
folding, protein-protein and protein-DNA interactions, DNA and protein
structure, protein- and receptorligand interactions, kinetic studies of enzymes,
the coupling of receptors to ion channels and the relationship between
mitochondrial integrity, oxidative stress and Ca2+ overload. The availability of
this equipment should serve to attract other researchers at Oregon State
University interested in mechanistic studies and will therefore serve as an
important resource for faculty, postdoctorals, graduate students and
undergraduates pursuing these research areas. Since the equipment is novel to
Oregon, it may also attract users from other institutions within the state. One
major feature of the instrumentation is the ease of data collection and
analysis. This should facilitate user training and increase the enthusiasm of
users in applying kinetic, mechanistic approaches in their research. The
principal investigator is Dr. Michael Schimerlik. The PI received his Ph.D. in
enzyme kinetics with Professor W.W. Cleland at Wisconsin and training in
transient kinetics while a postdoctoral at The California Institute of
Technology with Professor M.A. Raftery where he conducted stopped-flow studies
of ligand interactions with the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor. Since coming
to Oregon State, the PI has published manuscripts concerning transient kinetic
studies in the areas of protein-protein interactions and enzyme mechanisms and
is capable of analysis of kinetic mechanisms by fitting data to analytically
derived rate equations or, i n more complicated instances, using computer
simulations to examine mechanistic models. Several other investigators (Drs.
Penner, van Holde, Ho, Anderson and Hsu) also possess expertise in transient
kinetic theory. Transient kinetic equipment existing at Oregon State is about
fifteen years old, and no longer supported by the manufacturer. No facilities
are available for quench flow experiments for use in combination with state of
the art facilities at the institution in mass spectrometry or NMR for studies of
protein folding. No facilities are available for rapid acquisition of circular
dichroism spectra to examine structural changes that occur in protein folding,
ligand binding, DNA and protein structural transitions, or macromolecular
assembly or dissociation reactions. The abilities to acquire fluorescence or
absorbance spectra as a function of time, or to measure time-dependent changes
in fluorescence polarization are also lacking. These techniques provide
additional sensitivity and enhance the analysis of complicated mechanisms. Most
importantly, the software for data acquisition and analysis is far superior to
that currently available. In summary, the proposed kinetic equipment will add
important new capabilities in transient kinetics not currently available at
Oregon State University. In addition it will provide greatly enhanced
capabilities over that of our currently available, outdated equipment both in
the type of data acquired and in its analysis. This will not only expand the
research horizons of laboratories doing kinetic studies but, also because of its
"user-friendliness", serve to attract postdoctorals, graduate students and
undergraduates so that these individuals will receive training in transient
kinetic methods.