* 9512538
* Acquisition of a Parallel Computer for Structural Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* James Satterlee, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 434,236.00

This proposal seeks funding for a new high performance, parallel computer for
computational biology and chemistry, specifically to study the structure and
function of biological macromolecules. Washington State University has built
considerable strengths in the studies of biological macromolecules, of which
both the Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Center and the new X-Ray
Crystallographic facilities are important components. However, the key feature
missing is the lack of computing power. Computers provide the crucial link since
they are needed both for processing the large data sets obtained from NMR and
crystallographic structure determination experiments as well as for theoretical
studies such as molecular dynamics simulations and electronic structure
calculations that provide the connection between structure and function and that
also provide new directions for experiments. Modern research in structural
biology requires fast computers, with ever increasing needs because of rapid
advances in experimental methods that require analysis of larger and larger data
sets and because of the increasing importance of computer simulations in
understanding structure function relationships. In addition to daily
computational needs, each of the five principal investigators has projects that
require massive computing capabilities. These projects include studies of
myosin, enzymesubstrate complexes, electron transfer complexes, protein-nucleic
acid complexes, and the role of water in protein function. Currently, computing
for structural biology at WSU is being carried on workstations owned by
individual investigators. Many of these workstations are more than 5 years old,
which means that they are at the limit of hardware reliability and are orders of
magnitude behind current workstations in speed. For instance, computer
simulations currently being carried out take weeks of computer time on our
fastest workstations (IBM RS/6000 350). The only university facilities are an
IBM 3090-300 and a VAX cluster (slower than many personal computers), which are
heavily overused and expensive. Moreover, our most commonly used commercial
software is not available for these computers. Although new inexpensive
workstations (5 to 7 times faster than our RS/6000) may be used for many simple
problems, researchers at WSU are facing more and more problems that require very
fast computation, huge amounts of memory and/or huge amounts of disk space
beyond the reach of individual investigators, even those that use computers as a
major research tool. These needs can be met in part by Supercomputing Centers,
but these centers are becoming overloaded so a middle level between that route
and workstations is a vital need not currently met on this campus. Parallel
processing computers such as the one proposed here are an ideal solution for
academic research. They can have speeds equivalent to vector supercomputers such
as Cray computers, but at a fraction of the cost. These computers have multiple
processors of the same type that are found in the fastest workstations, but the
combination of these processors into a single chassis provides several important
advantages over multiple independent workstations. First, computation speed can
increase almost linearly with the number of processors by distributing the
computational "load" across several processors. Second, expensive resources such
as memory and software can be shared by multiple users. Third, operations and
maintenance of a single machine are much less, leading to a great saving in
personnel time. Fourth, different processors may be dedicated to different types
of usage at different times, allowing efficient usage of the processors.
Finally, the modular nature allows investigators to increase the efficiency of
the machine by simply adding additional processors if money becomes available.
The proposed computer will replace our outdated workstations in fulfilling
routine computational needs, but more importantly, will allow investigators at
WSU to pursue the new avenues not possible on those workstations. Moreover, it
will have an impact on not only the researchers currently directly involved in
structural biology, but will provide a means of introducing state-of-the-art
computational methods in structural biology and chemistry to researchers across
the campus. The computer will be accessible by any networked personal computer
or workstation, and staff are already in place who would provide consultation.
With the addition of new faculty and the growing interest of existing faculty in
structure-function studies, it is crucial that a new computer be obtained.