* 9512577
* Acquisition of Biophysics Instrumentation for Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Ronald Raines, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1999
* USD 442,420.00

Funds are requested for 50% of the cost of creating the University of Wisconsin-
Madison Facility for Biophysics Instrumentation. This campus facility would be
part of a $30 million expansion of the Department of Biochemistry. The facility
would house six major instruments for the study of the complexation,
conformation, and structure of biological and other macromolecules. These
instruments are a MicroCal isothermal titration calorimeter, Calorimetry
Sciences differential scanning calorimeter, Beckman analytical ultracentrifuge,
Aviv circular dichroism spectrometer, Nicolet Fourier transform infrared
spectrometer, and Pharmacia surface plasmon resonance detector. In addition, an
Instrumentation Specialist would be hired to provide technical assistance to
students, staff, and faculty on the installation, use, and maintenance of the
requested instruments. The six principal users of the requested instrumentation
are faculty members who use biophysical methods to study biopolymers and their
interactions. These faculty reside in four divisions of the university-
-Biochemistry, Chemistry, Chemical Engineering, and Pharmacy. They have active
collaborations, routinely share equipment and ideas, and participate in common
training and degree programs. Together, they would manage the operations of the
proposed core facility. The major users of the requested instruments would be
the approximately 100 students and staff being trained in the laboratories of
the primary users. In addition, the requested instruments would greatly enhance
the research and training efforts of ten secondary users. The laboratories of
all primary and secondary users are within two city blocks of the proposed
facility. Further, it is envisioned that the usage and hence the impact of the
facility would soon broaden well beyond the research groups of the primary and
secondary users. The need for the requested instrumentation is extreme. Physical
approaches to the analysis of biological systems depend heavily on
instrumentation. Researchers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison now have the
ability to produce biomolecules on a large scale, and to perform limited
physical analyses on these molecules. Yet, no isothermal titration calorimeters,
no differential scanning calorimeters, no analytical ultracentrifuges, and no
surface plasmon resonance detectors exist on any campus of the University of
Wisconsin. The Madison campus has two antiquated circular dichroism
spectrometers and only three Fourier transform infrared spectrometers, each of
which is inaccessible to the primary and secondary users. This proposal is
intended to address this crippling lack of modern biophysical instrumentation.