* 9512503
* Acquisition of a Charged Coupled Device (CCD) High Intensity X-ray Diffraction System for Materials Synthesis
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Bradley Chmelka, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 255,070.00

9512503 Stucky A charge coupled device (CCD), high intensity X-ray
diffractometer will be acquired and utilized for materials synthesis and
biotechnology research. The CCD detector and associated software allow for
nearly single photon detection efficiency and rapid readout time of 512x512
pixels. The ease of use and rapid screening time of this instrument will permit
the quick characterization of crystals as small as a few micrometers and of
molecular crystals that are unstable and tend to deteriorate in the X-ray beam.
Biomolecular phases and liquid crystal/membrane based composites with large unit
cell structures that produce a large range of scattered intensities will be
structurally accessible with this instrument. Zeolites, porous mesostructured
materials, and fullerine-type structures that cannot be otherwise characterized
because of their low scattering cross section, will also be studied. The large
improvement in sensitivity provided by this instrument, in combination with
available nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) resources, represents a unique
capability for studying complicated partially ordered polymeric materials. %%%
The high sensitivity, fast data collection, x-ray diffractometer will enable a
new materials characterization capability that will impact an existing
interdisciplinary program of over one hundred students and faculty. It will
facilitate research programs concerned with the design, synthesis, and
processing of advanced materials, studies of non- equilibrium transformations in
complex fluids and biological systems, and protein structure-property
relationships. ***