* 9512394
* Development of Instrumentation for Institutional Process    Design and Laboratory Testing in Economics and Political    Science
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Charles Plott, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1998
* USD 804,974.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Plott will purchase
equipment to expand and develop his experimental economics laboratory. This
includes 35 pentium 90 16MB, 500MBHD computers, monitors, high speed modems,
workstations, a network server and related equipment. He will also hire computer
programming staff to develop software which will be distributed to other
institutions which teach economics and engage in experimental economics
research. In this relatively new branch of economics, researchers create
experimental markets in controlled laboratory conditions and allow subjects to
participate in them. Money is used as an incentive to evoke responses that
accompany meaningful decisions. As Dr. Plott notes, `The logic that supports the
use of experimental methods in economics and political science is the same logic
that supports the use of experimental methods in any branch of science. The
trick is to identify and understand how the study of very simple and special
cases can help when the real goal is to understand something that is vastly more
complex.` This research, and the NSF grant which partially supports it, serves
to accomplish several goals. First, it allows economists to evaluate the
validity of widely held economic assumptions such as the laws of supply and
demand. Secondly, it permits the application of experimental approaches to the
solution of pressing present day problems. Dr. Plott and his group have, for
example, conducted studies for the Department of Transportation and several
other government agencies. They have provided guidance on issues such as the
allocation of airport landing slots, regulation of the pollution permit market
and the management of space station resources. Finally, this grant will allow
the development of simulation and teaching software which can be used for both
education and research.