* 9512010
* Racially and Ethnically Diverse Data Archive
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Erin Phelps, Radcliffe College
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 06/30/1998
* USD 264,820.00

The overall objectives of this project are to build and make available for
secondary analysis a collection of social and behavioral science data sets with
racially and ethnically diverse samples, to publicize the availability of those
data sets, and to encourage the multi-disciplinary use of the data for new
studies of psychosocial, cultural, economic and behavioral factors in relation
to adaptive and maladaptive development and individual productivity. This new
collection will be added to the current holdings of the Henry A. Murray Research
Center of Radcliffe College, an archive with over 200 data sets. A distinguished
project advisory committee will help Murray Center staff identify and evaluate
studies for the archive. The Murray Center is the only data archive in the
country that offers a comprehensive collection of longitudinal studies, the only
archive that makes available original records, and the only archive that enables
longitudinal follow-up of an existing sample. The data sets will be thoroughly
cleaned, organized and documented for ease of use by new investigators. The
availability of the data sets will be widely publicized, and several programs
will enusre that the data are used well for high quality new research. The data
are available without charge to researchers at all levels. As a result of its
multidisciplinary focus and it's potential contributions to the research of many
investigators, this project will yield substantial theoretical advances in the
social and behavioral sciences as well as providing data that will inform social
policies. The kind of data necessary for significant progress in the social and
behavioral sciences is becoming ever more difficult and expensive to gather. For
example, no longer content with simple laboratory investigations, the field of
psychology is increasingly turning to multi-faceted longitudinal investigations
conducting in real world settings with diverse subject populations. Yet the
resources for conducting this research conti nue to dwindle. The present project
addresses this conundrum by building and making available for secondary analysis
a collection of social and behavioral science data sets with racially and
ethnically diverse samples. Moreover, the availability of the data sets will be
widely publicized, and several programs will ensure that the data are used well
for high quality new research. The data are available without charge to
researchers at all levels. As a result of its multidisciplinary focus and it's
potential contributions to the research of many investigators, this project will
yield substantial theoretical advances in the social and behavioral sciences as
well as providing data that will inform social policies. In particular, this
project is highly relevant to the Human Capital research agenda, with data
pertinent to questions of how education, disadvantage, families, and the
workplace contribute to the realization of people's potential to be productive
citizens.