* 9512780
* U.S.-China Workshop on Bilingual Botanical Information      Management, December 1995, Tuscaloosa, Alabama
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Robert Haynes, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 09/30/1996
* USD 25,500.00

9512780 Xu Modern information technology has reduced the distance between
American and Chinese colleagues in terms of scholarly exchanges,and it is
predictable that a lot more future scholarly communication between the two
parties will occur through the international computer network or information
highway. Language barriers present severe problems in communication because the
Chinese language is incomprehensible to the majority of American colleagues and
most Chinese people do not speak English. Bilingual (English-Chinese) database
management systems provide a solution to overcome the language barrier because
such systems can simultaneously present the same piece of information in two
language formats, while archiving the original data without distortion. Co-
funded by the U.S. National Science Foundation (#INT9312146) and the Chinese
National Natural Science Foundation (#39410121144), a prototype of English-
Chinese botanical database system has been developed by the investigators of
this proposal, and a sample of bilingual collection data from Sun Yatsen
University herbarium (SYS) has been made on line through the Southeast Regional
Floristic Information System (SERFIS) at the University of Alabama since March
1995. Users can query this bilingual data set through the Internet computer
network. Most American botanists are not aware of bilingual database management
systems, and the majority of Chinese colleagues are still isolated from the
modern information world. Therefore, a joint workshop for bilingual botanical
information management between American and Chinese colleagues is proposed at
the University of Alabama by the end of 1995. The workshop will present to
participants the concepts and proven practices in bilingual botanical
information management, in addition to several existing botanical information
systems in the U.S., including Specimen MAnagement System for California
Herbaria (SMASCH), SERFIS, and Biodiversity Information Management Sy stem
(BIMS/INBio). It is expected that this workshop will promote the development of
botanical information systems in both U.S. and China, and it will facilitate the
scholarly exchanges between American and Chinese botanists.