* 9512334
* Acquisition of Mass Spectrometers for the Retrieval of High-Resolution Records of Global Climate Change
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Emi Ito, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1998
* USD 500,000.00

9512334 Edwards This grant, as part of the Academic Research Infrastructure(ARI)
program, provides $500,000 as one-half support of costs of acquiring three new
mass spectrometers for the Minnesota Isotope Laboratory. Total costs are jointly
supported including $420,000 from the Earth Sciences Instrumentation and
Facilities Program's ARI allocation, $80,000 from the Division of Ocean Sciences
Marine Geology and Geophysics Program and $500,000 from the Unitersity of
Minnesota. This group's research focuses on high resolution studies of global
and regional climate change as recorded in the isotopic composition of marine
and freshwater carbonates including, coral skeletons, calcareous sediments,
speleothems and ostracod tests. Specifically, the instruments that will be
purchased include a gas source stable isotope ratio mass spectrometer (SIRMS)
equipped with a Kiel device, a high transmission efficiency thermal ionization
mass spectrometer (TIMS) and an inductively coupled plasma sector mass
spectrometer (ICP-SMS). Additionally, the TIMS and ICP-SMS will provide the
necessary analytical capabilities for continued development of high-resolution
dating techniques (U/Th) and new proxies for climatic variables such as
temperature and precipitation (Sr/Ca and U/Ca ratios in corals, speleothem
growth rate, Sr/Ca, Mg/Ca and stable isotope composition of ostracods).
Furthermore, the TIMS will allow developmental work on recent breakthroughs in
chronometry using the Uranium/Protactinium (U/Pa) system. Taken as a whole,
these instruments will be provide the necessary sensitivity and analytical speed
to retrieve the next generation of high resolution local and regional climate
records for testing theories about the causes of climate change and for testing
models designed to simulate past and future climatic conditions. ***