* 9512622
* Modernization of Departmental NMR Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* David Petering, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 245,000.00

The specific aim of this proposal is to obtain funding to upgrade two NMR
instruments, General Electric GN-500 (500 MHz) and Bruker WM-250 (250 MHz)
spectrometers, in the NMR facility of the Department of Chemistry through the
replacement of The GN-500 console with a new state-of-the-art console (Varian
Unity plus 500 MHz console) and the purchase of a new 300 MHz spectrometer
(Varian GEMINI 2000) to replace the WM-250 instrument. The proposed UNITY plus
500 console and accessories, with existing 500 MHz superconducting magnet, has
the capability for conducting state-of-the-are NMR experiments on liquid and
solid state samples. The complete GEMINI 2000 300 MHz spectrometer with
accessories is equipped for conducting modern NMR experiments for the
characterization of molecules by researchers in the various sub-disciplines of
chemistry on a routine basis. The justification for this application rests first
on the need for modern NMR instrumentation to carry out the large amount of NMR
research done by departmental faculty. Five faculty will be the major users on
the 500 MHz spectrometer. Three members do biochemical studies which require
modern 500 MHz capability. One is examining the structures of metallobleomycins
bound to DNA oligomers, which relate to the prototype chemical nuclease iron
bleomycin. Another is involved with environmentally relevant work on the
structure of lobster cadmium metallothionein and its relationship to mammalian
metallothioneins. The third studies structure-reactivity relations in iron-
sulfur proteins. A physical chemist does solid state NMR studies of industrially
important catalytic surfaces and requires 500 MHz capability for solid state NMR
studies. The fifth faculty member uses NMR spectroscopy extensively to
characterize complex synthetic organic molecules. Additional faculty require
routine NMR spectroscopy from the facility, primarily to determine the
structures of newly synthesized moleculeq. In addition, it will be used by se
veral research chemists from industries in the Milwaukee area for QC and
structural analysis. In this context, the present instruments acquired in 1981
and 1986, respectively, are badly out of date and can not adequately serve
current needs for state-of-the-art multidimensional NMR experimentation as well
as high quality routine 2D NMR work. Thus, it is necessary to upgrade both
instruments so that sufficient NMR time is available on each spectrometer to
service faculty needs. It is also important to have a modern 500 MHz instrument
so that the department can attract a faculty member in biological NMR
spectroscopy to replace a professor in this area who resigned in 1994 because of
the lack of such instrumentation, moving to another institution where such
equipment is available. Finally, with the coordinated purchase of the new
console and a 300 MHz spectrometer, it will be possible to train students
routinely in the basic elements of experimental multidimensional NMR
spectroscopy on the new 300 MHz spectrometer without the need to crowd the
schedule of the 500 MHz instrument with this essential task. In so doing, the
department's graduate course in pulsed NMR can be coordinated with a much needed
laboratory for the enrolled students. Modern NMR spectroscopy is a central tool
for chemists. Faculty research and recruitment and student training in the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee has been
increasingly inhibited by the inadequacies of its NMR instrumentation. The
present proposal is submitted to remedy these fundamental problems.