* 9512279
* Acquisition of Equipment for Research in Molecular          Microbial Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Jnanendra Bhattacharjee, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 115,000.00

This proposal requests funds to purchase equipment that will build upon and
enhance existing research capabilities in the area of molecular microbial
biology in the Department of Microbiology. The funds requested will not only
provide state-of-the-art equipment to enhance the department's research
programs, but will also strengthen the department's capabilities for training
graduate and undergraduate students in the most modern techniques in molecular
microbial biology. The P.I. (Mary E. Woodworth), and the Co-P.I.s (Luis A.
Actis, J.K. Bhattacharjee, Joseph M.Carlin, and Gary R. Janssen) have well-
developed research programs in molecular microbial biology. In addition, the
five other faculty members in the Department of Microbiology have active
research programs that will benefit from the use of this equipment. The focus of
the research to be conducted within the scope of this proposal is broad in that
it will encompass research projects on regulatory mechanisms of viral DNA
replication, genetic and molecular analysis of iron acquisition systems in
bacteria, the molecular genetics of Iysine biosynthesis in yeast, the molecular
mechanisms of regulation of indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase (IDO) and the
translation of leaderless mRNAs in bacteria. The training of undergraduate and
graduate students in the department's teaching and research laboratories will
become more sophisticated and appropriate to today's special need for first-rate
graduates in science and for scientifically literate citizens. The laboratory
course in Microbial and Molecular Genetics for undergraduate and graduate
students will be described as an example of how the requested equipment will
accomplish these goals.