* 9512427
* Acquistion of ICP Spectrographic Facilities for Geologic    and Environmental Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Dorothy Freidel, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 12/31/1998
* USD 139,000.00

9512427 Coveney This grant, as part of the Academic Research Infrastructure(ARI)
program, provides $139,000 as partial support of the costs acquiring an
inductively-coupled plasma mass spectrometer (ICP- MS) and peripheral supplies
for the Department of Geosciences at the University of Missouri-Kansas City
(UMKC). This instrument will support research and teaching within several
academic departments at and will permit the acquisition of high-quality
spectrographic data for more than 60 chemical elements of interest, including
all major components of silicate rocks and soils and minor and trace
constituents of particular concern to the geological and environmental sciences
as well as to the material and chemical sciences. The ICP-MS will be the only
spectrographic equipment available on the UMKC campus and will be used in
numerous investigations including: (1) the distributions of metals in black
shales in the Midwest, (2) groundwater contamination from naturally metal-rich
shales in the Midwest, (3) the geology of hazardous waste sites, (4)
deterioration of building stones by environmental agents, (5) paleoclimates
related to Quaternary basins and pluvial lakes in the Pacific Northwest, (6) the
genesis of iron sulfide minerals, (7) the origins of uniquely bedded Ni-Mo
deposits in Cambrian shales from China, (8) lead-zinc mineralization in country
rocks of the Midwest, (9) impurities held by large organic molecules being
imaged by atomic force microscopy and (10) compositions of bones and teeth.
Eight faculty, drawn from five academic departments, have needs for this
equipment for research and teaching. The establishment of this ICP-MS laboratory
at UMKC will facilitate research by faculty while, at the same time, permitting
UMKC students to become proficient in a modern spectrometric technique. The lab
will be an essential resource for the training of M.S. students enrolled in the
Urban Environmental Geology program at UMKC, as well as for students from the
UMKC's innovative interdisciplinary Ph.D. program, for graduate students from
the other sciences at UMKC, and for undergraduates from the physical and
environmental sciences. ***