* 9512129
* Acquisition of a Fermentation Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* George McLendon, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

We are requesting funds for the acquisition of equipment and for renovation of
a fermentor to expand and upgrade the Fermentation Facility at the University of
Rochester. Although the Fermentation Facility has been in operation for over 25
years, some of the equipment has deteriorated, making it difficult and
inefficient to prepare large quantities of yeast and E. coli. The requested new
equipment and the renovation will rectify this deficiency at the University of
Rochester. The following items are requested for the Fermentation Facility: (i)
a BioFlo IV 20 liter fermentor (New Brunswick Scientific Co., Inc.); (ii) the
renovation of a 130 liter fermentor that is currently in need of repair; (iii) a
Model Z41 continuous flow centrifuge (New Brunswick Scientific Co., Inc.); (iv)
a Model 58750 sterilizer (VWR Scientific); and (v) a Labconco Laboratory Washer
(VWR Scientific). The BioFlo IV 20 liter fermentor will partially replace and
supplement three 16 liter fermentors, purchased in 1983, that are in constant
need of repair and are inefficient to operate. The 130 liter fermentor,
purchased in 1976 (Model 1401, Fermentation Design), will be renotated by the
New Brunswick Scientific Co. The continuous flow centrifuge is required for
collection of cells. The autoclave will replace a older model, purchased in
1969, that barely functions. The Laboratory Washer will be used for general
purposes, including washing of glassware used for the preparation of
precultures. The total cost of the equipment for the Fermentation Facility is
$152,667; we are requesting $100,000 from NSF, and the University of Rochester
will be provide remaining $52,667. The Fermentation Facility will be used by at
least five members of the faculty from the University of Rochester, Drs. F.
Sherman, E. Phizicky, T. Platt, A. E. Senior (Department of Biochemistry), and
J. S. Butler (Department of Microbiology &amp; Immunology); and by Dr. G.
Mclendon, (Department of Chemistry, Universi ty of Rochester, and Department of
Chemistry, Princeton University). In addition, the Fermentation Facility will be
available to others at the University of Rochester. The Fermentation Facility is
housed on the sixth floor of the Medical School (room 6-5721). The Fermentation
Facility will be under the responsibility of Dr. F. Sherman and will be managed
by Ms. Linda Comfort, who is Laboratory technician working in Dr. Sherman's
group. Each research group will be responsible for operating the equipment for
their own preparations; however, if necessary, the different groups can consult
with technicians having expertise in the use of the equipment. The Fermentation
Facility will be primarily used to prepare large quantities of normal and mutant
forms of yeast and Escherichia coli strains for a wide range of studies carried
out at the University of Rochester. The following investigators require the
Fermentation Facility to carry out the following studies: F. Sherman, amino-
terminal acetylation and post-translational processing of proteins from yeast;
G. Mclendon and F. Sherman, X-ray structures and physical studies of mutant
forms of cytochrome c of yeast; E. Phizicky, characterization of components of
the tRNA splicing reaction of yeast; T. Platt, identification and
characterization of proteins involved in 3'-end formation of yeast mRNA; J. S.
Butler, identification and characterization of proteins involved in cleavage and
polyadenylation of yeast mRNA; and A. E. Senior, structure-function
relationships of the FlFo-ATP synthase from E. coli. All of these studies are
funded by either NIH or NSF grants, and all are parts of projects involving
graduate and post-doctoral students. In addition, the Fermentation Facility will
provide training for undergraduate students, who are hired to operate the
fermentors.