* 9512321
* Acquisition of an Integrated Imaging Resource
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Steve Kay, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 06/30/1997
* USD 170,000.00

Progress in cutting-edge biomedical studies has become increasingly dependent
upon the technology required to measure biological processes as they occur in
living organisms, tissues and individual cells. This has led to the broad
application of imaging techniques in fundamental and applied bioscience. The
most important aspect of our proposal is the assembly of a critical mass of
investigators focused on the problem of studying gene expression and protein
activities in intact living cells. We plan to bring together a large group of
University faculty who are already pushing the capabilities of available imaging
technology. This limitation in currently available imaging equipment makes the
Advanced Cellular Imaging Facility (ACIF) the next logical step in the
development of many novel research programs. There are three classical imaging
problems that limit each of our biological research programs: sensitivity,
resolution and speed. These parameters are obviously linked, and increasing one
often occurs at the expense of decreasing anothep. Nevertheless, our goal is to
develop a facility that will dramatically improve all three capabilities over
our existing equipment. At the core of the ACIF will be the Integrated Imaging
Resource (IIR), a customized instrument designed to perform a broad range of
video microscopy experiments. The IIR will emphasize the following features:
optimized optical paths to reduce light loss; several types of stage chambers
for the maintenance of living specimens during image acquisition; a high-
sensitivity cryogenic CCD camera; a high resolution/high readout rate CCD
camera; a massively parallel processing unit capable of high speed image
deconvolution and 3D reconstruction, which will also process confocal images;
silicon graphics workstations for rapid and convenient image acquisition and
processing. The IIR will be expected to perform bright field as well as low-
light fluorescence and luminescence imaging in living preparations from both
plant and animal specimens. It will greatly augment the fluorescence microscope
facilities that currently exist in individual laboratories, and will be of use
to both confocal and wide-field microscopists. The ability to keep abreast of
the latest technology and to acquire hardware and software beyond the reach of
individual investigators is a main goal of establishing ACIF and acquiring the
IIR. A consequence of this goal is the generation and fostering of collaborative
efforts amongst investigators in both the Health Science Center and the College
of Arts and Sciences that will make the University of Virginia an
internationally recognized center of excellence for research in cellular
imaging. The ACIF participating faculty will be responsible for training both
undergraduate and graduate students in its use, through direct hands-on training
as well as the development of a seminar course in the applications of video
imaging to life science research.