* 9512088
* Investment under Uncertainty:  Theory and Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Andrew Abel, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 10/31/1996
* USD 109,366.00

The objectives of this research are to develop and empirically test a more
encompassing theory of investment under uncertainty that may better describe the
actual investment behavior of firms, and to assess its implications for
aggregate investment. The research project has both theoretical and empirical
components. The empirical component implements with firm-level data the
framework developed under the previous grant, in which firms may face various
costs of adjusting their capital stocks. The goal of the theoretical component
is to further develop analytically the role played by various types of
adjustment costs in the investment dynamics of the firm. This framework
emphasizes the fact that firms may pay a higher price for capital purchases than
they receive for capital sales. One such case is examined in detail and an
analytic solution obtained. It is shown that even a small discount on resale
prices relative to purchase prices may have a substantial impact on investment
behavior. This analysis is extended to a firm with any number of factors that
may have resale discounts. A two-factor example can be interpreted as a firm
facing irreversibility of capital investment and costs of firing workers. These
features have been examined separately before, but this framework shows that
when considered together, the importance of each type of irreversibility
declines. Finally, it is shown how a continuum of bubbles can arise in the
context of a firm's optimization problem. - - 9512088 Abel The objectives of
this research are to develop and empirically test a more encompassing theory of
investment under uncertainty that may better describe the actual investment
behavior of firms, and to assess its implications for aggregate investment. The
research project has both theoretical and empirical components. The empirical
component implements with firm-level data the framework developed under the
previous grant, in which firms may face various costs of adjusting their capital
stocks. The goal of the theoretical component is to further develop analytically
the role played by various types of adjustment costs in the investment dynamics
of the firm. This framework emphasizes the fact that firms may pay a higher
price for capital purchases than they receive for capital sales. One such case
is examined in detail and an analytic solution obtained. It is shown that even a
small discount on resale prices relative to purchase prices may have a
substantial impact on investment behavior. This analysis is extended to a firm
with any number of factors that may have resale discounts. A two-factor example
can be interpreted as a firm facing irreversibility of capital investment and
costs of firing workers. These features have been examined separately before,
but this framework shows that when considered together, the importance of each
type of irreversibility declines. Finally, it is shown how a continuum of
bubbles can arise in the context of a firm's optimization problem. + - À v▀ +n
±ª ╝n ¼▀ + - À vN +n ±ª ╝n ¼N f8 Û-ª þ ; + + Ûª▓ ÑOh ª' +'ª▒0 H + S u m m a r y
I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ ? x ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++
▀ Û ( L p ` » ] $ ; + +++ N:\WW60\NORMAL.DOT BROWN, R @ @ @ +║¾*_++ @ v(A
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 f8 Û-ª þ ; + +++ ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++]ªe =- e e % e H H H H H H $ x x x x x x í x ^ W + + + + + + + + ± ¼ ¼ ¼ Á
▀ ª ▀ @ ª T ^ H + + + + + ^ + H H + + + + + + H + H + ± H V ` H H H H + ± + +