* 9512619
* Planning Activities: Environmental Field Station and Marine Science Laboratory at Nacote Creek
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Marvin Witmer, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1997
* USD 25,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F % B^ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l Õ%^ Õ%^ 4 @ ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Located on a wooded 1,600-acre campus in Galloway
Township in the Pine Barrens, the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey
(RSCNJ), formerly Stockton State College, is one of only two 4-year
undergraduate institutions located in southern New Jersey. The College is
committed to the quality of its education and research programs in the
environmental sciences which are enhanced by its strategic location and
proximity to the Mullica River and the Atlantic Ocean. In 1993, in direct
support of Marine, Biological and Environmental Sciences, the College purchased
approximately 7 acres of land on the Nacote Creek, which is part of the
intercostal waterway system, to develop an Environmental and Marine Science
Field Station. The Nacote Creek site is within the nominated Mullica River-Great
Bay Estuary National Research Reserve which is characterized by freshwater
wetlands and saltmarsh natural habitats. Aqueous natural habitats are also very
common, ranging from high salinity open water bays and lagoon environments, to
extensive tidal channel and pond development in variable salinity wetlands, and
to fres hwater stream systems leading from the uplands. Stockton has invested
significantly in adapting existing buildings to teaching purposes. An NSF-ARI is
directed at increasing the research capabilities. The next step is to construct
a new facility with state of the art teaching and research capacity. This
project will assist in the developing a plan and architectural design for the
new building. Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( & D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Located on a wooded 1,600-acre campus in Galloway
Township in the Pine Barrens, the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey
(RSCNJ), formerly Stockton State College, is one of only two 4-year
undergraduate institutions located in southern New Jersey. The Tee Sullivan Tee
Sullivan @ ^ @ @ ^ @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e j j j j j j j # 1 Õ u T T + #
j # j j j j ~ j j j j Located on a wooded 1,600-acre campus in Galloway Township
in the Pine Barrens, the Richard Stockton College of New Jersey (RSCNJ),
formerly Stockton State College, is one of only two 4-year undergraduate
institutions located in southern New Jersey. The College is committed to the
quality of its education and research programs in the environmental sciences
which are enhanced by its strategic location and proximity to the Mullica River
and the Atlantic Ocean. In 1993, in direct support of Marine, Biological and
Environmental Sciences, the College purchased approximately 7 acres of land on
the Nacote Creek, which is part of the intercostal waterway system, to develop
an Environmental and Marine Science Field Station. The Nacote Creek site is
within the nominated Mullica River-Great Bay Estuary National Research Reserve
which is characterized by freshwater wetlands and saltmarsh natural habitats.
Aqueous natural habitats are also very common, ranging from high salinity open
water bays and lagoon environments, to extensive tidal channel and pond
development in variable