* 9512275
* The Development of a Low-Energy, High-Resolution Synchrotron Radiation Beamline
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* E. Ward Plummer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 527,000.00

9512275 Plummer A low energy, high resolution photoemission beam line will be
developed at the synchrotron at the Center for Advanced Microstructures and
Devices (CAMD) of Louisiana State University. This is a joint effort of
scientists and educators from the University of Michigan, the University of
Nebraska, the University of Texas, Southern University, the University of
Tennessee, and Louisiana State University. The high momentum and energy
resolution will be utilized to uncover new physical and chemical phenomena at
the surface or in thin films, such as the existence of charge density wave
distortions at the surface, Fermi surface instabilities, and metal-nonmetal
transitions in thin films. The low photon energy will be used to investigate the
development of collective excitations in thin films and to probe the bulk
properties of correlated electron systems containing transition elements or rare
earths. The high momentum resolution will facilitate dispersion measurements for
molecular solids and reconstructed semiconductor surfaces. The low photon energy
variable wavelength capabilities are essential for investigating molecular
photochemical processes. %%% Synchrotron-based angle-resolved photoemission is
the only experimental technique capable of directly mapping the energy bands of
a solid over an extended energy range. The challenge and the opportunity for the
future is to push the energy resolution of angle-resolved photoemission to
limits where the energies involved are significantly less than thermal energies.
The experience of this group of researchers in the design of synchrotron
radiation analysis instrumentation can lead to significant improvements over
existing high-resolution beam lines. ***