* 9512264
* Acquisition of a Multi-technique Surface Analysis System
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* John Barnard, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 355,000.00

9512264 Doyle A multi-technique surface analysis system with initial capability
for X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and scanning Auger microscopy (SAM)
will be acquired by the University of Alabama-Tuscaloosa. This fundamental
capability does not now exist at the Tuscaloosa campus and is part of the
University commitment to its materials science program. The equipment will be
located in a central analysis facility which serves major materials research
programs at the University, most notably the Center for Materials for
Information Technology (MINT). The MINT is a multidisciplinary research program
focusing on new materials for flexible magnetic media and heads, two areas in
which the power of SAM/XPS will be directly beneficial. The combination of XPS
and SAM in one instrument allows for the determination of near surface chemical
composition (SAM) and composition gradients (SAM), depth profiling (SAM),
chemical bonding (XPS), chemical states (XPS), and functional groups (XPS). The
instrument will support research programs in high magnetization and high
coercivity films and particles, coupling in magnetic trilayer structures, giant
magnetoresistance in multilayered structures, wear and corrosion of magnetic
media, and metal matrix composites, among others. %%% The multi-technique
surface analysis system will fulfill a fundamental need of several programs in
materials research on campus and will thus have a large impact on the academic
infrastructure. It will allow faculty to propose more comprehensive, and
therefore more competitive, materials research proposals, and will provide
students with hands-on training with a state-of-the-art tool. This instrument
will also expand opportunities for cooperative research with industrial
sponsors. ***