* 9512935
* A Confocal Microscope for the Basic Science Facility
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Robert Jensen, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1998
* USD 157,552.00

This is an application for two items that will allow state-of-the-art data
analysis and image processing: a Leica/Leitz TCS 4D-UV scanning laser confocal
microscope, and a Power Macintosh-based workstation with image processing and
image analysis software. The new microscope will be housed in the Basic Science
Microscope Facility. It will serve investigators from more than five basic
research departments at the Johns Hopkins Medical School. Our six major users
require confocal microscopy for the following purposes: high resolution
colocalization of fluorescent labels in fixed cells and tissues; clear
differentiation of signals in cells stained with multiple labels, simultaneous
recording of multiple fluorochromes for accurate registration and efficient
processing; excitation at both UV and visible wavelengths; and 3D views of
complex structures in cells, embryos and neural tissues. The Leica/Leitz TCS
4D-UV microscope best fits these needs. The Leica has (i) an upright microscope
body equipped with the best optics for DIC and confocal fluorescence microscopy,
(ii) multiple wavelength excitation provided by an Ar/Kr laser, and UV
excitation provided by an argon ion laser, (iii) simultaneous collection and
display of DIC and 3 fluorescence images, (iv) the most accurate collection of
either XZ or XY images with resolution in the Z-axis documented at 360 nm, and
(v) a convenient and efficient multi-user environment. Images will be stored on
hard drives or magneto-optical drives accessible to all laboratories in the
medical school via our EtherNet network. Volume rendering, 3D reconstruction,
and other image analyses will be performed on a separate Power Macintosh-based
workstation located in the same Microscope Facility, using software such as
VoxelView and Adobe Photoshop. The Johns Hopkins Medical School currently has
one old confocal microscope, which does not have these features. The Leica
confocal microscope described in this proposal will give all of our use rs
access to modern image and data analysis, and will be time-efficient,
dependable, and easy to use.