* 9512655
* Amino Terminal Processing of Eukakryotic Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Yie-Hwa Chang, Saint Louis University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 275,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 4 @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l 4 4 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +' 0 $ H
l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ qP 4 @
{\! e = e | o " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | # Ä± e V T 4 " | |
| | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 > " " " " | | 4 | 9512655 Chang PRIVATE The
broad goal of this project is to understand the mechanism of amino terminal
processing of eukaryotic proteins. The approach used is the purification,
characterization and genetic analysis of two methionine aminopeptidases (MAPs)
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The first aim is to elucidate the roles of yeast
MAP1 in amino terminal processing and cell growth. Yeast MAP 1 contains two zinc
fingers and a cobalt dependent catalytic domain. To understand the roles of MAP1
in this processing event, this investigator plans to study the roles of the zinc
fingers and cobalt ions in MAP1 function. The results will show whether MAP1 is
ribosome associated, and if so, how deletion of zinc fingers affects thi s
interaction The P.I. also plans to compare the efficiency of methionine removal
of several model proteins in yeast cells that express no MAP1, truncated MAP1
which lacks zinc fingers, and wild type MAP1 and to elucidate the roles of
cobalt in MAP1 function by determining the cobalt binding constant and studying
the effects of mutations at the cobalt binding sites on cell growth and enzyme
activity. The second aim is to elucidate the roles of is MAP2 in N terminal
processing and to determine whether it is a bifunctional protein. The P.I. plans
to purify and characterize this enzyme, to compare its substrate specificity and
other properties with those of MAP1, and to knock out the MAP2 gene alone and
both MAPl and MAP2 genes, and characterize the phenotype of the knockout yeast
strains. Amino terminal processing is one of the most common protein processing
events, which occurs in all living cells and is essential for normal cell
growth. Yet, until recently, very little was known about the mechanism by which
this important processing event is carried out in eukaryotic cells, and how it
is regulated. This study should provide novel insights into the mechanism and
regulation of this important event, which in turn may lead to better
understanding of the regulation of protein synthesis and the regulation of the
functions of myristoylated proteins, including certain oncogene products, viral
proteins, and proteins involved in transmembrane signaling and protein secretory
vesicular trafficking. %%% This research project is focused on studying the
mechanism of the removal of the initial amino acid from the origin of a protein
called the N terminus. This is one of the most common systems for modifying
newly made proteins. The generality of this phenomenon in proteins from microbes
to man indicates its fundamental importance to all living organisms. Yet,
relatively little is known about the mechanism by which this initial amino acid
is removed, particularly in higher organisms like man, or the manner in wh ich
this process is regulated. The Principal Investigator has already made
considerable progress in developing the problem. He has found two enzymes which
are specific for removing the N terminal methionine (the initial amino acid)
from newly synthesized proteins as they are produced in eukaryotic cells. The
next immediate goal of his research is to fully characterize these interesting
proteins, so called methionine aminopeptidases (MAPs), that are important to
every living cell. It is certain that understanding the novel features of yeast
MAPs will provide new insights into the mechanism and the regulation of this
cellular event that is essential for cell growth. *** @ ....()()))()() Z :
phoenix W EH o ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 4 @ E 4 @ Microsoft Word
6.0 4