* 9512341
* Acquisition of Equipment for Nucleic Acid and Protein       Analysis
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Rachel Skvirsky, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 159,650.00

Three items that would become components of our expanding molecular
biology/biotechnology and environmental biology programs are solicited. These
items are an automated DNA sequencer, a DNA synthesizer and a filmless
autoradiography system. These tools for the synthesis of DNA and the analysis
and quantitation of nucleic acids and proteins will extend research capabilities
in numerous areas. A core of 12 research laboratories would directly benefit
from the acquisition of this equipment. This core includes members from both the
molecular biology/ biotechnology and the environmental biology programs in the
department. A major Departmental priority has been to forge collaborations among
these diverse research interests. It has become clear that the key to
integrating these programs is molecular analysis. The molecular biologists
routinely require nucleic acid sequence data for characterizing genes and
verifying constructs. In addition these researchers must precisely quantify mRNA
and protein levels to investigate gene regulation, and must synthesize
oligonucleotides to manipulate specific DNA sequences. We also have an expanding
environmental biology program that has strengths in conservation and population
biology. The investigators of this program are relying increasingly on the power
and resolution offered by molecular techniques. The problem encountered by
population biologists is that the large sample sizes and extensive array of
markers often required for these studies have restricted the wide scale use of
laborious and expensive molecular techniques. The proposed equipment would be
used jointly by both the molecular biology/ biotechnology and the environmental
biology segments of our department. The equipment would serve as a focal point
to foster collaborative and integrative research efforts. These projects range
from basic research on gene regulation to studies of population dynamics and
conservation genetics. The efficiency of these projects would be increased and
all would be expanded and strengthened by the acquisition. The instrumentation
would also have a significant impact on our environmental biology, biotechnology
and molecular biology research training capabilities.