* 9512182
* Acquisition of Electron Microscope for Electron             Crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* David Stokes, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 400,000.00

This proposal concerns the acquisition of a state-of-the-art electron microscope
by the newly created Skirball Institute at New York University Medical Center
for determination of protein structure at nearatomic resolution. The microscope
has a Schottky field emission gun and is capable of operating at 200kV. In
addition, accessories will make it possible to image frozen-hydrated biological
specimens at high resolution. Finally, digital and analogue interfaces will
allow control of the microscope by external computers and will be used to
customize the operating modes. Two projects are described that use methods of
electron crystallography to study the molecular structure of Ca2+-ATPase from
sarcoplasmic reticulum and of the anion transporter from erythrocytes (Band 3).
In the case of Ca2+-ATPase, thin, multilamellar crystals diffract to 3.5
resolution and 3-D data will be collected by tilting specimens and recording
both electron diffraction and images. The same strategy will be used for 2-D
crystals of Band 3, which in initial studies have produced optical diffraction
to 12 . In both cases, the aim is for 3-D reconstruction at ~7 resolution, from
which elements of secondary structure will be identified and related to the
extensive set of biochemical and biophysical data for each protein. For
Ca2+-ATPase, the relatively strong electron diffraction provides hope for a
reconstruction at higher resolution, which may eventually allow tracing of the
peptide chain. Both of these projects also involve tubular crystals of their
respective proteins, which provide structural data at more moderate resolutions
(~15 ), but which offer the opportunity to study conformational changes of the
molecules. Such conformational changes are integral to the respective mechanisms
of ion transport and elucidation of the corresponding structures will be
essential for fully understanding these mechanisms. A collaborative project with
the Neurobiology Program at the Skirball Institute is also described. This
involves immunoelectron microscopy of tissue sections in an attempt to
understand the sequence of signals that lead to formation of a neuromuscular
junction during development. In addition, other investigators are being
recruited into the Neurobiology Program with interests in structure/function
relationships of voltagegated ion channels. Ultimately, active collaborations
between the electron microscopists and the neurobiologists are likely to
engender a crystallographic project involving these channels. The building of a
structural biology group at the core of a major new research institute at New
York University Medical Center will not only provide extensive training
opportunities for the graduate students, but also bring New York University to
the forefront of this important field. The lack of structural information for
membrane proteins represents an acknowledged problem for the basic research
community and all of the projects to be pursued on the requested electron
microscope would specifically address this problem. In addition, the unique
capabilities of this microscope for high resolution imaging of biological
molecules would make it a major resource for structural biologists throughout
the northeastern United States.