* 9512675
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Policing in Transition:    Relations Between the Royal Ulster Constabulary and         Nationalist Communities in Northern Ireland
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Michael Musheno, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 07/31/1996
* USD 8,500.00

9512675 Musheno This project examines how examines how social diversity and
community conflict affect the relationships between communities and the police
in an especially difficult context where the police have undertaken reforms
designed to gain acceptance for their authority from communities that have
historically regarded them as illegitimate. The context is Northern Ireland. The
project focuses on the globalization of policing strategies originating in the
United States and now being adopted by the Northern Ireland police and by other
police organizations worldwide. It seeks to determine how and with what success
the Northern Ireland police have sought the support of the Nationalist
communities, who have most distrusted them, historically. It uses data gathered
from historical documents, police publications, and interviews with police
officers and Nationalist community members. It will be supplemented by intensive
field work in a Nationalist community to illuminate how the history of conflict
in Northern Ireland has affected police-community relations. The study's
findings should be relevant to understanding police-community pelations and to
the establishment of more effective and accepted political authority in Northern
Ireland. %%%% This project examines how examines how social diversity and
community conflict affect the relationships between communities and the police
in an especially difficult context where the police have undertaken reforms
designed to gain acceptance for their authority from communities that have
historically regarded them as illegitimate. The context is Northern Ireland. The
project focuses on the globalization of policing strategies originating in the
United States and now being adopted by the Northern Ireland police and by other
police organizations worldwide. It uses data gathered from historical documents,
police publications, and interviews with police officers and Nationalist
community members and intensive field work in a Nationalist community to i
lluminate how the history of conflict in Northern Ireland has affected police-
community relations. The study's findings should be relevant to understanding
police-community relations and to the establishment of more effective and
accepted political authority in Northern Ireland.