* 9512348
* Development of a Variable Flow Seawater Flume and High-     Speed Video Imaging System
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* George Goslow, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 151,925.00

We propose to develop a variable flow sea water flume and high-speed video
imaging system for studies of feeding, dispersal and locomotion in moving
fluids. A sea water flume and video system in the Department of Ecology and
Evolutionary Biology will assist the research/education programs of the Marine
Ecology group (Bertness and Witman) and the Vertebrate Morphology group (Goslow
and Swartz). Water flow plays an important role in mediating ecological
interactions. The specifics of this mediation are largely unknown, however, and
their elucidation remain a major research focus of Bertness,Witman, and their
students. A sea water flume with variable water flow rate and volume and a means
for documenting rapidly occurring biological response will enable studies of the
effects of internal waves, variable food supply and temperature on populations
of suspension-feeding invertebrate animals. The system will also facilitate
studies of the way(s) marine predators respond to increasing water flow under
controlled conditions. Vertebrate animals are also affected by their physical
environment which is reflected in body shape and locomotor style. The mechanisms
by which morphology is shaped by physical parameters is the focus of the
research programs of Goslow, Swartz and their students. For example, a group of
seabirds, the 'wing-propelled' divers, use their wings to 'fly' underwater as
well as in the air; an ability which necessitates some evolutionary compromises
for one if not both media. Among fishes and marine mammals, considerable
diversity of body form, fin shape, bone structure and locomotor pattern exists
which can only be understood by careful manipulative studies. A flume with
controlled flow characteristics which is instrumented to monitor the water
column and the locomotor movements of the organisms under investigation will
provide a focus for training students in modern manipulative studies designed to
determine the evolution of complex forms.