* 9512742
* Dissertation Research:  Frontiers of 19th Century Culture   Contact
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Robert Schuyler, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 9,677.00

Schuyler/Church Under the direction of Dr. Robert Schuyler, Ms. Minette Church
will collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will excavate two abandoned
farmsteads located in southeastern Colorado which were occupied in the 19th
century. She will also examine the documentation associated with them. The
occupants of each farm are known: one was Anglo-American, the other Hispanic.
Archaeological investigation will entail four weeks of excavation at each site
as well as examination of the artifacts that prior survey crews have
systematically collected from the surface. The two homesteads will be mapped in
detail with special attention paid to placement, orientation, spatial layout and
construction of buildings and outbuildings and location of debris. To help
determine land use, flotation samples and pollen cores will be collected. The
results of the excavation of the homesteads, when combined with collections of
oral histories, journals and other primary documentary sources will supply key
information on the material culture and life at the household level. This
research has two underlying goals. The first is to examine the role of ethnicity
in adaptation. Groups from different cultural backgrounds moved to this rural
region of Colorado to farm and herd livestock. Anthropologists and historians
have speculated on similarities and differences in adaptation which occurred and
related these both to different forms of social organization and distance
travelled from point of origin. Some have argued that the single set of
environmental conditions led to cultural convergence while others have
postulated that distinct subcultures were maintained. MS Church will attempt to
determine which view is correct. The second goal is a methodological one.
Because written documentation exists for both sites, a good deal of a priori
control is possible. Ms. Church wishes to examine the material remains which she
collects and determine the extent to which they reflect ethnicit y. The
methodology she develops and conclusions she draws will be uqeful in a number of
archaeological situations. This work is important for several reasons. It will
increase our understanding of a dynamic period in American history. It will shed
new light on cultural adaptation and will assist in the training of a promising
young scientist.