* 9512465
* U.S.-Korea Joint Seminar on Civil Infrastructure System     (CIS) Research, Seoul, Korea, September 25-28, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Joseph Penzien, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1996
* USD 53,553.00

9512465 Penzien This award provides funds to permit Dr. Joseph Penzien,
Professor Emeritus, Department of Earthquake Engineering, University of
California, Berkeley, to conduct with Professor Chang-Koon Choi, Department of
Civil Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), a
U.S.-Korea Joint Seminar on Civil Infrastructure System (CIS) Research. This
joint seminar will be held in Seoul, Korea, September 25-28, 1995. The
participation of fourteen U.S. scientists/engineers will be supported under this
award. The joint seminar will have several major interest areas including the
following: structural analysis and design; better performing structural
materials; transportation systems; tunnel and underground structures; lifeline
systems; sensoring, monitoring and control; management, maintenance, and
rehabilitation; and social and economic considerations. CIS research is one of
NSF's seven primary strategic research areas. It is an area of increasing
importance, especially in East Asia where infrastructure development is expected
to keep pace with growing economic power. The PI and his Korean collaborator are
exceptionally well qualified to organize and conduct such a joint seminar. Both
are top scholars who are internationally renowned for their academic and
professional achievements. The PI has been a member of the National Academy of
Engineering since 1977. Dr. Choi recently received the prestigious National
Engineering Medal awarded by the Korean government. Both collaborators have
successfully organized past international meetings. This project is relevant to
the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to
increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and
engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and
techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest and benefit.
Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering
Foundation (KOSEF). Other East Asian participants will be supported from other
sources. ***