* 9512386
* Acquisition Of Multi-Media Storage and Processing for       Research in Situated Communication
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Lawrence Barsalou, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, the University of Chicago
Committee on Cognition and Communication will purchase: a video digitizing
PowerMac 9500/132, 4 Silicon Graphics Indigo2 ZX workstations, 3 DigitalLinear
Tape 20 GB backup systems and a Young Minds CD-ROM recorder. This equipment will
permit the group to digitize multimedia recordings of communication situations
and to code and analyze various properties of each digitized recording. It will
also establish the groundwork for the creation of a large multimedia database of
communication situations. The database will contain coded and measured
information about each communicative situation. It will include classifications
of gestures made qualitatively by researchers acoustical measurements of speech,
and measurements of gesture movement using image processing tools. The goal of
this research is to investigate the cognitive mechanisms that mediate processing
in conversational interaction, and utterance production and comprehension. To
fully understand verbal communication, language use must be studied in natural
communicative contexts such as conversations, arguments, narratives, recall of
emotional events and parent-child interaction. Natural communicative contexts
contain rich sources of information that govern the dynamics of language
processing in ways that cannot be observed in standard laboratory situations.
The analysis system which the Chicago group will employ, will allow studies of
this type to be conducted. The instrumentation system will also be used in
teaching situations and be available to graduate and undergraduate students.