* 9512963
* Acquisition of a Molecular Imager System
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* H. Roger Boerma, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 63,125.00

Significant advances in digital imaging technology provide capabilities not
otherwise available. The overall objective of this proposal is to obtain a
16-bit/pixel digital imager that will permit investigators in the Plant Sciences
Building at The University of Georgia to profit from this technology. A single
instrument that will provide images of media labelled with both radioisotopic
and non-radioisotopic probes is requested. Supporting items include a
microcomputer essential for operation of the imager, one high energy phosphor
screen cassette for each major user, one low-energy phosphor screen cassette to
be shared among all users, four chemiluminescence screen cassettes to be shared
among all users, a grey-scale laser printer for routine and inexpensive output,
and site-licensed image-analysis software. All will be integrated into an
existing computer network that will not only permit data to be moved readily
from the imager to each user s laboratory, but will also provide direct access
to a publication quality color printer and to a CD recorder for archiving data.
The imaging system (1) will permit us to obtain quantitative information with
greatly enhanced sensitivity and accuracy, and (2) will dramatically decrease
exposure times, permitting experiments to progress at a much more rapid pace.
Current usage of film for imaging media in the Plant Sciences Building exceeds
4,700/year, indicating that a digital imager will receive extensive and
efficient use. The instrument will be used primarily with DNA, RNA and protein
blots, labelled with 32p, 1251, 35S, 14C, or with enzymes that yield
chemiluminescence given appropriate substrates. Research programs that will
benefit from the equipment range from mission-oriented (e.g., H. Roger Boerma)
to fundamental (e.g., Kelly Dawe). These programs include the regulation of
virulence genes in a plant pathogen (Timothy Denny), intercellular movement of
plant viruses and intracellular movement of viral glycop roteins (C. Michael
Deom), characterization of root-knot nematode secretions (Richard Hussey and
Celeste Ray), genetic improvement of pest resistance and stress tolerance in
soybean (H. Roger Boerma), use of molecular markers in plant breeding and
evolution (Gary Kochert), characterization of two pathways of polyamine
synthesis in plants (Russell Malmberg), the genetics and cell biology of the
maize meiotic centromere and kinetochore (Kelly Dawe), and a comparative
evaluation of the phytochrome gene family and its expression in tomato and
soghum (Lee Pratt and Marie-Michele Cordonnier-Pratt).