* 9512679
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Theoretical and        Numerical Investigations of Relaxation in Metastable        Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Per Arne Rikvold, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 02/28/1997
* USD 18,401.00

This award supports the collaboration of Professor Per Arne Rikvold of the
Physics Department, Center for Materials Research and Technology, and
Supercomputer Computations Institute at Florida State University with Professor
Hiroyuki Tomita of the Department of Fundamental Sciences in the Faculty of
Integrated Human Studies at Kyoto University. Project funding will enable Dr.
Rikvold to spend 3.5 months at Kyoto University to study nonequilibrium
statistical-mechanics aspects of metastable phases of matter and their decay.
Metastable phases are ubiquitous in nature and include such familiar examples as
the diamond phase of carbon, supercooled water, and permanent magnets. Drs.
Rikvold and Tomita have both previously studied this common but as-yet ill-
understood state of matter, using analytical and numerical methods. By bringing
together researchers from the U.S. and Japan working on the nonequilibrium
statistical mechanics of metastability, the proposed research visit will enhance
the research in this area in both countries. The U.S. scientist will have the
opportunity to become familiar with the work performed at Kyoto University and
other Japanese institutions, while informing Japanese researchers of recent
results of U.S. research. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of
the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through
international collaboration.