* 9512225
* Development of a Filter-Analyzer Neutron Spectrometer at the National Institute of Standards and Technology
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* John Fischer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 740,000.00

9512225 Klein A new, high intensity filter-analyzer neutron spectrometer (FANS)
will be designed, constructed, and operated at the National Institute of
Standards and Technology (NIST) by a consortium of scientists from the
University of Pennsylvania, the University of California at Santa Barbara, NIST,
Hughes Aircraft, DuPont, and Allied-Signal. The throughput and sensitivity of
the new FANS will exceed by a factor of at least fifty that of a heavily
oversubscribed prototype which is already unique in the US. When completed, FANS
will be the most sensitive neutron spectrometer in the world for studies of
vibrational modes in the 10-100 millielectron-volt range by inelastic scattering
of neutrons. The FANS instrument will be used to study intra- and intermolecular
vibrations in molecular crystals and liquids, polymers, guest-host systems such
as hydrogen in metals and hydrocarbons in zeolites, to characterize novel forms
of carbon such as fullerenes and tubules, and novel candidate molecules for
environmentally safe refrigerants. %%% The development of the FANS will fill an
urgent need of the country's scientific infrastructure. There are currently only
two such instruments in the world, one in France and one prototype at NIST, and
they are both heavily subscribed. The FANS will have a wide impact on molecular
spectroscopy research, as current neutron facilities in the US are inadequate
for studies of molecular dynamics. ***