* 9512162
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Set-Valued Hybrid State    Estimation with Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1997
* X. Rong Li, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 11/30/1997
* USD 18,100.00

9512162 Li This award supports initiation of cooperative research between Dr.
Xiaorong Li, University of New Orleans, Department of Electrical Engineering,
and Wang Shuning, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, and Han
Chongzhao, Xian Jiaotong University, on set-valued hybrid state estimation with
applications. Set-valued estimation is a generalization/extension of the
traditional optimal point estimation. It emphasizes the feasibility, rather than
optimality, of the solution to the estimation problem. This research has ever
increasing applications in various fields of systems and manufacturing
engineering research, because it is insensitive to modeling errors, and
therefore can provide more reliable and robust solution to failure detection
problems. The US and Chinese co-PIs on this project are well known researchers
in set-valued estimation, and bring complementary expertise to the research.
Experimental work will be carried out at the National Key Laboratory of
Manufacturing System Engineering to test the validity of the techniques
developed during the project. Both Huazhong University and Xian Jiaotong
University have received increasing funding from various Chinese government
agencies and industry in recent years for work in the area of systems and
manufacturing engineering research. This is an extension of work funded under
ECS 9496319.