* 9512809
* Computational Approach to the Developmental Biology of      Dictyostelium
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Herbert Levine, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2001
* USD 566,352.00

Statement of Objectives The objective of this research is to develop a
computational model for the morphogenesis which occurs in the development of
Dictyostelium discoideum. The life cycle of this microbial eukaryote progresses
from that of a solitary amoeba to a differentiated multicellular organism, under
the control of interlinked genetic and physico-chemical processes. The work will
focus on extending successful models of early aggregation (encompassing
chemotaxis and nonlinear cAMP waves) to the mound structure and subsequent tip
elongation; also, we will incorporate recent data regarding the role of genetic
networks in the signal transduction process into a more sophisticated and hence
more predictive cAMP wave model. Experiments will be used to motivate modeling
choices and subsequently to test predictions, leading after several iterative
cycles to a simulation capability currently unavailable for this (or any other)
developmental biology system. Methods to be Employed Simulations will be based
on the recently introduced hybrid scheme where the individual amoebae are
treated as automata which interact with the physical world of chemical signals,
stress fields, etc., treated as a continuum. This methodology allows the modeler
great flexibility in representing the manner in which a Dictyostelium cell
obtains information from the surrounding world, reacts (via moving, emission of
chemicals, modification of its internal state variables, etc) to that data.
Supporting experiments will be performed by confocal fluorescence microscopy
using cells which express green fluorescent protein under a variety of distinct
promoters. This setup allows us to measure mound morphology dynamics as well as
track individual cells (from specific differentiated cell lines if needed ) in
the three dimensional multicellular body. Significance of the Propose d Activity
to the Advancement of Knowledge or Education Computational methods are beginning
to play an important role in biology. As the experimental data begin to indicate
the complexity of genetic interactions and how these exert control over the
developmental program, one will increasingly need to rely on computational
procedures to get from single cell behavior to multicellular morphogenesis. This
research suggests a case study of the? possible role of computation for the
development of Dictyostelium. If successful, it will not only speed the rate of
progresq in understanding Dictyostelium development, but will also serve as a
guide for longer term efforts to bring a predictive simulational capability to
the entire field of developmental biology.