* 9512506
* Acquisition of Thermo-analytical Instrumentation for        Materials Chemistry Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Rajive Khanna, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/1999
* USD 141,140.00

9512506 Griffin A suite of thermoanalytical equipment will be acquired and
utilized by a group of scientists working in the Structure and Dynamics cluster
of the Mississippi EPSCoR (Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research) Program. The instrumentation includes a differential scanning
calorimeter with photocalorimeter accessory, a thermogravimetric analyzer, a
dynamic mechanical analyzer, a polarized light thermal microscopy system, an
infrared imaging camera, and controlled heating accessories for an existing
infrared spectrometer. The instruments will be used for the thermal
characterization of materials synthesized by the research group. Much of the
research involves thermal studies of liquid crystals, such as thermodynamic and
kinetic data of phase transitions, photocalorimetry, spectroscopic and
mechanical behavior as a function of temperature. Other research involves
diverse topics such as traveling front polymerization, structuring in
semifluorinated alkanes, and amorphous organic glasses. %%% The proposed
instrumentation will fill a critical need of a group of EPSCoR scientists, thus
enhancing their ability to conduct first-line research which will take them to
the next level of competitiveness. The instrumentation will also serve an active
program in organic and polymeric materials that has traditionally involved a
large number of undergraduate and underrepresented minority students. ***