* 9512472
* Development of Instrumented Experimental Facility for the   Study of Large Scale River Morphology, Stratigraphy, and    Landscape Evolution
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Efi Foufoula-Georgiou, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 08/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

9512472 Parker This Academic Research Infrastructure grant provides $250,000 as
one-half support of the development of an experimental facility for the study of
large scale river morphology, stratigraphy and landscape evolution. The facility
will be constructed at the St. Anthony Falls Hydraulic Laboratory, University of
Minnesota in an existing indoor basin that is 14.3 m long and 7.3 m wide. The
main elements of the basin will include, a rainmaker for simulating various
hydrologic regimes, a hinged floor to simulate tectonic uplift and subsidence, a
zone of ponded water and feed points for water and sediment along the basin. All
elements of the basin are to be computer controlled and monitored by a data
acquisition system. The main subsystems of the data acquisition system will be
two computer controlled laser profilers for precision measurements of
microrelief, a particle imaging velocimetry system for instantaneous measurement
of surface flow velocities, an optical imaging system for instantaneous
determination of channel depth and a stereoimaging system for determination of
overall topography. This project is to be constructed and utilized by an
interdisciplinary team consisting of a civil engineer, a sedimentologist, an
environmental engineer, an agricultural engineer and an engineer with
considerable knowledge of electronics. The basin is to be operable in both
subaerial and subaqueous mode allowing for studies of both riverine processes
and terrestrial landscape evolution and studies of continental shelf, slope and
rise evolution. An automated mesocosm of this kind allows for the control of
governing variables and monitoring on time and spatial scales that are not
easily observed in field situations. This facility should provide a bridge
between simulation and field research that hastens the development of new
predictive tools and it is intended that the facility be made available to a
broad spectrum of outside researchers. ***