* 9512287
* Acquisition of a State-of-the-Art Electron Detector, Data   Acquistion and Processing Systems and Ion Gun to Upgrade a  Surface Analysis Facility
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Thomas Fehlner, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 08/31/1998
* USD 99,425.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9512287 A state-of-the-art integrated up-grade package consisting
of: 1) a 5 channel electron detector system, 2) a high-speed, digital data
acquisition and control system, and 3) a powerful SUN workstation for data
processing, and a variable flux, variable ion energy ion gun and controller for
a Kratos XSAM-800 SEM, XPS, Auger system will be acquired. The package will be
supplied by Kratos Analytical Ramsey, NJ and the ion gun by RBD Enterprises,
Eden Prairie, MN. The system will be the anchor instrument of the University's
Surface Science Facility jointly operated by the College of Science and
Engineering and will be available to all academic researchers requiring
analytical surface chemistry. The proposed system upgrade will immediately
impact research performed by 10 faculty users. The requirements include all or
some of the following capabilities to be offered by the proposed new systems; 1)
high energy resolution, 2) high spatial resolution, 3) high chemical sensitivity
fast jet precise depth profiling an 4) rapid and reliable analysis. Whether it
be the chemical characterization of; 1) catalysts, 2) interface reactions
between biological and non-biological materials, 3) artificial quantum solids,
4) lubricated rubbing interfaces, 5) semiconductor multilayered
heterostructures, 6) reaction synthesized ceramics materials, 7) fracture
surfaces, or 8) ohmic contacts on wide handgap semiconductors, the users agree
that the proposed equipment acquisition is essential for the continuance of the
research and teaching effort in Surface Science at the University of Notre Dame.
The number of trained users will quickly grow due to the expanded set of
capabilities that would result from the upgrade. It is expected that the
presence of this versatile, user- friendly, quality system will continue to
spawn new research projects and new users. ***