* 9512146
* Decisions to Limit the Use of Technologies at HMOs and Other Insurers: Process, Principles, and Guidelines
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Norman Daniels, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

For health care reform to achieve increased access while constraining cost
increases, we need a system for making decisions about the use of new
technologies and other services that is widely perceived to be fair. Reforming
an institution requires a thorough knowledge of how it works, however.
Currently, decisions by HMOs and other insurers to limit the use of new
technologies are controversial and mysterious; we know little about how they are
or should be made. This project undertakes the empirical and ethical analysis
necessary to understand existing processes and improve them. The three year
interdisciplinary project is being carried out by a philosopher, a psychiatrist
with clinical and managerial experience in an HMO, the Program Coordinator for
an HMO committee involved in decisions about new technologies, and a medical
anthropologist with expertise in using ethnographic methods in medical contexts.
With other support, the team is surveying an association of HMOs to determine
the methods in use for making decisions about new technologies and conducting an
in-depth study of decision-making by the Committee on Appropriate Technology at
the Harvard Community Health Plan. With interviews, participant observation, and
analysis of documents and videotapes, this support will allow the study of
`focal cases` that reveal how three major collaborating HMOs and the Oregon
Health Resources Commission make decisions on the same new technologies. In
consultation with collaborating HMOs, the team will then develop guidelines for
an improved and morally acceptable process. It will disseminate the results
through associations of HMOs and through appropriate journal publications, as
well as a monograph. Finally, using interviews, it will assess the impact of a
publicly accountable procedure in HMOs on research and development attitudes of
producers of medical technologies. A morally acceptable, publicly accountable
process for making decisions about new technologies in HMOs and other insurers
can be generalized into a model for making other decisions limiting the use of
beneficial services; the result may also be generalizable to other contexts of
decision-making about the dissemination of technologies. The project will
interest health policy makers and implementers as well as scientists and
engineers involved in research and development decisions.