* 9512564
* Development of a Novel Helium Beam Scattering Multi-        technique/detection Facility to Study Surface Lattice and   Spin-wave Dynamics, and Spin-resolved Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Wolfgang Franzen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1997
* USD 103,000.00

9512564 El-Batanouny This research will develop a versatile multi-
technique/multi- detection system to be used in conjunction with a newly
developed dual atomic beam (DAB) monochromator to be used for surface studies.
The instrument will be capable of measuring the magnetic and spin-dependent
electronic structure of solid surfaces, as well as the related dynamical
properties. The DAB monochromator can generate a mono-energetic beam of either
ground-state helium atoms or spin-polarized metastable helium atoms. The heart
of the detection system is a miniaturized angle-resolved hybrid detector which
can provide dispersive atom-velocity analysis as well as detection of metastable
atoms. Magnetic measurements to be performed involve determining the long-range
order of surface electron spin polarization and the dynamical properties of
surface spin waves (magnons). The dual atomic beam mode of operation permits to
distinguish between surface magnons and surface phonons, as the spin-polarized
atom beam couples to both surface magnons and phonons while the ground state
atom beam couples only to surface phonons. The technique is suitable for the
study of materials with highly correlated electron systems, such as high
temperature cuprate superconductors and other transition metal compounds. %%%
The implementation of this novel and unique system will open a new area of
research involving the properties of surface electron-spin states and their
dynamics, which remains inaccessible to existing techniques. The proposed system
is simple, innovative, and user-friendly enough that it is expected to have a
wider use, with the potential for commercial production. ***