* 9512482
* Acquisition of Equipment for Studies of Protein Structure   and Function at the University of Nevada, Reno
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* William Welch, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 249,000.00

The purpose of this proposal is to make a major improvement in the quality and
capability of instrumentation available on campus for research and training in
protein chemistry and physics. The five items requested build on a base of
existing equipment and faculty acquired and supported by the University over the
last several years. As programs in the natural sciences have developed in
Nevada, there has been an increasing amount of research and teaching involving
proteins and peptides, including molecular recognition and protein/peptide
interactions. This has put a heavy demand on existing equipment used for protein
analysis and accentuated the need for protein technologies not yet available in
the State of Nevada. The proposed instruments will enhance our capabilities in
this area in three aspects: (1) the analysis of protein structure and
macromolecular and protein- ligand interactions (protein sequencer, MALDI-TOF
mass spectrometer, life time fluorescence spectroscopy), (2) the visualization
and interpretation of experimental data, modeling of biopolymer conformation and
receptor-ligand interactions, hypothesis building, and engineering of proteins
(high capacity graphics workstation), and (3) the chemical synthesis of peptides
(peptide synthesizer). The equipment requested will serve students and faculty
in the University of Nevada's growing undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
training programs. The University has a large undergraduate Biochemistry
program; each Biochemistry major is required to complete a year-long laboratory-
based thesis project. There are multi-departmental graduate programs in
Biochemistry, Cellular and Molecular Biology, Cellular and Molecular
Pharmacology and Physiology, and allied fields which share faculty and
resources. The physical and/or chemical principles behind the requested
equipment are already taught in didactic courses for graduate and undergraduate
students. Availability of such equipment on campus is an enormous b enefit in
the training of the next generation of researchers and technicians. The
equipment will be shared with members of five departments and three
interdisciplinary graduate programs. The requested equipment would have an
immediate impact on (A) 35 faculty in Biochemistry, Cell and Molecular Biology
and allied areas, (B) 20 postdoctoral fellows, (C) 56 graduate students in
Biochemistry and Cell and Molecular Biology and (D) 113 undergraduate
biochemistry majors. The greatest initial use will come from the 30 members of
the major users' laboratories; previous experience on this campus with existing
equipment has shown that the demand will grow exponentially. Equipment such as
the MALDI-TOF mass spectrometer and peptide synthesizer will quickly acquire
users from students of at least ten other faculty members. Full funding of this
proposal would permit a major increase in both the quality and the quantity of
training offered to undergraduates, pre-doctoral and post-doctoral trainees. It
would permit exposure to technologies (time-resolved fluorescence, peptide
synthesis) not presently available on campus and greatly enhance the
availability of other technologies (molecular modeling, peptide sequencing)
already present but being conducted on overloaded or obsolete equipment.