* 9512392
* Acquisition of Equipment for a Mouse Genetic Manipulation   Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Glenn Merlino, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

The purpose of this project is to acquire equipment to create a Transgenic Mouse
Facility at Georgetown University (GU). During the past 10 years, GU has
undergone dramatic expansion of its funded research in the basic Life Sciences.
This has allowed undertaking of a large scale expansion of its rodent viral
antigen-free Research Resources Facility (RRF) animal facility under direction
of Dr. Stephen P. Schiffer, DVM. A strong need to provide a facility for
production, characterization, breeding, and transfer of transgenic mice has
arisen as the power of this type of experimental model has become evident.
Transgenic mouse technology allows the generation of mouse strains expressing a
gene(s) of interest in a specified range of cell types and in a specified window
in time or development, depending upon the promoter of the gene. The technique
can allow profound insights into gene regulation and gene function in a normal
physiological context. A transgenic mouse facility does not currently exist at
Georgetown University. Our proposed facility will produce transgenic mouse
strains at competitive costs for University investigators in relevant basic
science departments and interdisciplinary programs (Neuroscience, Cell Biology,
Microbiology and Immunology, Physiology and Biophysics, Pharmacology,
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pathology and Biology). The facility will
become a critical feature of graduate (and undergraduate training) programs in
each of the above mentioned fields of study, and will train new faculty as well.
The fundamental research projects to be supported by the facility include
studies on gene function and regulation in the biological processes of cell
division, cell death, and cell differentiation. Specifically, transgenic mouse
research projects from four interdisciplinary focus groups of faculty are
identified in the areas of Immunology, Neurobiology, Developmental Biology and
Reproductive Biology. In addition, we have created a unique Biotechno logy
exchange agreement with the Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) whereby the
Jackson Laboratory will serve as a respository and distribution for new strains
of mice generated by our facility and our facility will receive strains of
interest and technical advice from the Jackson Laboratory. Leadership of the
facility include Robert B. Dickson, PhD, Professor of Cell Biology and
Pharmacology; Stephen P. Schiffer, DVM, Director, RRF Animal Facility; and Glenn
T. Merlino, Adjunct Associate Professor of Pathology. The facility will be
overseen by a committee of basic scientists from Georgetown University with a
research interest in Transgenic Mouse Technology and its applications.