* 9512366
* Acquisition of an Advanced Plant Molecular Genetics Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Fredrick Bliss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 255,448.00

We will acquire and operate instruments for a high-throughput automated plant
molecular genetics facility. The facility will comprise of an automated DNA
sequencer, a DNA extraction robot, a laboratory workstation, a thermocycler, a
phosphoimager, and supporting computers. The facility will primarily provide
three areas of research support: DNA sequencing, quantitative analysis of gene
expression, and genetic analysis. The facility will impact at least 24
productive research programs in nine departments that study plant molecular
genetics, ranging from fundamental molecular genetics on model species to
applied crop improvement programs. We are currently severely limited by the lack
of this instrumentation. All these studies would benefit from this facility.
Several experiments are impossible without it. Reliable generation of accessible
DNA sequence data is a fundamental component for many biological investigations,
particularly gene identification and characterization. Accurate measurement of
gene expression is critical to studies on gene function. Molecular markers have
now been developed for most of the species under study; these should now be
utilized. This facility will allow a scale of experimentation that would be
otherwise impossible in an academic setting. Automated DNA extraction as well as
template preparation and analysis will allow large numbers of samples to be run
with accuracy. Both the UC Davis Office of Research and the College of
Agriculture and Environmental Sciences are committed to developing this facility
as demonstrated by their level of financial support. Their contribution,
together with that from Keygene, constitutes a 50% match to the amount requested
from NSF. The College will provide technical support for a total of five years,
two years beyond the funding period. We will continue to develop and apply
efficient molecular marker technologies. In particular, we are collaborating
with Applied Biosystems to analyze Ampli fied Fragment Length Polymorphisms as
codominant markers on their instruments. This will increase the utility of their
machines and allow hundreds of markers to be analyzed on many individuals. It
will also reduce the generation of radioactive waste.