* 9512728
* U.S.-Netherlands Center to Center Cooperative Research in   Membrane Science and Technology
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Richard Noble, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/31/1998
* USD 47,780.00

This award supports the establishment of a strong research-based linkage between
two centers of excellence in membrane technology in the U.S. and The
Netherlands. These are the University-Industry Cooperative Research Center in
Separations Using Thin Films of the University of Colorado, Boulder, directed by
Professor William B. Krantz, and the Center for Membrane Science and Technology
at the University of Twente, The Netherlands, directed by Professor Heiner
Strathmann. With seventy research staff, this Dutch organization is the largest
and strongest membrane research center in the world. It has interdisciplinary
strengths in both the fundamental science and applied technology aspects of
membranes. The U.S. center is a relatively new one, and is stronger in the
engineering side of membrane research. It hopes to benefit from the Dutch
expertise in membrane chemistry and thermodynamics as well as its experience in
technology transfer to its industrial partners. Staff and students of the two
centers will collaborate in several areas of research, but generally these lie
in the area of processes and models for the formation of new types of membranes
for use in environmental applications. Specific research topics will include a
thermally induced phase-separation process, methods to minimize macrovoid
defects in phase-inversion membranes, hybrid membranes, zeolite membranes,
polymeric membranes and metallic membranes. Ultimately the joint research to be
performed should contribute new knowledge about the separation processes
effected by membranes, and how to enhance the processes and develop new membrane
materials for use in more hostile environments Over its three year duration,
this award will support nine research visits lasting from three weeks to three
months to be made by three senior staff and six graduate students of the U.S.
center. Funds for the award are provided by the Western Europe Program of the
Division of International Programs, and the Separation and Purification
Processes Program of the Division of Chemical and Thermal Systems.