* 9512950
* Laser Tweezers and Scissors for the Analysis of Cells and   Molecules
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1997
* Jean Sanger, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 101,334.00

This proposal requests funds for the purchase of equipment necessary to
establish a multi-user Laser Tweezers and Laser Scissors center. The development
of optical trapping by laser light using single- beam gradient force traps
(popularly referred to as optical tweezers) has provided a powerful tool for
micromanipulating cells and polymers both in vivo and in vltro. The
instrumentation can be used to elucidate qualitative and quantitative properties
of organelles or intracellular bacteria inside living cells as well as particles
or bacteria attached to the surfaces of living cells. Experiments are also
proposed for the use of the Laser Tweezers to measure the force development of
beads coated with motor molecules in cell-free systems. The power of the Laser
Scissors can be used to make precise surgical cuts inside living cells as well
as in isolated polymer systems. Experiments are also proposed to use the Laser
Scissors to cut parts of cells and axons that can then be isolated with the Cell
Selector microsyringe so that they can be analyzed for different types of mRNA.
The Laser Tweezers and Laser Scissors will be mounted on a requested Nikon
inverted microscope. This laser center will be administered by experienced
investigators and will be available for investigators and their students at the
University of Pennsylvania. The instrumentation will be unique on the campus and
will permit problems of a fundamental nature to be addressed that would
otherwise not be possible. ~ - I