* 9512945
* An Automated Nutrient Analyzer System for Biological        Research
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Alice Alldredge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 50,398.00

This is a request for funds for the purchase of an automated nutrient analysis
system. This would be a multi-user instrument, and would be housed in a shared-
use analytical and instrumentation facility at UCSB's Marine Science Institute
(MSI). The new analyzer would replace a ten-year-old system that no longer has
the capabilities required to support current and proposed research projects.
Knowledge of the concentrations of dissolved inorganic nutrients in aquatic
systems is of fundamental importance to a wide range of biological studies.
Areas of interest to researchers at MSI encompass both fresh and salt water
systems, and have included such diverse areas as hydrological and ecological
studies of Amazonian lake and river systems, nutrient dynamics in areas of
merging water masses and coastal upwelling, biogeochemical processes in
California's Sierra Nevada watershed, water quality and nutrient cycling studies
in coastal estuaries, and ecological studies in both northern and southern polar
regions. A11 of these studies have required the analysis of large numbers of
water samples for up to five nutrient species. Nutrient analyses have been done
using an analyzer system that is now over 10 years old, and which suffers from
various problems, including unstable detectors, relatively poor detection
limits, and general obsolescence. Some of the aforementioned projects are
ongoing, while new projects requiring nutrient analyses are starting up and/or
being proposed almost continuously. A feature they all have in common is the
need for better and faster nutrient analysis. In the nutrient cycling studies of
coastal marshes and estuaries, for example, a system is required that can
automaticallv handle the wide range of concentrations (1 to 1000 uM) and
salinities (O to 34 ppt) that are routinely encountered (error-prone manual
dilutions and salini ty adjustments having been necessary in the past). In the
programs dealing with polar systems, sample size (for logistical reasons) and
analysis time (because of sample stability) are critical. And in a recently
initiated long-term program to monitor the chemical, physical, and biological
parameters influencing sedimentation in a coastal area featuring a high-
resolution sedimentary record, the rapidly changing oceanographic conditions
require timely nutrient analyses (to provide quick feedback to the project),
with both high sensitivity (to detect depleted waters), and high precision (to
follow subtle long-term changes). The requested analyzer system would fill all
of these requirements. The system we are requesting is the Perstorp Flow
Solution III, a continuous-flow analyzer with capabilities for both flow
injection and segmented flow technologies. It would be configured for the
simultaneous analysis of up to five nutrient species (phosphate, nitrate,
nitrite, silica, and ammonia), and would include a random-access autosarnpler,
peristaltic pump, injection valves, analysis cartridges for the , five
nutrients, double-beam photometric detectors, and a PC-type computer/controller
with Windows-based software.