* 9512483
* Acquisition of a Multi-processor Computing Facility for     Nonlinear Mathematical Field Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Juan Lopez, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 08/31/1998
* USD 304,000.00

A team of faculty, staff and students in the College of Science and the College
of Engineering at the Pennsylvania State University propose to acquire a multi-
processor computer facility to enable the solution of mathematical field
equations. The faculty are drawn from the Department of Mathematics, Astronomy
and Astrophysics, Aerospace Engineering, and Mechanical Engineering. The goals
of the program are: to develop numerical simulations on parallel computer
architectures of unsteady, three-dimensional, non-linear phenomena in science
and engineering; to compare and share numerical methods applied to similar
mathematical problems; and to integrate numerical solutions on parallel
computers into the gradua te curriculum. These goals will be achieved by (1) the
establishment of a multi-processor computer facility accessible to a team of
faculty, staff, and students, (2) the conduct of research on mathematical
problems with common themes and challenges, (3) the development of model
problems and solutions for use in graduate coursework and, ( 4) the
dissemination of the results of the research and instructional activities
through the World Wide Web. Research will be conducted in the areas of : black
hole collisions; unsteady flow and acoustics; electromagnetics; magneto-
thermocapillary convection; and geophysical fluid flows. Different numerical
methods will be used to solve problems in these areas including: adaptive
finite-elements; high-order finite-differences; and spectral techniques. Though
the research topics cover many different phenomena, they all have common
mathematical and computational challenges. They all involve the solution of
three-dimensional, unsteady, non-linear, partial differential equations. They
are all problems that involve a wide range of length and time scales. Also, they
all require the analysis of large time-dependent solution data sets. Finally,
numerical approaches that run efficiently on multiple processors and take
maximum advantage of the hardware architecture are of vital importance to all
the simulations. The facility proposed here has not only advanced architecture
but also development tools for debugging, profiling, and tuning the programs.
The computer also allows all three forms of parallel processing: shared memory;
message-passing (MPI and PVM); and data parallel (Fortran 90 and High
Performance Fortran). The activities in this proposal have the support of and
cooperation with both Silicon Graphics Inc. and IBM. To promote additional
cooperation and dissemination the research team will establish a regular
workshop/seminar series. This activity will have the goals, to share knowledge
on techniques of parallel computation, to keep abreast of new developments in
software and algorithms and, to keep facility users informed in detail of the
activities of the other team members. In addition to the common threads in the
research activities, the proposed research will have extensive links to our
graduate education activities. Penn State is establishing a Center for High
Performance Computation. This is partially supported by a grant from the
National Science Foundation under its Combined Research-Curriculum Development
(CRCD) Program. The Center will combine our research activities and our graduate
education program, including a minor in High Performance Computation. Five new
graduate and undergraduate courses in applied parallel processing are already
being offered. Access by students to the proposed research facility, as well as
exposure to the research activities will provide an invaluable enhancement to
the instructional program