* 9512170
* Acquisition of a 128 Channel EEG Recording System
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Richard Srebro, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,692.00

Bioelectric fields can be measured on the human scalp in response to sensory
stimuli and in association with cognitive tasks. Evoked potential (EP) and event
related potential (ERP) scalp fields, the terms used for these bioelectric
fields, are important objects in research on fundamental issues concerning
sensory processing in humans. Scalp potential fields offer good temporal
resolution (less than 1 ms); brain activity can be "tracked" during processing,
a feature unavailable to other modalities of functional brain imaging. Magnetic
field recording also supports tracking but at a cost more than 10 times that of
bioelectric field recording. In most contemporary applications, bioelectric
field recording has suffered from inadequate spatial sampling. Both theoretical
and empirical studies suggest that the Nyquist sampling interval on the scalp is
about 2.5 cm. More than 100 electrodes must be placed on the scalp to capture
potential fields without risking distortion, a recording density that until
recently has been out of practical reach. This proposal is made to acquire
equipment for high density spatial sampling which will be used by several
researchers, their graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. The research
projects supported by this facility will span a wide range from engineering
through sensory psychology. It will bring together a group of researchers with
complimentary backgrounds and act as a catalyst for a sophisticated research
program aimed at understanding how the human brain processes sensory
information. These researchers are from three institutions, Southwestern Medical
School (SWMS), University of Texas at Dallas (UTD) and Southern Methodist
University (SMU), all located close to the proposed facility. No comparable
facility exists within or near the Dallas metro area. UTD has a 32-channel
"BEAM" system. SWMS has a 32-channel "homemade" recording system in operation.
Neither school or the ir combination can provide the required recording
equipment. It is proposed to purchase a 128-channel recording system from
Electrical Geodesics Inc. (EGI), an S.B.I.R. grant-supported company under a
"Beta" site agreement to reduce costs. The system, "Net Station", will include
EGI's Geodesic sensor nets that allow 128 electrodes to be placed on the scalp
in about 20 minutes, state of the art amplifiers, a flexible data acquisition
system, and software for signal processing, convenient display of results, as
well as statistical testing. These functions are vital to making the facility
useful to the researchers. It is also proposed to acquire an optical disk to
support the large data storage requirements of the project. A three-dimensional
digitizer completes the equipment requirements allowing experimenters to record
all electrode locations for adequate display and processing. Important as the
equipment and software are to the success of this project, it is also recognized
that the facility must provide apppopriate support staff for the researchers at
least for the first few years of its operation. Thus it is proposed to hire an
electrical engineer who will serve as the chief technical person. In addition,
SWMS is prepared to support the salaries of the P.I., who will act as the
administrative head of the facility and of a well-trained technician who will be
responsible for subject scheduling, equipment maintenance and who will assist in
the actual data acquisition process. During the three years of this project, the
goal is to develop the facility so that it becomes a "stand alone" research
resource supported by its users.