* 9512727
* ASBMB Fall Symposium:  Activation of Transcription in       Response to Extracellular Signaling Proteins;               October 6-9, 1995 in Keystone, Colorado
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* George Stark, American Society of Biolchemistry and Molecular Biology
* Standard Grant
* Charles D. Liarakos
* 08/31/1996
* USD 4,400.00

9512727 Stark The Symposium on "Activation of Transcription in Response to
Extracellular Signaling Proteins" to be held under the auspices of the American
Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) October 6-9, 1995, in
Keystone, Colorado. Participation will be 200-250 scientists (including speakers
and moderators), selected on the basis of their expertise and interest in this
area, and their expected contribution to the success of this scientific program.
The meeting will begin with broad discussion of each of the two major pathways
of transcriptional activation in response to extracellular signals: the ras-MAPK
pathway and the JAK-STAT pathway. understanding transcriptional signaling is
vital to understanding processes such as cell growth control, the functioning of
the immune system and development and so has a central place in modern biology.
The pace of progress in this area has been very rapid in recent years, and it is
important to bring scientists working on diverse systems together so that the
interrelationships of these systems can be fully appreciated and so that new
clues about the mechanisms and functions from one system can be applied in
others. The meeting is designed to be highly interactive and to give ample time
for discussion and for presentations by younger scientists. This meeting will
serve as a catalyst to stimulate the interest of scientists who may have novel
tools in hand to approach these problems, with a focus on those younger
scientists, who have yet to initiate a major program of independent research.
%%% The Symposium on "Activation of Transcription in Response to Extracellular
Signaling Proteins" to be held under the auspices of the American Society for
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (ASBMB) October 6-9, 1995, in Keystone,
Colorado. Participation will be 200-250 scientists (including speakers and
moderators), selected on the basis of their expertise and interest in this area,
and their expected contribution to the success of this scientifi c program.
Understanding transcriptional signaling is vital to understanding processes such
as control of cell growth, the immune system and development and so has a
central place in modern biology. This meeting will serve as a catalyst to
stimulate the interest of scientists who may have novel tools in hand to
approach these problems, with a focus on those younger scientists who have yet
to initiate a major program of independent research. ***