* 9512646
* Equipping ICPSR to Provide Direct Client-Server Access to   Data and Documentation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Richard Rockwell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

With partial National Science Foundation support the Inter-university Consortium
for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) will purchase two Sun SPARCserver 1000
machines with 128 MB of expansion memory, a high-speed (FDDI) bus connecting
them, and options to integrate this into their existing computer system. This
addition will provide a significant upgrade in computing and permit the
organization to meet its current and projected needs. ICPSR is a consortium of
325 member universities and colleges in the United States and Canada with
additional national members in Europe, Latin America and elsewhere. Based at the
University of Michigan, ICPSA acquires social science data from all over the
world. It processes and documents the data so that many different persons with
different levels of expertise can undertake research on them and then makes the
product available in electronic form. ICPSR has created standard formats for
data sets and data documentation which make the data useable in a variety of
settings and these standards are now widely used in the social sciences. These
data are distributed in forms that are compatible with current computing
technology in many varieties. ICPSR's current file server, a Sun 4/690MP is now
four generations of CPU chips old and in need of replacement. Social scientists
increasingly conduct complex statistical analyses on large data sets and such
information is crucial for advances in this field. ICPSR plays an extremely
important role in making such materials available and this award will prove of
benefit to many researchers in a broad range of institutions.