* 9512743
* NSF-CGP Science Fellowship Program:  Sensor-Based Planning  Control of Cooperating Mobile Robots
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Arthur Sanderson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1996
* USD 81,184.00

This award supports the collaboration of Professor Arthur C. Sanderson of the
Center for Advanced Technology in Automation, Robotics, and Manufacturing and
the Department of Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering at Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute and Professor Shin'ichi Yuta, Director of the Intelligent
Robot Laboratory, Institute of Information Sciences and Electronics, University
of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan. Project funding will enable Dr. Sanderson to spend
six months in Japan, resident at the University of Tsukuba, in order to study
topics in experimental robotics including multisensor fusion, sensor-based
planning, and distributed architectures. Professor Sanderson has previously
developed important analytical results and algorithms which enable the design of
sensor-based robots and describe their performance in complex environments.
Professor Yuta has developed an outstanding laboratory for experimental studies
of mobile robots. In this project, Professor Sanderson will combine his
expertise with that of Professor Yuta to carry out experiments which demonstrate
new capabilities for multirobot cooperation and evaluate these capabilities for
new applications. This proposal brings together research scientists from two
countries working in the area of robotics research. The U. S. scientist will
have the opportunity to become familiar with the extensive experimental
facilities and research methods provided by the University of Tsukuba while
contributing to the overall research effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills
the objectives of the Program in its exchange and transfer of scientific
knowledge through an international collaboration.