* 9512902
* A High-Speed Fluorescence Activated Cell-Sorter for Multiple Use Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Gregory Tylka, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1998
* USD 129,207.00

Funding is requested for a state-of-the-art high speed fluorescence activated
cell sorter to be utilized by a group of seven major users on the Iowa State
University campus. The technology utilized in flow cytometry has advanced
rapidly in the past five years to include both high speed processing of multi-
parameter signals for both analysis and sorting, as well as the incorporation of
larger flow cell tip orifices to accommodate the sorting of larger particles (up
to 400 micron diameter flow cell tips). The justification for requesting
matching funds for the purchase of a high speed sorter can be viewed in three
sections. First, the existing EPICS 752 instrument within the facility has been
in operation for eight years and has become the limiting factor in the
progression of the projects outlined here as a result of increased downtime and
the slow rate of data processing for both analysis and sorting. Secondly, many
of the research projects have common requirements that the ELITE ESP cytometer
will be able to provide which will enable these projects to progress forward.
They include the large scale production sorting (&gt; 106 cells) of large cell
or particle subpopulations that represent only a small portion of the overall
distribution (&lt; 5 %). The following cell or particle types are both large,
often fragile, and represent a minor portion of the population to be sorted.
They include: swine inner cell mass cells (35 microns), Arabidopsis protoplasts
(35 microns), soybean cyst nematode eggs (100 microns), and mouse ine
trophoblastic giant cells (200-300 microns). The rapid cell sorting capabilites
are also required for the large scale production sorting (&gt; 106 cells) of the
traditional smaller mammalian cell types such as Iymphocytes for the purpose of
assaying cytokine production and hybridoma cells to be analyzed for the loss of
or mutation with the gene encoding the heavy chain for antibody. Additionally,
the expansion to a multiple laser system will facilitate the move to four color
analyses and cell sorting in the case of the swine Iymphocytes. Finally, the
operation of the Facility which will house this instrument has a well documented
and solidly financed educational component for training faculty, post doctoral
research associates, as well as graduate and undergraduate students in both the
experimental design, sample preparation, and use of the fluorescence activated
cell sorter in research and the Facility will continue to fulfill this componet
with a state-of-the-art instrument. The new ELITE ESP will be used extensively
for all of these purposes in both research as well as teaching.