* 9512521
* A Core Laboratory for Biological High-Performance           Computation, Communication, and Visualization
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Wah Chiu, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 07/31/1998
* USD 1,146,438.00

Recent advances in computing and networking technology have opened a new
frontier in biological research. Baylor College of Medicine (BCM) has recognized
this opportunity and its potential impact on understanding fundamental
biological processes and developing biotechnological applications. The field of
computational and structural biology was designated as one of the highest
priority areas for development and expansion at BCM in the 1994 report of the
College's Strategic Planning Committee. This proposal will create a new core
laboratory for high performance computation, communication and visualization
applied specifically to biological research. The proposed facility will include
a parallel array of 12 processors with advanced visualization capability, and a
high bandwidth network to four research and teaching clusters throughout the
College. The core laboratory will be administered by an executive director and
an executive committee of seven faculty and a student representative. It will be
staffed with a computing application specialist and a system administrator.
Twenty-five faculty members at BCM are key participants in this proposal, which
covers four research areas. These include electron image reconstruction of
macromolecular assemblies, x-ray crystallography, molecular biology informatics
and computational neurobiology. All of the investigators are leaders in their
respective scientific disciplines and use computationally intensive methods in
their research efforts. Establishment of this proposed core laboratory will
provide highspeed network access to a high performance computing and
visualization resource that cannot be reasonably acquired by any individual
investigator. The impact of this proposed bio-computing core laboratory at BCM
will be enormous. This facility will: x improve our ability to tackle problems
of great importance in cell biology, biochemistry, virology, molecular genetics
and neurobiology which rely heavily on computa tionally intensive methods; x
facilitate the development of novel methods of analysis and simulation using
parallel and distributed computation; enhance our capability for visualization
of large and complex biological data; x enable direct high-speed network linkage
between the proposed high performance computers and the groups engaged in
computationally intensive research at different locations throughout the
College; x enrich student training in the use of computers for understanding
complex biophysical and structural concepts; x attract new faculty members and
trainees at postdoctoral, predoctoral and undergraduate levels to join our
recently established Ph.D. Program of Structural and Computational Biology and
Molecular Biophysics (SCBMB). The total cost of establishing the proposed core
laboratory is $2.3 million, including equipment purchase, high-speed network
connection, room renovation, software installation, equipment maintenance and
personnel salary support for a period of three years. BCM will provide 34 %
matching funds totaling $0.78 million. The total project cost that NSF is asked
to fund is $1.5 million.