* 9512434
* Acquisition of a Laboratory for Computationally Assisted    Investigation of Geomaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/15/1995,09/30/1998
* Joan Gosink, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 09/30/1998
* USD 286,700.00

9512434 Gosink Geomechanical problems are characterized by large amounts of
data, significant variability, and lack of experimental control. Analysis is
frequently dependent upon remote sensing of various types, including
geotomography, and acoustic and microwave methods. Computationally intensive
models, discrete element methods, and inversion techniques, are employed to
determine soil and rock properties, and their response to civil works,
contaminant dispersion and seismic loading. At CSM, investigators have been
actively involved in both experimental and computational studies of
geomaterials; these studies now require enhanced computational capability and
instrumentation for continued success. The research strategy advances a systems
approach to the analysis of geomaterials. Rather than focusing on computation
without data acquisition or the reverse, we are proposing a suite of computers
and instruments which, working together, can substantially increase our
understanding of fundamental properties and processes in soils and soil/rock
mixtures, as well as in other material applications. This information has
relevance to problems of the civil infrastructure, contaminant transport and
fate in soils, construction issues, design for seismic considerations,
transportation technologies, energy technologies and pollution minimization and
waste management. ***