* 9512290
* Building a Computing Infrastructure for Data-Intensive      Social Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Stewart Tolnay, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 48,077.00

With partial support from the National Science Foundation, the SUNY Albany
Center for Social and Demographic analysis will complete the installation of a
UNIX network. Major items include a module upgrade for a Sun Sparcstation 20 to
a model 514 MP, and 4 SunSparcstation 20 Model 1 with 60 MHz SuperSparc
processor with SuperCashe SX 24-bit Color Accelerated graphics imaging
workstations. The instrumentation will provide an interdisciplinary group of
social science researchers with a computing infrastructure suitable for projects
that require the manipulation and analysis of extremely large data files. It
will also provide access to state of the art statistical analysis procedures
that are memory intensive. Researchers involved include anthropologists,
economists, geographers and regional planners, psychologists, sociologists and
public health specialists. The researchers will address a number of topics.
These include, for example, a study of segregation and neighborhood change
between 1970 and 1990 which will examine trends in metropolitan racial and
ethnic segregation, multiethnic patterning and the spatial concentration of
poverty and wealth. Other projects will focus on family patterns of southern
migrants to northern cities, the relationship between specific aspects of
nutrition and mortality, and adolescent behavior and parent-teen communication.
The center involves many students in its research and the equipment provided
will serve an important educational as well as research function.