* 9512970
* A Femtosecond Resolution Transient Optical Spectrometer for the Study of Energy and Electron Transfer in Natural and    Articial Photosynthetic Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Su Lin, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 11/30/1998
* USD 200,000.00

The Photosynthesis Center at Arizona State University has developed a major
research program investigating fast energy and electron transfer during solar
energy conversion in both natural and artificial systems. Ultrafast optical
laser spectroscopy is a key tool in this research effort. Six groups,
representing about 40 faculty, postdocs and students, are actively using an
existing femtosecond time resolution transient absorbance spectrometer to study
bacterial, plant and synthetic antenna and reaction center complexes. This
research includes designing and synthesizing molecular devices which mimic the
fast rates and high yields of the natural systems but are much simpler
chemically and may have applications as molecular switches and logic gates.
Also, investigation of the structurally well defined reaction centers of the
purple nonsulfur bacteria is leading towards an understanding of the
photophysics of the initial solar energy conversion event and towards an
understanding of the role played by the protein in modifying the thermodynamic
and kinetic parameters of electron transfer. Research is also underway into the
light harvesting and energy trapping reactions of the Photosystem I reaction
center of higher plants as well as in a related photosynthetic reaction center
from Heliobacillus mobilis. A great deal of progress has been made with the
present instrument, but as the experiments performed have become more and more
sophisticated, limitations have been reached in available time resolution,
sensitivity, noise suppression, photon excitation densities, available
excitation and probe wavelengths, capabilities to perform multiple excitation
pulse experiments, and simply in the amount of time available for each group on
the apparatus. The purchase of a new instrument is proposed with greatly
expanded capabilities. Unlike the present instrument which uses an actively
mode-locked Nd:YAG laser synchronously pumping a dye laser as the source of
ultrafast pu lses, the new system will employ a self-mode-locked titanium
sapphire laser pumped by a CW argon ion laser. The pulses from this source will
be amplified in a solid-state regenerative amplifier to the millijoule level at
kilohertz repetition rates and used to generate up to two excitation pulses at
any wavelengths between 400 nm and 2.4 rnicrons with pulse durations of roughly
50 fs. In addition, part of the regeneratively amplified pulse will be used to
generate a white light continuum, allowing simultaneous absorbance change
measurements at many different wavelengths in a single experiment. By using
optical gating in a nonlinear crystal, the instrument will also have the
capability of performing femtosecond time resolution emission decay studies.
Purchase of the proposed femtosecond system will open up a number of new
research avenues for photosynthesis investigators at ASU. New excitation
wavelengths will allow more specific preparation of molecular excited states
Multiple excitation pulses at higher photon densities will allow the creation of
specific intermediate states with one pulse whose photochemistry can then be
investigated with a second excitation event. The higher time resolution of the
system will both help in the investigation of processes previously detected but
not resolved on the 100 fs timescale and also open up a window into the
molecular vibrations of the system coupled to the absorbance transitions and
photochemistry. Higher signal-to-noise absorbance change data will allow more
thorough investigation of natural photosynthetic systems with large numbers of
pigments whose absorbance masks the small absorbance changes associated with the
primary photochemistry of solar energy conversion.