* 9512178
* Acquisition of Equipment for Automated DNA Sequencing
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Dennis O'Rourke, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1996
* USD 112,932.00

With partial National Science Foundation support, the University of Utah will
purchase an ABI 3377 automated DNA sequencer, an Perkin-Elmer 9600 PCR machine
and a Sun SPARCstatioon 20. This equipment will be shared by four evolutionary
geneticists. Acquisition of this equipment will greatly increase the speed and
fidelity of DNA sequencing and nuclear genotyping and enable the scientists to
remain at the cutting edge of human evolutionary genetic research. Initially,
the equipment will be used in at least 13 major research projects. These include
research on the evolutionary genetics of south Indian caste populations,
Micronesian populations, the Altai Siberian population, Native American
populations and African and African-American populations. To provide a long-term
temporal perspective, ancient DNA samples from the U.S. Southwest, the Great
Basin region, North China, the circum-Arctic, and Austro-Hungary will be
analyzed. The role of founder effect in the evolution of von Willebrand disease
will be investigated. Mutation rates in mitochondrial DNA will be measured by
comparing large-scale sequencing results with `DNA chip` technology. Worldwide
genetic variation will be analyzed to test hypotheses regarding the origins of
modern Homo sapiens. In addition to aiding in research, this equipment will help
students and postdoctoral fellows to learn the most modern molecular methods in
the course of their training in evolutionary genetics. Each of the researchers'
laboratories has a number of students and fellows.