* 9512533
* Computer Infrastructure for Mathematical Research
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Steven Kerckhoff, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

The Department of Mathematics at Stanford University plans to purchase computer
equipment which will be dedicated to the support of research in the mathematical
sciences. It also proposes to hire a part-time systems administrator to help
maintain and to use effectively this equipment. The computer system in the
Mathematics Department at Stanford University is currently adequate only for
communication and manuscript preparation. It is completely inadequate for any
serious mathematical computation or visualization projects. There are several
members of the department who have computationally or graphically intensive
projects which cannot be performed in the current computer environment. To
correct this situation we are proposing to purchase appropriate equipment. The
inclusion of this equipment into the system and the increase of mathematical
activity that they would generate would necessitate support personnel. The
department currently employs a very part-time systems administrator to help with
communications problems. This would be insufficient support for the expanded
computer environment. The PIs will obtain an additional 25% time systems
administration position to supplement the current arrangement. This position
would be responsible for integrating the new equipment and software into the
existing system and then would provide support for its maintenance and use. This
would include helping people with their programming needs for research projects.
The equipment will be used for several research projects in mathematics,
including in particular: Evolution Equations in Geometry, Ben Andrews and Brian
White. Computational Aspects of Number Theory, Daniel Bump. Hyperbolic Geometry
and Geometric Topology, Steven Kerckhoff. A Wavelet-based Seismic Analysis and
Simulation Environment, George Papanicolaou.