* 9512651
* Archaeology of the Georgia Woodland
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Karl Steinen, University of West Georgia
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/29/2000
* USD 34,345.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Karl Steinen will conduct one
season of fieldwork in southwestern Georgia. He will carry out a survey in the
10 kilometer area immediately surrounding the prehistoric site of Kolomoki. This
large impressive site contains multiple raised earthen mounds associated with a
crescent shaped village area. Some of the mounds served burial purposes while
others likely provided bases for wooden structures. Although Kolomoki exhibits
some of the traits characteristic of highly developed prehistoric
`Mississippian` societies, it lacks others such a fortifications and the
elaborate status markers known from Mississippian centers. Dr. Steinen wishes to
examine this anomaly and in this first stage of the research will attempt to
relate Kolomoki to the broader surrounding region. He wishes to know if the site
served as focal point for a larger regional system or whether it functioned
independently and in isolation. To accomplish this he will conduct a systematic
surface survey to locate ceramics, lithics and other cultural remains. In some
areas he will undertake shovel testing to locate buried materials. In promising
areas limited test excavations will be carried out. Ceramics will be
stylistically dated to time period to determine whether synchroniety with
Kolomoki exists. Before the arrival of the Spanish, complex societies had
developed in many parts of the US Southeast. These societies integrated large
numbers of individuals into hierarchically organized political systems which
were able to mobilize enough labor to construct large and impressive burial and
religious mounds. Trade networks transported shells, implements of exotic stone
and other materials over long distances and the burial of such objects with
limited numbers of individuals indicates the emergence of social elites.
Archaeologists with to know how such societies developed and were maintained.
Dr. Steinen believes that study of regional failures can be just as informative
as successes and his research is based on this premise. He proposes that local
ecological characteristics provide the proximate cause and therefore he wishes
to situate Kolomoke in a regional environmental context. This research is
important for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists and shed new light on a poorly understood aspect of American
prehistory. It will increase our understanding of how complex societies develop
and it will assist in increasing the educational capabilities of an
undergraduate teaching institution.