* 9512611
* Acquisition of a Confocal Scanning Laser Microscopic Work   Station with off-line Analytical Capacity
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Fred Roisen, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 10/31/1997
* USD 170,059.00

Recent technical advances have transformed the optical microscope from an
information gathering tool into an interactive analytical instrument capable of
detecting, manipulating, quantifying and sorting subcellular, cellular and
tissue specific properties. This application requests funds for the purchase of
an Ultima 312TM Premium Laser Confocal Microscopic workstation (manufactured by
Meridian Instruments, Inc.) with enhanced interactive software for data
acquisition, storage, and off-line data acquisition. This confocal system was
selected because its unique and comprehensive confocal abilities with multiple
laser lines and applications software will accommodate the diverse needs of the
researchers at the University of Louisville. To maximize user time, the system
includes components that permit remote (off-line) data analysis and 3-D
reconstruction while the microscope is in use. Among the tasks to be performed
are: to obtain highly-purified primary embryonic cell populations; to study Ca2+
metabolism and intracellular pH after electrical and chemical stimulation; to
examine co-localization of tRNA biosynthetic enzymes; to perform high resolution
in situ hybridization studies; to determine the distribution of membranous
components (i.e. receptors, complex carbohydrates) and their relationships to
cytoskeletal organelles during a variety of dynamic cellular phenomenon
including phagocytosis and neuritogenesis; and to obtain 3-D reconstructions for
cytoarchitectural and developmental morphometric comparisons. The 16 research
paradigms of the 32 faculty members in this application are not inclusive of all
projects that would utilize the Ultima, but are intended to demonstrate the
breadth of our needs. The instrument will be housed in the Core Analytical
Microscopy Laboratory (CAML) which has served as the sole microscopy laboratory
for all campuses of the University for the past four years. Being the first
confocal microscopy system in the CAML, it would enhance significantly our
optical microscopic capabilities, thereby providing for cuttingedge technology
for research and the training of CAML users, graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows. The research and outreach mission of our "Developmental and Molecular
Neurobiology Program" funded by an NSF KY/EPSCoR contract will be greatly
facilitated by this instrumentation. Furthermore, recent faculty recruitment in
the biological sciences has been hampered by the lack of a confocal microscope.
Therefore, in addition to facilitating research and training of investigators
and students at U of L, the acquisition of the Ultima should assist future
faculty recruitment in several departments and thus facilitate the strategic
plan of the University to become a research institution. The genuine widespread
need for this equipment is mirrored by the fact that more than 50% of the funds
needed to purchase the confocal scanning laser microscopic workstation have been
raised from the office of the University Vice President for Research, Dean of
the Medical School, and 10 different departments in several schools as well as
individual users.