* 9512478
* Acquisition of a 500 MHz NMR Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Philip Bolton, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 340,000.00

We propose the acquisition of a three channel, pulsed field gradient 500 MHz
nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometer for use in doctoral and postdoctoral
research training in research groups of eight Wesleyan faculty based in the
Departments of Chemistry and the Department of Molecular Biology and
Biochemistry and outside users from Connecticut College and Trinity College.
Graduate courses and instruction in spectroscopy, and particularly NMR, are a
focus of our Molecular Biophysics program, supported by an NIH Training Grant.
Undergraduate thesis research is also encouraged at Wesleyan, and use of the
instrument by trained undergraduates is also envisaged. There are currently two
400 MHz NMR instruments at Wesleyan, one of which has been recently upgraded and
a second which currently is approaching obsolescence. A 300 MHz instrument
supports the need of undergraduate teaching laboratories in chemistry and the
routine analytical needs of the synthetic chemistry research groups. The
proposed instrument would restore our capacity for high level NMR research and
provide field strength and electronics for state of the art 2D and 3D
experiments on proteins and nucleic acids, and also the ability to perform novel
experiments on smaller molecules which are not feasible on the NMR instruments
currently available here. Wesleyan based research to directly benefit from this
initiative include a) projects directed by two faculty who specialize in NMR
spectroscopy in their research: NMR Studies of Nucleic Acids and Proteins (Prof.
Bolton, Chemistry, ACS, NSF and DOE funded); NMR Studies of RNA, DNA and
Protein-DNA Interactions (Russu, MB&B, NIH funded); b) projects from six faculty
whose work involves or relates to NMR spectroscopy: Theoretical Aspects of NMR
on DNA (Prof. Beveridge, Chemistry, NIH funded); Enantioselective Catalysis in
the Synthesis of ,~Blockers (Prof. Bruno, Chemistry, NSF funded); Synthetic
Organic Electrochemistry (Prof. Fry, NSF and EPRI funded); NMR Studies in
Natural Product Synthesis (Prof. Jacobi, Chemistry NIH funded); Biophysical
Investigation of Protein-Protein and Protein-DNA Interactions (Prof. Mukerji,
MB&B, a new faculty member); ,~-Lactamase Active Site Structure and Function
(Prof. Pratt, Chemistry, NIH funded), Kinetics of Multielectron/Halide Transfer
Self-Exchange Reactions (Prof. Westmoreland, Chemistry, NIH funded). In
addition, there are projects from two faculty from nearby liberal arts colleges:
Solution Structure of a Band 3 Protein Domain (Prof. Branchini, Connecticut
College), and NMR Investigation of Osteocalcin and Related Peptides (Prof.
Prigodich, Trinity College), both of whom have external funding. The objective
of the science programs at Wesleyan is to provide high-quality courses and
research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in preparation
for careers in science and education. Specific initiatives in support of women
in science, programs for developing the interest of minorities in science, and
access for the handicapped are provided. The proposed 500 MHz NMR would place
scientific instrumentation at an appropriate level for an institution of our
Si7R and educational mission.