* 9512849
* U.S.-Korea Joint Seminar on Tribology, Seoul, Korea,        October 24-29, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Steven Danyluk, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 07/31/1996
* USD 50,595.00

9512849 Danyluk This award provides funds to permit Dr. Steven S. Danyluk,
Department of Mechanical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, to
conduct with Dr. Soo Wohn Lee, Department of Materials Science and Engineering,
Sun Moon University, Choongnam, Korea, a U.S.-Korea Joint Seminar on Tribology.
This joint seminar will be held in Seoul, Korea, October 24-28, 1995. The
participation of ten U.S. scientists/engineers will be supported under this
award. The joint seminar will address several topics of current concern in the
field of tribology, including wear modeling, lubricants, micro/nanotribology,
surface polishing, and subsurface damage generation. In addition to formal
seminar sessions, the U.S. delegation plans to learn about and evaluate the
status of tribology research conducted in Korea through discussions on research
results at the seminar and through site visits to evaluate tribology research
capabilities in Korea. The U.S. participants will return to the U.S. by way of
Japan where they will participate in the International Tribology Conference,
Yokohama, from October 30 to November 2, 1995. The field of tribology is of
great importance in manufacturing processes and in maintenance of machinery. The
PI and his Korean collaborator are well qualified to organize and conduct such a
joint seminar, as both are well known scholars in the related field of research.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science
Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S. and Korean
scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific information, ideas,
skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems of mutual interest
and benefit. Korean participation is supported by the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation (KOSEF). ***