* 9512242
* Acquisition of a Cryogenic Elementary-Particle Detector     Facility for Dark Matter Searches and Neutrino Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Blas Cabrera, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Terrence W. Rettig
* 08/31/2001
* USD 360,000.00

A Cryogenic Elementary-Particle Detector will be acquired by a consortium of
institutions including Stanford University (principal institution), UC Berkeley
and UC Santa Barbara. The instrumentation will be used primarily in the Stanford
Underground Facility (SUF). The three Principal Investigators are Blas Cabrera,
Professor of Physics at Stanford and Director of SUF; Bernard Sadoulet,
Professor of Physics at UC Berkeley and Director of the NSF-funded Center for
Particle Astrophysics (CfPA); and David Caldwell, Emeritus Professor at UC Santa
Barbara. The Cabreras and Caldwell groups are supported by the DOE High Energy
Physics program. This unique low temperature facility will be built to operate
large-mass cryogenic particle detectors for research on dark matter and neutrino
physics experiments, and for investigating industrial applications. Under the
coordination of CfPA, the groups from these three institutions, along with
research personnel from Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory (LBL), Santa Clara
University and the Institute for Nuclear Research (INR) in Baksan, Russia are
performing a search for the dark matter that makes up at least 90% of the mass
of the universe. This problem is one of the most important in cosmology and
science today and is the central theme of the CfPA. Our team is looking for
weakly interacting massive particles (WIMPs) such as supersymmetric particles,
which may constitute this dark matter. We are expecting to improve the
sensitivity of the previous searches by more than a hundred times within a few
years using novel detectors which operate at very low temperature. By
simultaneously measuring the ionization and lattice vibrations created by
particle interactions within crystals, we obtain an unparalleled rejection tool
against ubiquitous radioactive backgrounds which have limited previous
experiments. The proposed instrument will be operated in the Stanford
Underground Facility (SUF). It offers about one cubic foot of space at a
temperature of 10mK and an ultra-low radioactive background environment.