* 9512614
* ARI: The Hawaii-2 Observatory: A Deep Ocean Geoscience Facility Re-using the Hawaii-2 Telephone Cable
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2001
* Rhett Butler, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 12/31/2001
* USD 2,233,992.00

This ARI award provides funding to convert the AT&amp;T Hawaii-2 undersea co-
axial telephone cable, a retired cable that stretches from Hawaii to southern
California, into a long-term geophysical observatory. The Hawaii-2 Observatory
(H2O) will be created by cutting the cable approximately mid-way between Hawaii
and California and inserting a junction box with eight underwater-mateable
connectors. Power will be supplied to the junction box and any instruments
attached to it from the AT&amp;T Makaha cable station on the island of Oahu. A
landline from the cable station to the Univ. of Hawaii at Manoa will allow
scientists to monitor data from the ocean bottom observatory in real-time and
modify the software contained in the junction box and instruments. The first
instrument the PI's propose to deploy at the H2O is a seismometer because the
proposed site of the junction box optimizes coverage of a strategic area for the
IRIS Global Seismic Network (GSN), an international network of seismic stations.
Observations from GSN stations are constrained by the location of the stations,
which are all on continents or islands. This biased distribution of seismic
stations introduces spatial alias and substantial uncertainties into earth
studies, particularly tomographic studies of the Earth's structure and studies
of earthquake source location, focal mechanism, and rupture process. Ocean floor
observatories are necessary to complete the network. Oceanographers have
initiated an international effort to establish an Ocean Seismic Network as a
subset of the GSN. They have identified 20 areas of the ocean floor where
seismic coverage is a high priority; H2O would offer coverage of one of these
areas. In addition to advances in seismic studies, H2O could be used to advance
studies of geomagetism, tsunamis, polar motion, gravity and geodetic studies.
Geomagnetic data also are biased by the distribution of observatories, which are
mainly located on continents in the northern hemisphere. A recent NRC task group
re port has described the scientific rationale for a more balanced global
geomagnetic network and proposed the addition of 8 seafloor sites, including one
in the vicinity of H2O. Tsunami studies are hampered by a lack of open-ocean
data and would be greatly enhanced by deployment of a pressure sensor at the H2O
site. Real-time access to the data would improve the ability of existing tsunami
warning systems to predict wave height. Ocean bottom pressure is also an
indicator of large scale horizontal water motions, which affect the Earth's axis
of rotation, vertical and horizontal deformation of the earth's crust, and
fluctuations in surface gravity. The H2O site would allow real-time studies of
these geophysical systems.