* 9512278
* Acquisition of Research Instrumentation and Small Research  Vessel for the Darling Marine Center
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Kevin Eckelbarger, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 98,210.00

PROJECT SUMMARY The Darling Marine Center is the marine laboratory of the
University of Maine System. Since 1991, the University has made an unprecedented
financial commitment to modernize the facility and to expand teaching and
research programs to benefit both University faculty and visiting researchers.
Lab and office space for visiting scientists has been increased 5 fold, nearly
all of the Center's 16 original building have been renovated or improved,
visitor housing has been increased by 65%, a new dining hall has been built, a
shoreside Dive & Field Staging Building has been erected to support SCUBA work,
two additional classrooms have been constructed including a new shoreside
Visiting Investigator/Classroom building, and the research library has been
expanded. The inauguration of a formal Visiting Investigation program in 1991
has resulted in an unexpected surge of visitors that is increasing annually. A
concerted effort has been made to involve visitors in planning future facility
improvements and, based on their evaluations, the University has targeted three
areas of facility weaknesses at the Darling Center, two of which are the focus
of this proposal: 1) additional improvements to the small vessel operation and
2) the upgrade of research instrumentation for visitors. This project will
support the purchase of a 24' research vessel with enclosed cabin space for
conducting all-weather research and teaching activities, as will the purchase of
several research instruments that are most frequently requested by visiting
investigators will be supported. The University will provide no funds to
construct a shoreside 40 x 50' x 20' Vessel Operations building that will be
used for repair, maintenance and storage of the Center's boat fleet.