* 9512262
* Acquisition of Equipment to Enhance Research and Instruction in Biotechnology:  Molecular Physiology and Biochemistry   Laboratory
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Sibdas Ghosh, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 09/30/1997
* USD 18,000.00

The University of Wisconsin-Whitewater is committed to enhancing the research
experiences of undergraduates. During the past two years this commitment has
been reflected in substantial expenditures to improve the science research
laboratory facilities. This proposal requests $97,932 in funding to obtain new
research instrumentation for the University's Biotechnology/Molecular Physiology
and Biochemistry Laboratory. A matching fund has also been pledged by the
University. The growth chambers, centrifuges and the protein purification and
measurement systems detailed in the proposal are currently being used in every
modern biotechnology laboratory in the United States. The equipment that would
be purchased will significantly strengthen faculty research and instruction in
biotechnology and protein biochemistry analysis. This equipment will also
provide our students with hands-on experience with state-of-art technology in
scientific analysis and research. The experience and education made possible by
this modern research instrumentation will significantly enhance the productivity
of teachers and scientists educated at the University. Acquiring this equipment
is the next logical step in the continuing development of research facilities in
the Departments of Biology and Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-
Whitewater.