* 9513028
* HPLC/Electrospray Triple Quadrupole Mass Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* M. Judith Charles, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 06/30/1999
* USD 131,141.00

We are requesting funds for the purchase of a high-performance liquid
chromatography/electrospray triple quadrupole mass spectrometer. Acquisition of
this state-of-the-art instrumentation is essential for biological research at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. The major user group is
comprised of Dr. Glish, Associate Professor, Department of Chemistry; Dr.
Charles, Research Associate Professor, Department of Environmental Sciences and
Engineering; Dr. Swenberg, Professor, Department of Environmental Sciences and
Engineering; Dr. Zeisel, Chair and Professor, Department of Nutrition; Dr.
Frelinger, Professor, Department of Microbiology and Dr. Smith, Assistant
Professor, School of Pharmacy. The instrument will be used by Dr. Swenberg to
investigate the formation and repair of DNA modifications from exogenous
exposure to chemicals and endogenous processes. This research requires advances
in analytical chemistry to detect low femtomolar quantities of DNA adducts. For
this reason, Dr. Charles is investigating electrospray mass spectrometry methods
for the analysis of DNA adducts. She is also using electrospray to identify
intermediates of biological oxidation reactions. Dr. Zeisel requires
electrospray for quantitiation of metabolites of choline and for identifying
phosphatidylcholines to characterize the transport, biosynthesis and metabolism
of cholne in mammary epithelial cells. Dr. Smith wants to quantitate known,
exogenously administered peptides in biological fluids to understand the
metabolism and disposition of peptides. Dr. Frelinger will use the instrument
for molecular weight and structural determination of peptides and proteins. Dr.
Glish intends to investigate the electrospray and collision-induced-dissociation
of proteins and peptides. The instrument will also be available for use by other
researchers on campus pursuing research in the biological sciences, including
those identified in the proposal as minor users. The mass spectrometer w ill be
housed in the Mass Spectrometry Facility at the University of North Carolina,
located in rooms 153-156 Rosenau Hall. The long-term objectives of the Facility
are to teach students and support research. The specific aims are to perform
research which develops solutions to analytical problems in the biological
sciences; to promote the use of mass spectrometer by active interactions with
students and faculty conducting biological research; and to provide instruction
in mass spectrometry by discussions and hands-on experience.