* 9513162
* East Asia and Pacific Regional Workshop:  Mechatronics      Technology in San Jose, California, on May 19-24, 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Tai-Ran Hsu, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 02/28/1997
* USD 49,957.00

9513162 Hsu This is a 12 month award proposed by Dr. Tai-Ran Hsu, San Jose
State University. This proposal requests funds to convene a Trans-Pacific
workshop on education and human resource development in mechatronic technology.
This workshop will include educators, scientists, engineers and business leaders
in the mechatronics industry from Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong, Singapore, Malaysia
and Japan. The meeting will be held at the San Jose State University, California
on May 19-24, 1996. Mechatronics is an important and emerging technology
combining mechanical science with electronics. The U.S. has held a leadership
role in this technology, but this leadership role has been seriously challenged
in recent years by producers in Pacific-rim countries as these countries have
invested heavily in this technology. The result has been a dramatic shift in the
manufacturing of mechatronics products from the U.S. to these countries. The
principal reason for the shift of this industry to overseas is the quality and
quantity of the labor force including the cultural values of the workers. Human
resource development therefore becomes a key factor, in order for the U.S. labor
force to be competitive in this industry. This workshop comes at an opportune
time for developing an agenda for education and human resource development in
U.S. colleges for training the front line of workers in this industry. The
result can be of importance for strengthening the U.S. competitive position in
this field.