* 9513479
* Analysis of the Yeast C-Type Cyclin Gene UME3
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Randy Strich, Institute For Cancer Research
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 05/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

Strich 9513479 Cyclins are a conserved gene family that activate specific
protein kinases (termed CDK's for cyclin dependent kinases). Initially, cyclins
were identified as factors required for oocyte maturation and mitotic cell cycle
progression. As indicated by their name, the levels of these proteins were found
to oscillate during the cell cycle peaking when their activity was required.
However, a rapidly emerging subclass of cyclin proteins (C-type) has been
described that differs from the original groups in one important aspect.
Although these proteins still activate protein kinases, their transcript levels
do not vary with respect to the cell cycle. This project will investigate the
yeast gene UME3, the newest member of the C-type cyclin subfamily. UME3 is
required for the full repression of several meiotic genes and member of the
Hsp70 heat shock super family of proteins. Since these genes are regulated in
response to external stimuli, these results suggest a role for Ume3P in the
adaptive response to changing environmental conditions. Consistent this
hypothesis, the protein encoded UME3 (Ume3p) is rapidly destroyed when cells are
exposed to heat shock, nutrient deprivation and during meiotic development. The
destruction of Ume3p in response to adverse environment conditions or
developmental cues represents a novel mechanism for cyclin regulation and,
combined with the genetic analysis, suggest that Ume3p links the pathway that
transmits exogenous signals and the transcription machinery. If correct, this
system would provide the cell a rapid, flexible response to changing
environmental or intracellular signals through post-translational regulation of
Ume3p-dependent protein kinase activity. This study will investigate the pathway
that regulates Ume3p and further elucidate the role this cyclin plays in the
normal cellular response to stress. Specifically, the following questions will
be addressed: 1. What are the cis and trans factors that mediate Ume3p
regulation? 2. Wha t role does Ume3p play in the cellular response to stress?
The long term goal of this study is to understand the underlying mechanisms by
which cells translate environmental stimuli into altered gene expression
programs. One critical component of this process is the connection between the
signaling pathway that transmits a particular stimulus and the transcription
machinery that facilitates gene expression. Such an activity would be predicted
to be a regulatory molecule that can modulate gene expression directly and,
itself, be regulated by external stimuli. Several findings are consistent with
yeast gene Ume3p performing such a role. First, UME3 encodes a C-type cyclin.
Cyclins are a conserved family of proteins that serve as molecular switches
through the activation a specific protein kinases. Second, genetic analyses have
revealed a role for Ume3p in negatively regulating genes involved in meiotic
development or the adaptive response to stress. Third, this cyclin directly
interacts with the transcriptional apparatus. Finally, Ume3p is rapidly
destroyed in response to a subset of stress or differentiation signals, a novel
regulatory mechanism for cyclins. These results point to the existence of a
rapid, flexible system that alters gene expression in response to changing
environmental signals through post-translational regulation of Ume3p-dependent
protein kinase activity. This project is directed toward elucidating the pathway
that regulates Ume3p and investigating the role this cyclin plays in modulating
gene expression. ***