* 9513613
* Structural, Association, and Kinetic Properties of          Dehydrogenases
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* H. Spivey, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/2000
* USD 130,000.00

Abstract 9513613 Anomalous kinetics for the coupled reactions of dehydrogenases
(DeHs) of opposite chiral specificity have been well documented since 1940. The
only simple explanation of the anomalies is that the complex of donor enzyme
with NADH (El NADH) can directly transfer NADH to an acceptor enzyme E2 so that
NADH doesn't significantly equilibrate with the bulk aqueous phase. That is:
NADH is a competent substrate for E2. The potential metabolic consequences of
this "channeling" are far greater than commonly realized. For example, 1)
channeling permits enzyme reactions to proceed independently of bulk phase
substrate concentrations, 2) channeling isolates metabolites from competing
reactions, 3) enzyme bound substrates avoid the inadequate solvation capacity of
the cell, 4) the desolvated state of substrates bound to enzymes may be a major
factor in enzyme rate enhancement, 5) channeling permits larger degree of
control by the enzymes according to recently extended metabolic control theory,
and 6) channeling systems are subject to regulation by modulators that affect
enzyme associations. Most of these consequences result from the
microcompartmentation of metabolites that is inherent in this mechanism. A
puzzling aspect of NADH channeling among the DeHs, however, was the difficulty
in observing the El NADH E2 complex in vitro. Peticolas et al. appear to have
resolved this problem by demonstrating that association of the two enzymes
depends critically on the NADH concentration. Their experiments were limited to
the a-glycerol-P (aGPD) &amp; lactate (LDH) DeH enzyme pair (plus a negative
control with two A chiral specific DeHs), two NADH concentrations, and a single
experimental method. Because of the potential significance of this process in
metabolism, we propose the following overlapping objectives. 1) Characterize the
NADH modulation of the association of dehydrogenases to: a) more definitively
establish the properties of the LDH-aGPD system, and b) test the generality of
this NADH modulat ion among other enzyme pairs. 2) Correlate these enzyme
associations with the efficiencies of substrate channeling among different
enzyme pairs, and 3) Correlate these association and channeling properties with
the molecular structures of the donor and acceptor enzymes. Enzyme associations
will be studied by fluorescence polarization, agarose gel electrophoresis,
Hummel-Dreyer size exclusion chromatography, analytical ultracentrifugation, and
differential thermal titration methods. In addition, the possibility that the
association of E1 with E2 occurs only during the steady-state of the E2
catalyzed reaction will be tested by computer simulations. NADH channeling will
be characterized by the "enzyme buffering method" and metabolic control theory
and experiments. These functional properties will be correlated with enzyme
structures using molecular graphics and related programs to deduce the common
determinants among the nearly 15 DeH enzymes with known crystal structures. The
fact that only A-B pairs of DeHs channel NADH provides us an excellent
opportunity to achieve these objectives. In a highly related study, the
channeling of metabolites in situ will also be tested using permeabilized PC12
cells. %%% Enzymes are responsible for all basic metabolic reactions as well as
other reactions, e.g., those replicating and translating the genetic information
of cells and the signaling processes of cells. The classical model of the cell
assumes that most of the enzymes (and consequently also their metabolic
products) of the major metabolic pathways are randomly distributed within their
cell compartments. Furthermore, our understanding of the regulation of
metabolism is significantly dependent on this simplifying assumption. Very
strong evidence has accumulated, however, that instead, many of these enzymes
are associated with the next enzyme in the metabolic sequence. This permits the
direct transfer of metabolic products from one enzyme to the next without their
random distribution within the cell comp artment. If this occurs, metabolic
properties will be significantly different from those that we currently assume
to exist. Consequently, we plan to test for the presence of these enzyme
associations among an important class of enzymes and to also determine the
consequences of these associations on the metabolic reactions that these enzymes
catalyze. For technical reasons, these enzyme associations are much smaller
outside the cell than within. Thus special methods are required to detect the
associations outside the cell and measurements of channeling in situ will also
be attempted. In addition, the molecular structures of many of these enzymes are
now known from x-ray studies. Thus we shall correlate these molecular structures
with the enzyme association and metabolic properties. *** ??