* 9513047
* Control of Heme Enzyme Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* James Erman, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 08/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9513047 Erman The long-term goal of this research is to elucidate the structural
features which control heme protein reactivity and determine heme protein
function. The research will compare proteins from two different functional
classes: (1) the heme enzymes and (2) the oxygen transport/storage proteins. Of
particular interest is the chemical reactivity of the Fe(III) state of heme
proteins. The properties of CcP will be compared with those of the Fe(III) state
of two oxygen transport/storage proteins, mammalian metmyoglobin (MetMb) and
Glycera dibranchiata methemoglobin (metGHb) in an effort to understand the
structural features which are responsible for the reactivity differences in
these two classes of heme proteins. The first aspect of Fe(III) heme protein
reactivity to be investigated is the reaction which characterizes the
peroxidases, the reaction between the Fe(III) protein and H2O2 to form an
oxidized enzyme intermediate called Compound I. Initial studies, using site-
directed mutagenesis to alter protein structure, indicate that two amino acid
residues in CcP are critical in the formation of Compound I, the distal
histidine His-52 and a distal arginine (Arg-48). Arg-48 facilitates oxygen-
oxygen bond cleavage while His-52 promotes peroxide binding to the heme iron.
Elucidation of the differences in the properties of the distal histidine in the
peroxidases and the oxygen transport/storage heme proteins is one of the
specific objectives of this proposal. A key question concerning the reactivity
of the Fe(III) state of heme proteins is access of small reactants and ligands
to the distal heme pocket. Active-site access will be probed by investigating
the rates of binding of small ligands such as fluoride, cyanide, and nitric
oxide to the iron in CcP, metMb, metGHb and their mutants. Discrimination
between the neutral and charged forms of the ligands will be determined. Steric
constraints, acid-base behavior, and the polarity of the heme pocket will be
investigated through site-directed mutagenesis. The studies outlined in this
proposal will provide a more sophisticated level of understanding of heme
protein reactivity and function. It will provide a basis for rational protein
design. The proposal includes plans to convert metGHb into an efficient
peroxidase and more importantly, to convert CcP into a versatile hydroxylase,
utilizing H2O2 rather than O2. %%% Heme proteins perform many important
functions in living organisms including the transport of oxygen to its site of
utilization and the protection of the organism from reactive oxygen species.
(Reactive oxygen species such as superoxide, hydrogen peroxide, and the hydroxyl
radical are thought to accelerate the aging process.) The goal of the research
proposed in this project is to determine how the structure of various heme
proteins govern their biological function. Two heme proteins, with different
functions, will be extensively investigated by systematic manipulation of their
structures. Observation of the biological reactivity of the altered proteins
will allow correlations to be made concerning structure and function. The
studies will provide a sophisticated level of understanding of heme protein
reactivity and function. These studies will also provide a basis for the
rational design of heme proteins to carry out processes which may have important
commercial applications. ***