* 9513932
* Role of the Universally Conserved 3'-CCA And Synthetase     Recognition Determinants in tRNA Function
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Jack Horowitz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2001
* USD 336,125.00

9513932 Horowitz The long-range goals of this research are to define structural
features of transfer RNA essential for its function in protein synthesis. Focus
will be on E. coli tRNA Val and its interaction with its cognate aminoacyl-tRNA
synthetase. Methods of tRNA gene manipulation, site-directed mutagenesis, and in
vitro transcription will be used to introduce modifications into E. coli tRNA
Val and examine their effects on function, primarily by examining in vitro
aminoacylation kinetics and polypeptide synthesis. a. Role of the universally
conserved 3'-CCA sequence in tRNA function. Recent results have shown that E.
coli tRNA Val can function actively in aminoacylation and polypeptide synthesis
despite alterations in the universally conserved 3'-CCA end. To further explore
the functional role of the 3'-CCA terminus the following will be done: (1)
Functional groups in the 3' terminal sequence of tRNA essential for
aminoacylation will be examined by site-specific incorporation of base analogs.
(2) Role of 3'-CCA in misacylation and editing by valyl-tRNA synthetase will be
investigated. (3) Role of 3' terminal nucleotides in polypeptide synthesis will
be investigated. Although the variants of tRNA Val termination in 3' pyrimidines
are readily aminoacylated, they function poorly in polypeptide synthesis. The
step(s) of polypeptide synthesis inhibited by pyrimidine substituents at the 3'
end of tRNA Val will be identified. (4) Ribosome recognition of the 3' end will
be investigated using 3'-end mutants of tRNA. Val (5) Specific requirement for
3'-CCA in tRNAs other than tRNA Val will be examined. b. Recognition of E. coli
tRNA Val by valyl-tRNA synthetase. The recognition of tRNA Val by its cognate
synthetase will be further investigated and the synthetase itself will be
further characterized. These studies will include the following: (1) Efforts
will continue to define the complete set of sequence and structural elements
essential for tRNA Val recognition by valyl-tRNA syn thetase. Features thus far
identified as necessary for tRNA Val recognition will be inserted into other
tRNAs to assess effects of sequence context on valine-accepting specificity and
to identify possible negative determinants (antideterminants) that interfere
with synthetase recognition. (2) Details of synthetase/tRNA interactions can
best be resolved by structure determination of the complex. Large quantities of
purified tRNA Val and valyl-tRNA synthetase are available and in collaboration
with a crystallographer the structure of valyl-tRNA synthetase and its complexes
will be determined. (3) The aminoacylation fidelity, hydrolytic editing, and
other functions of an active truncated mutant of valyl-tRNA synthetase, which
have recently been isolated, cloned, and overexpressed, will be characterized.
%%% Transfer RNAs (tRNA) play an important role in determining the accuracy and
efficiency of protein biosynthesis. These molecules effectively translate the
sequence of 3-nucleotide codes determined by the genetic material into the
linear incorporation of amino acids into proteins in their proper order. All
tRNAs contain a universally conserved code (3'-CCA) at one end of the molecule
which implicates a specific function. Interestingly, base changes within this
sequence had no effect on protein synthesis. The proposed research will explore
the functional role of the 3'-CCA sequence by evaluating the effects of altering
chemical(functional) groups within this sequence on aminoacylation reaction
kinetics as well as on recognition by the specific tRNA synthetase which
mediates this reaction. The structure of the synthetase enzyme and its complexes
with tRNA and other substrates will be obtained by X-ray crystallography. ***