* 9513670
* The Biology of Heat Shock Proteins and Molecular Chaperones: Meeting to be held May 1-5, 1996 at Cold Spring Harbor, NY
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 03/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

951370 Grodzicker This proposal is a request for partial financial support for a
meting on Molecular Chaperones and the Heat Shock response to be held from May
1-5, 1996 at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory. There has been a significant amount
of new information on the role of heat shock proteins synthesis, protein
folding, transport and secretion. In addition, there has been substantial
progress on the biochemical properties of these heat shock proteins and
chaperones, on the regulation of the genes that encode these proteins, and on
the role, regulation and function of heat shock proteins in a wide range of
human diseases. the field of heat shock proteins and molecular chaperones has
gown rapidly and draws interest from a number of traditional scientific
disciplines in the basic sciences and has embraced numerous areas of biomedical
research including infectious diseases, cancer, heart disease and
neurodegenerative disease. This meeting, in the tradition of Cold Spring Harbor
meetings, will emphasize new discoveries in these areas. The meeting will
include seven lecture and three poster sessions. The proposed sessions include:
I-Biochemical and biophysical aspects of chaperone-dependent protein folding,
II-Import and folding of precursor proteins into organelles and secretion into
the extracellular space, III-The protein folding, IV-The role of chaperones in
recognition of the protein degradative machinery, V-The transcriptional and
post-transcriptional regulation of genes encoding chaperones, VI-Stress
tolerance: Protection of critical cellular targets against protein damage, and
VII-The Stress Response in Disease. Each session will be chaired by an invited
speaker and have eight to nine oral presentations of which only 3-4 talks per
session will be pre-invited speakers. The remaining speakers for each session
will be selected from submitted abstracts to reflect diverse participation and
to recognize new investigators. Particular attention will be paid to encourage
participation in the lecture or poster sessions by graduate students,
postdctoral fellows, and new investigators in addition to attendance and
presentations by leading scientists in the field. ***