* 9513967
* Financial Support for the 18th Annual Symposium in Plant    Physiology, January 18-20, 1996, Riverside, California
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Robert Heath, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Machi F. Dilworth
* 01/31/1997
* USD 4,000.00

9513967 Heath The Department of Botany and Plant Sciences, University of
California, Riverside (UCR) has held a symposium for the past 17 years on timely
topics in plant biology. The 18th Annual Sympoisum in Plant Biology, entitled
"How Plants Use the Light Environment to Regulate Growth and Development," will
be held January 18-20, 1996. The objective of the 1996 Symposium is to bring
together scientists working in the area of plant growth and development as
influenced by light, with the intention that the presentations, and the
discussion arising from them, will lead to a greater understanding of the
cellular, physiological, and genetic aspects of the photo-environment. It will
cover the major electromagnetic bands which influence plants on earth, including
the phytochrome and blue light responses and the UV spectrum which will be
increasing due to the weakening of the ozone layer shield. The five sections
will be: 1) properties of the photoreceptors; 2) light regulation of gene
expression; 3) signal transduction; 4) the use of mutants; and 5) the whole
plant response, to also including circadian rhythms. Speakers from abroad and
from other institutions, including young investigators who have introduced
innovative molecular approaches, will be invited to participate. Poster
presentations will also be included in the program. The presented papers, as
well as poster abstracts, will be published rapidly and inexpensively. Riverside
is an ideal location for this symposium because there are many researchers
within California and the western states.