* 9513137
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science Program:  Wave Propagation   in Periodic Composite Materials
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Joseph Haus, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/2000
* USD 30,000.00

9513137 Haus A three year cooperative research program is developed between the
experimental group of Prof. Kuon Inoue at Hokkaido University in Sapporo, Japan
and the theoretical group of the PI at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute. The
subject of our investigations is dielectric materials with periodicity in one-,
two- and three-dimensions. The topic combines the strengths of two groups to
explore the potential of these new materials for applications in
optoelectronics, especially pulse propagation and nonlinear effects. The
experimental group is engaged in a number of experiments on samples whose
lattice spacing ranges from millimeters to sub-microns; two- and three-
dimensional samples are of primary interest. The Japanese group has both
microwave and optical characterization experiments underway to confirm specific
theoretical predictions. The PI is continuing numerical calculations and
developing several approaches from plane-waves to beam-propagation methods;
attention is devoted to convergence and reliability issues. Analytical methods
are concurrently being developed using the multiple scales perturbation
approach. The results are applied to pulse propagation, dispersion and
diffraction in linear and nonlinear structures. ***