* 9513334
* Genetic and Molecular Analysis of a Drosophila Homolog      of MyoD
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Susan Abmayr, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/2001
* USD 330,000.00

*** 9513334 Abmayr The proposed studies focus on the role of nautilus, the
Drosophila homologue of the myogenic regulatory gene family that includes MyoD,
in myogenesis. Embryos homozygous for deficiencies that delete nautilis are
missing a distinct subset of mesodermal cells. Several of these muscles are
missing in embryos mutant for daughterless, the putative partner of nautilus,
and the spitz group genes, an EGF-like signaling cascade involved in
dorsal/ventral axis determination. Additional studies have revealed that
nautilus is capable of converting cells from non-muscle origins to somatic
muscles, and of altering the developmental program of somatic muscle fibers in
which it is not normally expressed. These results suggest that nautilus induces
myogenic differentiation, and that some cells are converted to a myogenic
program by expression of bHLH-containing myogenic genes. The proposed
experiments are designed to address various aspects of the above findings. These
include characterizing potential point mutations and/or overlapping deficiencies
that affect only the nautilus gene. Results of these studies will provide
critical information indicating whether nautilus is necessary to specify
particular muscle progenitors or, rather, simply induces their differentiation
program. In related studies, the origin and developmental status of ectopic
muscles that form in response to nautilus will be explored to aid in
understanding its role. Additional studies will search for interactions between
nautilus and genes that cause similar or related mutant phenotypes. For example,
the observation that daughterless mutant embryos exhibit a more severe mutant
phenotype than that of the nautilus deficiencies suggests that it may interact
with proteins that have yet to be identified. ***