* 9513988
* Ontogenetic Changes in Defensive and Nutritional            Characteristics of Juvenile Kelps and their Effects on      Community Structure
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Kathryn Van Alstyne, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 06/30/1998
* USD 127,714.00

9513988 Van Alstyne Kelp forests are habitats that are important nursery grounds
for many commercially important species of fish and shellfish. The kelps that
make up these forests serve as food and shelter from predators for a variety of
marine animals. Large numbers of kelps within kelp forests die each year
creating open patches that can be colonized by juvenile kelps. In order to
understand how kelp forests are sustained, it is necessary to know how juvenile
kelps become established in open areas and how environmental factors affect
their establishment. Like many marine organisms, kelps produce large numbers of
offspring but only a few survive to become adults. Many kelp offspring die
within a few weeks after they settle to the bottom because they are consumed by
snails and sea urchins. When they first settle, juvenile kelps are very small
relative to their predators and their tissues are thin and easily consumed.
However, some species of kelps are less likely to be consumed than others and
these species often become the dominant species in kelp beds. Little is
currently known about why these species are less likely to be consumed by
grazers, but preliminary data suggest their survival may be due to high
concentrations of chemical defenses in their tissues. Previous research has
shown that seaweed chemical defenses are distasteful to snails and sea urchins,
and that many grazers will avoid chemically defended seaweed individulas. This
study will use field and laboratory experiments to examine the biochemical and
structural features of juvenile kelps that affect grazing by herbivores. The
following questions will be addressed (1) Do juvenile kelps invest greater
amounts of resources in defending themselves against attacks by herbivores than
adult kelps, or do they preferentially allocate resources for growth rather than
defense?; (2) Do kelps at different locations use different strategies in
allocating resources towards defense versus growth? If so, is the strategy use d
at a particular location determined by environmental features of the site?; (3).
Are the polyphenolic defensive compounds that are produced by kelps effective
against all types of herbivores?; and (4) Are juvenile kelps that do not invest
heavily in defenses better competitors because they have more resources to
invest in growth?. The results of this study will provide insights into the
mechanisms by which these important habitats are sustained. They will also serve
as a basis for determining the effects of changes in the environment on
interactions between predators and their prey.