* 9513001
* An Automated DNA Sequencer for Brown University
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Edward Hawrot, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 70,000.00

A group of faculty in the Departments of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology
(EEB), Molecular and Cellular Biology and Biochemistry (MCB) and Molecular
Pharmacology and Biotechnology (MPB) at Brown Uliversity seeks funds for the
purchase of an Applied Biosystems, Inc. ABI 377 Automated DNA Sequencer and
dedicated thermal cycler for use with the ABI 377. This equipment will be
operated as a multi-user facility with four major users (Hawrot, Hendrickson,
Rand, Zaret) and eight minor users (Biggins, Cane, Gerbi, Landy, Marshal, Mowry,
Wessel, Wharton). The research conducted with this Sequencer ranges from the
analysis of mutants of known genes (Biggins, Cane, Hawrot, Landy, Mowry,
Wharton, Zaret) to the characterization of new genomic sequences (Cane, Gerbi,
Hendrickson, Marshal, Wessel Wharton) to studies of genetic variation and
evolution of well-characterized loci (Rand). This piece of equipment will
provide a significant increase in research productivity and competitiveness as
each of the users currently does sequencing by "hand." At present, there is no
automated DNA sequencer at Brown University, nor in the entire state of Rhode
Island. For most of the major users, acquiring the DNA sequence of cloned or
amplified genes is a major burden to research progress. A substantial proportion
of sequencing effort falls on the shoulders of graduate students. Hence, an
automated DNA sequencer will have a significant impact on graduate education by
allowing students to focus on more intellectually challenging research and
direct more effort towards creative experimental design. Brown University will
provide 48.8% of the funds for the purchase of the ABI 377, and will pay the
salary of the staff member (Charles Setterlund) who will be the dedicated person
responsible for operating this equipment.