* 9513919
* Molecular Analysis of Chlamydomonas Mating-Type Locus
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Ursula Goodenough, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 04/30/2000
* USD 353,000.00

9513919 Goodenough The long range goal of this project is to analyze the genetic
control of sexual differentiation in the unicellular green alga Chlamydomonas
reinhardtii. The organism differentiates into 4 distinct cell types during the
course of its life cycle and most, if not all, of these programs are governed by
its mating-type (mt) locus which exists as a pair of apparent alleles. Cells
inheriting the mt+ locus differentiate as plus gametes in response to nitrogen
starvation and are capable of mating interactions and zygote formation only with
complementary minus alleles. The specific goals of this proposal are: 1. To
determine if the gene product of the mid gene is responsible for directing mt-
sexual differentiation during gametogenesis and to determine if it acts directly
or in concert with other proteins to elicit the transcription of minus- specific
structural genes during that period. 2. To define the mechanisms responsible for
the movement of the mid gene and about 20 kb of flanking DNA to an autosomal
location in a specific strain of C. reinhardtii. Further work will be done to
determine the cause for the loss of the element when the autosome is crossed
into a plus background. 3. A homologue of the mid gene has been identified in C.
incerta, a close relative and experiments will be done to determine similarities
or differences in chromosomal location and or configurations. Other more
distantly related species will be screened for conservation of the domains of
the mid gene. %%% The mid locus of C. reinhardtii has been characterized as the
gene responsible for directing mt- sexual differentiation during gametogenesis
will be studied in respect to its function. The effect of chromosomal position
of the gene will also be studied by comparison with a closely related species of
Chlamydomonas where the gene is located on an non-sex chromosome. The level of
conservation of the gene will be determined by screening of more distantly
related species. These studies should enhance o ur understanding of how sexual
differentiation is determined in an important representative of the "early"
eukaryotes. ***