* 9513100
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Function and Ontogeny      of a Remarkable Poisonous Vertebrate Neck Gland
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Gordon Burghardt, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 03/31/1999
* USD 6,250.00

9513100 Burghardt This award supports a three year cooperative research project
between Dr. Gordon M. Burghardt of the University of Tennessee-Knoxville and Dr.
Akira Mori of Kyoto University. The collaborators assembled also include Dr.
Richard Goris at the Yokohama City University School of Medicine and biologists
specializing on reptile chemical ecology in the USA. This project will
investigate the structure and function of a remarkable nuchal venom gland in a
Japanese natricine snake. The problem is how the snake synthesizes and uses this
complex chemical stew of potent toxins, which seem to be unique to this species
and some relatives. Since related toxins are found in the skin of favored prey
of this species, amphibians, it is possible that the venom derives from
chemicals sequestered from the diet of the animal. This has not been
demonstrated in any amniote vertebrate to date, although many eat potentially
toxic amphibians. Neonatal snakes seem to have an undeveloped gland and the
ontogeny of the system will be explored through a series of experiments. The
behavior of the snakes towards potential predators and responses of such animals
to the toxins will also be explored in noninjurious tests. The project brings
together workers in behavior, development, snake venoms, and histology from two
countries. This proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its joint
endeavor bringing state of the art methods from two countries into a joint
international collaborative effort. ***