* 9513887
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research:  Microstructure and      Alloying Effects on the Reliability of Conductor Lines
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* William Nix, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 03/31/2000
* USD 14,000.00

This award supports Professors William Nix and John Bravman, plus two graduate
students, all from Stanford University, to collaborate in studies of failures in
electronic materials with Professor Eduard Arzt and his research group of the
Institute for Metallurgy of the University of Stuttgart, Germany. Professor Arzt
and his students have pioneered the study of `interface controlled` deformation
processes, and they have developed a new technique for studying electromigration
failure. The U.S. group led by Professor Nix has developed models to describe
the flow and accumulation of ions in conductor lines and the initial stages of
void formation. They also have specialized equipment for studying the formation
and propagation of voids in metal lines. Advances in miniaturization of
integrated circuits have exposed the metallic conductor lines to increasingly
severe operating conditions. The aim of this research collaboration is to
develop a better understanding of the microstructural and alloying effects that
control the reliability of conductor lines in integrated circuits. These lines
typically carry very high current densities which causes atoms to migrate from
one place to another creating damage sites. This leads to the formation of voids
and cracks in the surrounding materials, which is the cause of major reliability
problems for miniaturized electronic devices. Joining the complementary
expertise of these U.S. and German research groups will accelerate progress in
understanding such critical electromigration phenomena in conductor lines.