* 9513082
* U.S.-U.K. Cooperative Research:  Electrophysiological and   Behavioral Responses of the Salt Marsh Biting Midge,        Culicoides mississippiensis, to Holly Volatiles
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Donald Hall, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 01/31/1997
* USD 7,183.00

This international dissertation enhancement award will support travel and
living expenses to the United Kingdom of Robert G. Stewart, a graduate student
of Donald W. Hall at the University of Florida. Mr. Stewart will conduct studies
in pest control with Alison Blackwell of the Unviersity of Dundee and John
Pickett, Head, Biological and Ecological Chemistry Department at Rothamsted
Agricultural Experimental Station in England. The objective of the research is
to evaluate the components of the yaupon holly, Ilex vomitoria, as possible
attractants for suveillance and/or control of the insect Culicoides
mississippiensis or salt marsh biting midge. This insect is a major pest along
the Florida gulf coast. The proposed studies will identify a blend of potential
attractrants through electroantennogram measurements and confirm the
electrophysiological activity of the blend through bioassay methods. The project
takes advantage of unique expertise in the United Kingdom. The UK researchers
are expert in the development of electroantennogram techniques for very small
delicate insects. Their collaboration will advance understanding of insect-plant
associations for control of insect pests and disease vectors.