* 9513911
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Kinematic          Development of Pressure Solution Fabrics in Dense           Rocks
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Mark Brandon, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/28/2001
* USD 10,145.00

This award supports Professor Mark Brandon and a graduate student of Yale
University to collaborate with three German geologists, Professors Passchier,
Den Brok and Ring, and their students at the University of Mainz. They will
study the kinematics of the pressure-solution process by comparing its effects
in natural and experimentally deformed materials. The naturally deformed rocks
will include sandstones from northern Kamchatka and sandstone and siltstones
from regions of the Swiss and French Alps near Mainz. Field work in these areas
will be done by Drs. Brandon and Ring and their students. Dr. Brandon will
direct the natural fabric measurements, which will be carried out on his
specialized equipment at Yale. The experimental work will be carried out
primarily by Drs. Paschier and Den Brok in their well-equipped laboratories in
Mainz, Germany. They will manipulate very fine grained dense aggregates of `wet`
halites, with selected grain size, temperature and differential stress, to
provide valid comparisons. All the participating scientists and some students
will interact in portions of the laboratory research during a series of exchange
visits between the two institutions. Pressure solution appears to be the
dominant ductile mechanism operating in the low temperature/high pressure
setting that characterizes subduction zones. The specific objective of the
project is to improve understanding of the kinematic development of fabrics that
typify pressure-solution deformation in dense rocks. This information will
improve the utility of such fabric data in efforts to understand regional
tectonic problems.