* 9513513
* B Mating-Type Specificities and Pheromones in Schizophyllum
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Carlene Raper, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1999
* USD 329,750.00

9513513 Raper The aim of this research is to understand how a simple eukaryote
distinguishes itself from many nonselves in regulating mating and development.
The specific objective is to clarify the mechanism by which the multiple B
mating-type genes trigger sexual development in the mushroom Schizophyllum
commune. The B genes are in two linked loci, B( and B(, each of which has nine
different versions, or specificities, in the world-wide population. A mating
pair must be different at either B( or B( to be compatible: any of the 36
possible pairings of different specificities at either locus results in
initiation of the identical developmental pathway. How does this occur? Recent
analysis of one specificity at each locus, B(l and B(1, has revealed genes for
pheromones and pheromone receptors similar to those found in other fungi. All
previously described fungal systems, however, have only two different versions
of such genes. In S. commune, there are multiple versions. A model to explain
multiple B mating types in S. commune is that each specificity at each locus is
defined by a unique combination of pheromone and pheromone receptor genes. These
genes have coevolved so as to insure that no combination of genes contained
within the B mating-type locus of a single specificity encodes a pair of
molecules capable of activating sexual development in self; only molecules
encoded by different specificities of that locus can interact to activate the
pathway. It is proposed that the basis for multiple B mating-types in S. commune
is a unique system of multiple pheromone and pheromone receptors which act as
master regulators of sexual morphogenesis. The focus of this project is to test
this model by defining the functional genetic components of the B(3 and B(2 loci
and comparing these with the genes of the B(l and B(1 loci which are currently
being studied in collaboration with two European laboratories. Genes of the
wild-type B(3 and B(2 loci will also be compared to a series of existing mutated
genes within these loci that cause a variety of defective phenotypes. These
comparisons will begin to explain how specificity of function is determined by
the genes of each locus, and why certain pairings of these genes activate
development while others do not. The research is divided into three parts: 1)
Determine the basis for specificity of function among wild-type alleles by
comparing differences and similarities between genetic elements that define B(3
and B(2 versus B(l and B(1. 2) Gain understanding of how the B mating-type genes
determine specificity for self/nonself recognition by defining a mutation within
the B(2 locus that destroys this function. 3) Determine specific functions of
the multiple genes within the B(2 locus by correlating a series of mutations
with changes in phenotype. Also define predicted deletions within the mutants
for use as recipients in transformation experiments in order to test the effect
of various combinat1ons of wild-type and mutated B mating-type genes. The
pattern of expression of selected B mating-type genes will be examined for
evidence of regulation with respect to development. This research will be
accomplished by using standard techniques of DNA cloning, sequencing, sequence
analysis, nucleic acid hybridization, PCR amplification, and DNA-mediated
transformation of S. commune. %%% The long-term goal of this research is an
understanding of how multiple pheromones and pheromone receptors regulate mating
and cell-to-cell communication during development simple multicellular
eukaryote. The organism being studied is the woodrotting Basidiomycete
Schlzophyllum commune. This fungus, like other members of its class, has
thousands of mating types. The investigator believes that the underlying
mechanisms by which a haploid individual can distinguish self from many
nonselves in regulating sexual development is fundamental relevance to an
understanding of multicellular development in eukaryotes generally. S.commune is
an ideal model system for this study because of the relative ease with which it
can be manipulated in the laboratory and the substantial background information
available for molecular genetic studies. ***