* 9513527
* Protein Turnover in p53 Regulation; Mutagenesis of E6-AP
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Penelope Duerksen-Hughes, Georgia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/29/2000
* USD 258,964.00

9513527 Duerksen-Hughes The long term goal of this research is to define on a
molecular level the regulation of p53, a protein which plays a major role in DNA
repair, cell cycle regulation and apoptosis. The first goal is to examine how
the degradation of p53 is regulated. Previous work has shown that the rapid
turnover of p53 during normal metabolism can be at least partially attributed to
the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic system. Following DNA damage, the p53
protein is stabilized; the mechanism for this stabilization is unknown. This
work focuses on two conditions which can stabilize p53; damage to the cellular
DNA, and the expression of adenovirus ElA. Two possible mechanisms for p53
stabilization will be tested: that the increased stability is a result of
changes in the activity of components of the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic
system, and that the change in stability is a result of modifications made to
p53 itself. Cells with conditional mutations in the ubiquitin-dependent system
will be utilized to examine the role of that system in p53 turnover. Protein
turnover and steady-state levels will be measured by immunoprecipitation and
Western blot analysis, respectively. The second goal of this work is to develop
and characterize mutations in one or more of the enzymes likely to participate
in the turnover of p53, and to test cells expressing these mutations for their
ability to degrade that protein. One target enzyme is E6-AP, which functions to
transfer activated ubiquitin to p53 and thus render it a substrate for
ubiquitin-dependent proteolysis. Also, a strategy for creating random mutations
in selected cell lines, then screening the resulting mutants in a way which is
expected to yield temperature-sensitive mutations in one or more of the enzymes
which participate in p53 degradation has been developed. The results of this
work will lead to an understanding of whether the ubiquitin-mediated system is
important in p53 breakdown and how the actual activities of the various enzymes
ma y shift under different conditions. This should set the stage for further
studies in how p53 levels are regulated on a molecular level. In addition, cell
lines conditionally mutant in their ability to degrade p53 will be useful in
several ways. Not only will they will provide a valuable tool in studying the
function of p53 under various conditions, but because these mutations are
expected to be in enzymes associated with the ubiquitin-dependent proteolytic
system, they will provide specific tools for studies of the functions and
substrates of that system in general. %%% Individuals are constantly exposed to
a wide variety of natural and man-made substances which can damage DNA in the
genome, and are therefore called "genotoxins." To protect themselves, all
organisms possess several mechanisms to prevent or repair DNA damage. One of the
most important of these mechanisms uses a protein called "p53." When a cell's
DNA is damaged, the levels of p53 rise. This causes one of two things to happen:
the cell may stop dividing until the damage is repaired; or, if the damage is
too great to repair, the cell may commit "cellular suicide." In either case,
damaged DNA is not copied, and this helps to prevent mutations. It is already
known that the reason p53 levels rise when DNA is damaged is not because more
protein is made, but because the p53 is degraded more slowly than usual. What is
not known is how the degradation rate is altered. The first goal of this
proposal, then, is to look at two situations where p53 is stabilized (following
DNA damage and when a virus protein called ElA is present) to see if the protein
lasts longer because the enzymes that degrade it are less active, or because the
p53 itself has been changed in some way. The second goal also concerns
degradation of p53. One of the enzymes which can help to break down p53 is
called E6-AP. A cell line where E6-AP has been mutated will be created and
characterized. Observing how these cells control p53 will then help researchers
understand more about how and when p53 is degraded.