* 9513244
* Genetic Analysis of Membrane Traffic in Mammalian Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Rockford Draper, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 01/31/2001
* USD 308,526.00

95-13244 Draper Eukaryotic cells consist of various endomembranous structures,
each with a unique complement of proteins and lipids. Despite a dynamic membrane
traffic involving transfer of membrane components from one compartment to
another, the membranes maintain their distinct composition. This dynamic
membrane traffic is presumed to occur by membrane vesicles that originate at
donor membranes, migrate to acceptor membranes, and fuse to the acceptor
compartment. The mechanisms by which vesicles are formed and by which vesicles
identify and fuse to the acceptor compartment are poorly understood. This
proposal is concerned with gaining insights into the molecular events in
membrane trafficking. Dr. Draper has isolated temperature-sensitive mutants of
CHO cells that comprise five complementation groups, End1 through End5, that are
defective in certain aspects of membrane trafficking. The focus of this proposal
is to gain insights into the nature of the mutants of the End4 complementation
group and to isolate new mutants. Mutants of the End4 group have a block at the
non-permissive temperature in endoplasmic reticulum to Golgi transport that
correlates with a dissipation of the latter. The objectives of the proposal are
to establish an in vitro system to biochemically analyze the End4 mutants, to
clone the affected gene by complementation, and to isolate and characterize
mutants that are resistant to protein toxins and are also defective in membrane
trafficking. %%% Eukaryotic cells consist of various endomembranous structures,
each with a unique complementation of proteins and lipids. Despite a dynamic
membrane traffic involving transfer of membrane components from one compartment
to another, the compartments maintain their distinct membrane composition. This
dynamic membrane traffic is presumed to occur by the formation of membrane
vesicles at the donor compartment, migration of these to the acceptor
compartment, and fusion to the acceptor compartment. The mechanisms by which
vesicles are formed, by which vesicles identify and fuse to the acceptor
compartment are poorly understood. This proposal is concerned with gaining
insights into the molecular events of membrane trafficking. ***