* 9513880
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Attractive Invariant   Manifolds in High-Dimensional Symmetric Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Rick Miranda, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 20,760.00

This award supports Michael Kirby, and several other professors and graduate
students of the Department of Mathematics of Colorado State University, to
collaborate in applied mathematics with Professor Werner Guettinger and others
of the Institute for Theoretical Physics of the University of Tuebingen,
Germany. The subject of their collaboration is the study of the complex spatio-
temporal behavior of nonlinear dynamical systems with many degrees of freedom.
Their goal is to reduce high dimensional evolution systems to low dimensional
dynamical systems and to analyze those with the qualitative geometrical concepts
of nonlinear dynamics. To do this they must develop suitable methods for
mathematical approximation of invariant manifolds. The research benefits from
the German group's pioneering work in developing low-dimensional dynamical
systems theory and applying it to physical problems. The joint research also
requires the complementary expertise of the US group in dimensionality reduction
and symmetry exploitation. In particular, they have developed pattern analysis
methods for dynamical systems based on neural network modeling algorithms
Starting from fundamental principles of mathematics and physics, these
collaborating scientists are investigating the development of organized
structures and moving patterns whose activation is triggered when external
forces exceed critical values. They seek to demonstrate how symmetrical or
coherent spatio-temporal structures may arise, and why such structures are
preferred in nature. The answers to such questions also have bearing on larger
issues of technological development.