* 9513398
* Mechanisms of Enzymatic Catalysis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Harvey Fisher, University of Kansas Medical Center
* Continuing grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 08/31/1999
* USD 281,500.00

9513398 Fisher The long term goal of this laboratory is to understand enzymes as
functioning biological machines. We hope to learn the chemistry of their
mechanisms, how their structural features initiate and control that chemistry,
and how the energetics of their operation is related to the chemical and
structural events that occur in their reaction time course of the mammalian
glutamate dehydrogenase catalyzed reaction; and 2. To resolve the time course of
that reaction into a series precisely defined "open" and "closed" phases. This
proposal is focused on the chemical mechanism of bovine liver glutamate
dehydrogenase. In our previous work we have identified and characterized most of
the important enzyme complexes involved and have established the locations of
many of them in the reaction time course. Our recent progress has resulted in
the discovery of a new prehydride transfer charge-transfer complex; the
preliminary identification of the final required post hydride complex (a
carbinolamine form); the finding that an obligatory proton release step which
occurs prior to hydride transfer in the mammalian enzyme is shifted to a much
later phase in a corresponding bacterial enzyme form whose chemistry and active-
site architecture appear to be otherwise identical. We have also developed some
new investigative tools, including a new theory of transient state kinetic
isotope effects (whose application we have demonstrated experimentally). We
propose now to apply these methods and some new experimental approaches to solve
two specific objectives. These new methods include the use of a very simple
mass-law based kinetic approach to integrate the component-concentration time
courses we can now produce using a recently acquired apparatus into a completely
defined scheme. We w ill also apply and continue to develop our new transient-
state kinetic isotope effect theory. The second objective will be pursued using
a variety of multimixing "kinetic-jump" experiments to determine the co
nformational state of the intermediate complexes. Molecular engineering, the
ability to alter proteins to meet man's needs is a well defined national goal.
The information required to fulfill this need is in the form of understanding a
series of structure-function relationships at a detailed level. The current
approach in the field is the combination of protein crystal structure
information and site directed mutagenesis of those structures. However, without
a more detailed knowledge of the mechanisms of action of these biological
machines, we cannot formulate the proper questions. The work proposed here is
intended to provide just such knowledge. %%% The long term goal of this
laboratory is to understand enzymes as functioning biological machines. We hope
to learn the chemistry of their mechanisms, how their structural features
initiate and control that chemistry, and how the energetics of their operations
is related to the chemical and structural events that occur in their reaction
sequences. Our immediate objectives are: 1. To complete the kinetic resolution
of the reaction time course of the mammalian glutamate dehydrogenase catalyzed
reaction; and 2, To resolve the time course of that reaction into a series of
precisely defined "open" an "closed" phases. This proposal is focused on the
chemical mechanism of bovine liver glutamate dehydrogenase. We have developed
two important new tool which we will apply to enable us to understand the
mechanism of enzymatic catalysis at a deeper level: 1. a very simple mass-law
based kinetic approach to integrate the component-concentration time courses we
can now produce using a recently acquired apparatus into a completely defined
scheme; and 2, a new transient-state kinetic isotope effect theory. Molecular
engineering, the ability to alter proteins to meet man's needs, is a well
defined national goal. The work proposed here is intended to provide just such
knowledge. ***