* 9513325
* Molecular and Developmental Analysis of a Proteoglycan      Cadherin Function
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Jack Lilien, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1999
* USD 335,000.00

Cadherin adhesion molecules play a central role in the cell-cell interactions
that occur during embryogenesis. Regulation of the temporal and special
distribution of functional cadherins is required from the earliest cellular
interactions between blastomeres and are maintained throughout the life of an
organism. The regulated temporal and special morphogenic patterns in embryos may
be brought about by controlling either cadherin expression or its function. This
proposal is describes experiments that examines one mechanism through which
cadherin adhesion molecule function is regulated though interactions with two
extracellular matrix molecules present in embryonic tissues. The first ECM
molecule is a proteoglycan (250kD PG), and the second, is a cell surface
glycosyltransferase (GalNAcPTase). Previous work has suggested that the
proteoglycan is a co-ligand for the cell surface GalNAcPTase; thus, it is
thought that GalNAcPTase acts as a cell surface receptor for the proteoglycan.
It is also known that the interaction of these two molecules initiates a signal
cascade culminating in the loss of cadherin function and thus cell adhesion. The
interaction of the 250kD PG ligand with the GalNAcPTase may therefore serve as a
regulatory switch controlling key events during embryocenesis. The long term
goal of this research is to understand the developmental significance of the
250kD PG/GalNAcPTase interactive pair. This includes: 1. Defining the molecular
characteristics of the 250kD PG and the GalNAcPTase and the basis for their
interaction. 2. Determining the components of the signaling pathway and how
their interaction leads to cadherin inactivation. 3. Characterizing the temporal
and spatial localization of the pair throughout development, and determining the
physiological and developmental significance of the interactive pair. This work
will establish a link between cell-ECM interactions that regulate loss of
cadherin-mediated cell-cell adhesions. Such feedback adhesive mechanis ms have
long been postulated but never before describe in molecular terms.