* 9513862
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Heat-              Resistant Active Brazing of Silicon-Nitride
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* J. Indacochea, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 03/31/1998
* USD 15,410.00

This award supports Professor J. E. Indacochea and a graduate student of the
University of Illinois at Chicago to collaborate in materials engineering
research with Professor Erich Lugscheider and others of the Materials Science
Institute of the Technical University of Aachen, Germany. The objectives of
their joint research are to improve the technological processes involved in
bonding non-oxide ceramics at elevated temperatures and in otherwise hostile
environments. In particular, they plan to develop a filler material and define a
joining procedure to bond silicon nitride. They will evaluate three techniques
for ease of fabrication and the stability of the ceramic joint. In order to
capitalize on the technological benefits of high performance ceramics and
composite materials, it is necessary to provide adequate techniques for joining
these materials to other substances. This collaborative research takes advantage
of the German group's technological expertise in alloy design, process design
and optimization. It is enhanced by their valuable European industrial
partnerships, which give them access to industrial mass production equipment.
The U.S. group has easy access to necessary microscopic, analytical and
computing facilities, and it has expertise in microstructure evaluations and
phase transformations which complement the German expertise. The results of
their joint effort are expected to produce a data base and model that could
design the filler material and identify an effective joining process based on
specifications of substrate, temperature levels and service environment for the
bonding.