* 9513382
* Genetics of Chromosome Structure and Segregation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Gregory May, Baylor College of Medicine
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 300,000.00

MCB-9513382 May The identification of conditional mutations that disrupt mitosis
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Schizosaccharomyces pombe, and Aspergillus nidulans
has allowed the scientific community to begin to understand the events of this
fundamental genetic process at a molecular level. Conditional mutations in the
A. nidulans gene bimD lead to an aberrant mitotic spindle with one-third the
normal number of microtubules. Strains carrying such bimD mutations undergo an
abortive mitosis during which the chromosomes fail to attach to the remaining
spindle microtubules and do not migrate to the poles. In addition, at permissive
temperature, mutations in bimD confer sensitivity to DNA damaging agents:
following mutagen treatment, bimD mutants enter mitosis and die. The
investigator has cloned and sequenced bimD, which encodes a novel polypeptide
with a predicted structure suggesting a DNA-binding protein with properties of
the bzip class of transcription factors. Attempting to identify other molecular
components of the chromosome segregation process, the investigator also has
discovered several mutations that suppress the heat-sensitive mitotic defect of
the bimD6 mutation. He has cloned and sequenced one of these extragenic
suppressor genes and determined that its gene product is a member of the widely
distributed family of DA-box proteins. Members of this family include the yeast
SMCl and SMC2 gene products, the S. pombe cut3+ and cutl4+ gene products, the
Caenorhabditis elegans dpy-27 gene product, and the Xenopus laevis XCAP-C and
XCAP-E chromosomal proteins. These products have roles in such processes as
chromosome segregation, gene dosage compensation, and X chromosome-specific
repression of transcription. Thus the investigator's identification of the
suppressor gene as a DA-box protein gene supports his hypothesis that these
genes function in chromosome segregation. The initial focus of the current study
will be the identification of the other genes whose products participate in this
pathway by cloning the remaining extragenic suppressors of bimD6. Understanding
how these products function will lead to new insights into mitosis at a
molecular level. %%% Mitosis is the process by which eukaryotic cells equally
divide their genetic information following its replication. Mitosis must occur
in a precise and orderly manner for the survival of the cell and/or organism.
While the major events of mitosis have been known for a long time, the detailed
molecular mechanisms underlying many of them remain a mystery. Through the
analysis of (1) fungal strains in which the process is disrupted by mutation and
(2) strains (derived from one of the original disrupted strains) which carry
compensating mutations, the principal investigator will broaden our
understanding of the molecular details of this fundamental process. ***