* 9513094
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Studies of the Physical    Properties of Galaxies with the Sloan Digital Sky Survey
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Michael Strauss, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/1999
* USD 10,200.00

9513094 Strauss This award supports a three-year cooperative research project
between Dr. Michael Strauss (Princeton University) and collaborators at
Princeton, the Johns Hopkins University, and the University of Washington, and
Dr. Masataka Fukugita (University of Kyoto) and collaborators in Kyoto and
Tokyo. They plan to use data from the Sloan Digital Sky Survey to carry out a
number of investigations of the physical nature of galaxies. The Sloan Digital
Sky Survey, with accurate, well-calibrated, digital images in five broad optical
bands covering 1/4 of the sky, together with high-quality spectroscopic
information on the million brightest galaxies, promises to allow statistical
studies of the optical properties of galaxies at a level of sophistication and
detail that is currently impossible with existing data. These include detailing
the multivariate distribution of galaxies in magnitude, color, diameter, and
morphological properties; searches for ultra-low surface brightness galaxies;
the definition and study of large, complete samples of active galaxies; studies
of the relative clustering of galaxies of different physical types, and stellar
population studies from the galaxy spectra. This proposal will support travel
between the Japanese and US astronomers to enhance collaborations. Therefore,
this proposal fulfills the objectives of the Program in its exchange and
transfer of scientific knowledge through an international collaboration. ***