* 9513433
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Generation and     Characterization of Layered Microparticles
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Asit Ray, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Rose Gombay
* 03/31/1999
* USD 13,956.00

This award supports Professor Asit Ray and a U.S. graduate student from the
University of Kentucky to collaborate in chemical engineering research with
Professor Gustav Schweiger and others from the Faculty of Mechanical Engineering
at the Ruhr University of Bochum, Germany. The objectives of their joint
research are to develop techniques for generation of layered particles of
precise composition, and to develop techniques for in situ physical and chemical
characterization of layered spheres. In particular, they will focus on
techniques involving elastic and inelastic (Raman) scattering of light with the
goal of developing a technique that combines the two simultaneously for complete
quantitative characterization of layered microparticles. The challenge here is
the complexity of scattering introduced by the small size of the particles.
Progress will require a computational approach based on light scattering theory
and controlled experimentation. The success of the effort relies heavily on the
complementary expertise of Dr. Ray in elastic scattering techniques and of his
German colleague, Dr. Schweiger, in Raman spectroscopy of microparticles. They
will also make use of unusual facilities including the specialized Aerosol
Laboratory at the University of Kentucky and the state-of-the-art laser
spectroscopy laboratory of Dr. Schweiger in Bochum. Better understanding of the
formation and behavior of microparticles will have immediate and important
applications in many technologies and processes. These include the manufacture
of high purity ceramics and thin films, separation technologies related to
pollution control and remediation, chemical reaction processes in many
industries, and even atmospheric processes and the generation of artificial
rain.