* 9513537
* Sex-Chromosome Genes: Are XY Homologs Allele-Like?
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Elizabeth Simpson, Jackson Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 03/31/1999
* USD 365,000.00

9513537 Simpson Mammalian sex chromosomes are thought to have evolved from an
autosomal pair to a hemizygous state but much of the data which have been
generated in the molecular and genetic era do not easily fit into that
hypothesis. The Y chromosome contains only a few genes, comparatively speaking.
However, one unexpected observation has been that genes which had not recombined
since the evolution of the sex chromosomes have been found to be homologous to
their X counterparts. One could account for this observation by assuming a
similar function for the genes but that would not be acceptable in view of what
is known of dosage compensation. The long term goal of this research is to
analyze the function of the mammalian sex chromosomes, particularly in the
Y-specific region of the Y chromosome. The immediate goal is to create the tools
and transgenic mouse strains for the purpose of Y chromosome gene targeting. An
embryonic stem cell line with a Y duplication will be created; a genomic library
isogenic to the embryonic stem cell line and a strain of transgenic mice needed
for targeting experiments will also be created. %%% Our knowledge of how the sex
chromosomes function to produce the two sexes without either an overdose or
underdose of gene products from those genes found on the sex chromosomes and
whether the genes on the two chromosomes are functionally identical is very
limited. The production of the necessary tools for asking such questions at the
molecular level will make it possible to expand our understanding of the
mechanisms used to compensate for the inequality of chromosome number in males
and females, particularly in mammals. ***