* 9513392
* Electrochemical Recording System for Rapid Chemical         Recordings in Biological Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Greg Gerhardt, University of Colorado at Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 02/28/1999
* USD 606,301.00

In recent years, microsensors (5-30 microns in diameter) have been developed to
investigate rapid (11000 Hz) chemical signaling in biological systems. Recent
electrochemical recording methods such as highspeed chronoamperometry (1-25Hz),
fast-scan cyclic voltammetry (10 Hz and 100-1000 v/sec scan rates) and
amperometry (1000 Hz resolution) have been developed for such recordings. The
study of rapid chemical signaling requires the use of microelectrodes that are
coupled to sensitive instrumentation that is capable of recording and converting
the small changes in current that are due to chemical reactions at the surfaces
of the microsensors. A few laboratory designed instruments and some commercial
instruments are available. However, no low noise "turnkey" system that is
capable of recording, displaying, analyzing data and outputting results is
available to the scientific community. In addition, some commercial
instrumentation often requires a combination of other laboratory instruments as
seen in Figure la (adapted from Stamford et al. 1992). Presently, there is no
self contained microcomputer-based instrument that is available to scientists
that encompasses the capabilities to record rapid electrochemical signals using
fast-scan cyclic voltammetry, highspeed chronoamperometry, 1000-6000Hz
amperometry, more standard electrochemical methods, and new modifications of the
rapid electrochemical recording methods. A major goal of this proposal is to
carry out the Phase I (design) and Phase II (modification and refinement)
development of an automated multi-channel recording system as depicted in Figure
lb. Such an instrument, which we call FAST for Fast Analytical Sensing
Technology, will be useful to students, postdoctoral fellows and principal
investigators in the fields of cell biology, chemistry, biology, neuroscience,
pharmacolog y, physiology, chemoreception, marine biollogy, psychology and other
biological sciences. The second goal of this proposal is to further develop
microsensors for the selective, rapid, and sensitive measures of dopamine,
norepinephrine, serotonin, nitric oxide and glutamate in biological systems.
Both carbon fiber based probes and semiconductor based probe designs will be
developed. Further sensor development is needed to enhance the recording
capabilities of currently available instrumentation and the proposed FASTin vivo
electrochemical recording system. ~