* 9513266
* A Compact Laser Excited Coherent X-ray Source for           Macromolecular Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1997
* Charles Rhodes, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1997
* USD 60,000.00

This proposal outlines a three year program to develop a compact coherent X-ray
source that is suitable for three-dimensional imaging of living organisms,
tissue and cells with macromolecular resolution. The imaging is to be
accomplished using X-ray rnicroholographic techniques. The X-rays will be
produced by exciting atornic clusters or molecules with an intense ultrashort
(femtosecond) laser pulse in the ultraviolet (UV). The resulting multiphoton
ionization of the atoms in the clusters produces an electron-ion plasma which
interacts strongly with the oscillating radiative field of the laser pulse. The
collective motion of the electrons, due to the field-induced ponderomotive
force, gives the electrons sufficient energy to collisionally eject an inner-
shell electron from an ion in the cluster. A X-ray photon is emitted when an
outer shell electron fills the vacant inner shell state in the "hollow" atom.
Previous investigations have shown that the efficiency of this nonlinear X-ray
generation process is increased if the interacting laser pulse is both intense
(i.e. short and energetic) and coherent (i.e. phase controlled). We describe an
all solid-state, high-power UV femtosecond laser system that is designed to be
optimally suited for the excitation of atomic clusters for the production of
X-rays. The laser system will be based on the new solid-state UV laser material
Ce doped LiSrAlF6 which operates between 280 and 320nm, and will employ
femtosecond laser technology that is already well established at wavelengths in
the near infrared (~ 800nm). In addition to its use in the X-ray generation
process, we expect this source of coherent UV femtosecond pulses to find many
applications in spectroscopic biological research, e.g. the temporal resolution
of the water solvation dynamics in enzyme reactions and other protein complexes.
We intend to use the coherent X-ray source produced using the UV laser system to
image chromosome dynamics during mitosis and meio sis. The microholographic
techniques that have already been developed in our laboratories will enable
three dimensional images to be reconstructed, in contrast to any other imaging
technology available today with comparable marcomolecular resolution. Using
X-rays with a wavelength of -l, this holographic technique should also allow the
structure of biological molecules to be visualized in three dimensions without
the need for crystallization. We propose to explore this possibility by
investigating the avidin-biotin complex. The development of this laser-based
technology has the potential to replace expensive synchrotron X-ray sources for
imaging in the biological sciences.