* 9513958
* Role of Skeletal Muscle in Potassium Homeostasis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Alicia McDonough, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 02/29/2000
* USD 244,000.00

9513958 McDonough Potassium (K+) is the main salt found in intracellular fluid
(ICF), while extracellular fluid (ECF) potassium is low, so there is a gradient
of potassium across the cell membrane which is necessary for nerve and muscle
excitability. Vertebrate animals must regulate extracellular fluid potassium
concentration (ECF K+ ) within a narrow range. If K+ loss exceeds input over a
period of days, ECF K+ falls, which is known as hypokalemia. The resulting
increase in the K+ gradient across the cell membrane, if not corrected, can
disrupt critical functions such as cardiac contractility (which can be fatal).
During potassium deprivation, the skeletal muscle adapts by providing its K+ to
the ECF to blunt and delay the fall in ECF K+. This important regulatory process
is only poorly understood. In contrast, non-muscle cell types are adapted to
maintain, not lose, intracellular K+ during K+ deprivation. The central aim of
this proposal is to identify the specific muscle types that supply K+ to the ECF
in hypokalemia and the underlying cellular mechanisms responsible for the shift
and for the restoration response when K+ becomes available. Defining the target
muscles and transporters are critical first steps toward understanding why a
subset of muscles is specialized to lose K+ while others are spared in order to
perform, different critical muscle functions. The loss of ICF K+ is accompanied
by a decrease in number of sodium pumps, the molecules in the membrane that
actively pump K+ into the cell from the ECF. This supports the hypothesis that
the K+ loss is due to a decrease in active K+ influx rather than an increase in
K+ exit from the cell. Sodium pumps, Na,K-ATPase, are composed of ( and (
subunits and muscle expresses (l, (2, (1, (2 subunit isoforms, thus, up to four
possible (( combinations. The PI's laboratory has established that the isoforms
are expressed in a muscle specific pattern. The PI has further established that
abundance of (2 and (2 subunits are depressed in a muscle specific pattern. The
PI aims to accomplish the following: 1) Test the hypothesis that the decrease in
number of specific sodium pump isoforms is the underlying cellular mechanism
causing shifts in K+ from a subset of muscles to ECF in hypokalemia. The PI will
determine time course and muscle specificity of change in: ICF K+ , K+ influx,
K+ efflux, and sodium pump subunit isoform abundance during low K+ diet and
after restoring K+ in a panel of five muscles including white gastrocnemius
where there is a 85% decrease in (2(2, to diaphragm where there is no change in
(2(2 in hypokalemia. 2) Test the hypothesis that muscle sodium pump activity is
regulated at multiple levels, both long term regulation of RNA and protein pool
size, and acute regulation of existing pumps, during hypokalemia and K+
restoration. During K+ depiction and repletion determine the time course of
change in ( and ( isoforms' mRNA vs. protein, and determine whether there is
also acute regulation of Na,K-ATPase transport activity before there are changes
in abundance of pumps. Significance: this fundamental, specialized, and poorly
understood response of skeletal muscle to organism K+ deprivation is critical
for survival of all vertebrates, including humans, during periods of fasting or
famine, or when K+ loss is high (mineralocorticoids, prolonged exercise in the
heat, diuretics). Accomplishing these aims will identify the location of the K+
reservoir and the cellular mechanisms responsible for tapping and repleting this
reservoir. This information contributes to an understanding how a subset of
muscles have specialized to lose K+ to buffer ECF K+ , thus sparing other
muscles and organs to perform critical functions, and to development of assays
for the signal(s) that mediate the response. All steps are requisite for
defining the homeostatic loops responsible for adapting to altered K+ status.
***