* 9513550
* Gradients and the Control of Pattern Formation
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Stephen Small, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F , C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l = > ? @ A B C D E F G F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; (((( :ll: <flffl xhh``` llllf xh00hx >hl =P u P Z Bookman Old
Style (Light) (TT) BriemScript (TT) Playbill (TT) Book Antiqua (TT) Braggadocio
(TT) Peignot Medium (Medium) (TT) Arial Narrow (TT) Bookman Old Style (DemiBold
Italic) (TT) Parade (TT) Times Bell MT (TT) Onyx (TT 9513550 Small A central
question in modern biology is how genetic information establishes body form in
higher eukaryotes. In Drosophila, the establishment of the body plan involves
the coordinate activities of a hierarchy of segmentation genes, which establish
a template of reiterated segments along the anterior-posterior axis, and
homeotic genes, which specify the identity of each segment. At every step in the
segmentation hierarchy, there are significant refinements in patterns of gene
expression that culminate in the expression of the segment polarity genes in
patterns of fourteen transverse rows of single cells that will give rise to the
future border cells of the segments. The most dramatic example of such a
refinement is seen in the transition from the broad expression domains of the
gap genes to the metameric striped patterns of the pair-rule genes. Recent
molecular analyses suggest that this transition involves direct DNA binding of
the protein products encoded by the gap genes to the cis regulatory regions
(enhancers) of the pair-rule genes. Although much effort has been expended eluc
idating the structure of the enhancers involved in these interactions,
relatively little is known about the trans control of the patterns. However, it
has been hypothesized that gap proteins may act as graded morphogens to control
pair-rule gene activity in a concentration dependent manner. The gap genes also
play a crucial role in establishing the positions of expression of the homeotic
genes, which are important for specifying the identity of individual segments
later in development. This proposal outlines a series of experiments designed to
directly test the gradient model of morphogenesis for gap genes during
segmentation, and the role of the homeotic genes in segmental specification. In
these studies, a combination of genetic analyses and indirect misexpression
techniques will be performed to precisely alter gap and homeotic gene expression
patterns in the blastoderm. The misexpression experiments will use the well
characterized stripe 2 enhancer from the even-skipped gene to control the
position and timing of ectopic expression. By manipulating known binding sites
in this enhancer, the shape and level of ectopic expression can be changed in a
very precise way. Preliminary results suggest that misexpressing the gap gene,
knirps causes disruptions in segmentation expression patterns that are
consistent with a gradient mechanism of morphogenesis. Surprisingly, the
disruptions do not cause lethality during embryogenesis, with many individual
mutants surviving to late stages of puparium formation. Therefore, the
experiments proposed here will not only permit the analysis of how embryonic
genes interact to form more refined expression patterns, but also how these
patterns control cell fate decisions important for the formation of the larval
and adult body form. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m
m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( < 9513550 eozsaruh eozsaruh @ @ @ @ @ @ F #
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e a a j j j j j j j 4 1 e T + 4 j 4 j j j j ~ j j j j
. 9513550 Small A central question in modern biology is how