* 9513878
* Microsequencing Via Continuous Flow Matrix-Assisted Laser   Desorption Ionization in an Ion Trap/Reflectron             Time-of-Flight Device
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* David Lubman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 02/29/2000
* USD 310,000.00

The goal of this work is to develop methodology based on new instrumentation
which can be used for detection and structural analysis of ultralow levels of
molecules of biological importance, i.e peptides and protein digests. In
particular, this will involve the interface of capillary separation methods to
an ion trap storage/reflectron time-of-flight mass spectrometer detector using a
continuous flow MALDI method. In this method the chromatographic or separation
products will be delivered via a flow probe directly into the ion trap where
MALDI is performed from a continuously flowing Liquid directly from the tip of a
probe in a manner analogous to continuous flow FAB experiments. The ions
generated will be analyzed using an ion trap storage/reflectron time-of-flight
device which can provide enhanced sensitivity and solution in the liquid MALDI
process via the long teem storage and cooling effects of the ion trap in
combination with a reflectron time-of-flight device. In addition, the advantages
of trap operation at high pressure when interfaced to d~ liquid flow from
capillary columns will be demonstrated. The IT/reTOF will be shown to provide
structural analysis via the MS/MS capabilities of the trap. The basic
methodology will be applied to enzymatic digests which generally yield fragments
that are less than 3000 Da. In addition, the capabilities of the method will
also evaluated for chemical digests which may yield products up to 8-10 kDa in
some cases. This method will be directly compared to on-line capillary analysis
using an electrospray source interfaced to the IT/reTOF also being developed in
our lab. The specific advantages of the CF MALDI for digest analysis in terms of
identification, sensitivity and for its ability to perform in the presence of
interfering salts and buffers will be evaluated.