* 9513899
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on Numerical Modelling    of Accretion Disk Coronae
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Mitchell Begelman, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 03/31/2000
* USD 14,890.00

This award supports collaboration between Mitchell Begelman and his research
group at the University of Colorado, and Ruediger Staubert and others of the
Institute for Astronomy and Astrophysics of the University of Tuebingen,
Germany. They are studying the origin of the hard X-ray component in emissions
from hot coronae around accretion disks. In particular, they are attempting to
develop a set of self-consistent models through numerical analysis which can
then be used more widely by other astronomers. The collaborative plan combines
the theoretical skills in modeling active galaxies possessed by Begelman and his
graduate student, James Dove, with the data acquisition and analysis skills of
Professor Staubert and his colleagues. The latter has been one of the leading
groups in the world in the study of high energy phenomena in x-ray binaries and
other systems. The U.S. side will be responsible for developing computer code
and the basic theoretical models; these models will be greatly improved by the
physical data obtained by the German group. The technique of x-ray spectroscopy
has improved substantially, and now produces x-ray spectral data that is high
enough quality to warrant detailed theoretical modeling. This project brings
together two research groups with the complementary expertise to accomplish this
task and improve understanding of accretion disk coronae.