* 9513556
* Meiotic Kinetochores of Maize
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2002
* R. Kelly Dawe, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 06/30/2002
* USD 590,159.00

9513556 Dawe The long term goal of this study is to identify the structural and
molecular properties of the kinetochore that ensure normal meiotic chromosome
segregation. Kinetochores have a variety of critical roles in cell division,
such as ensuring that the chromatids do not separate prematurely, and acting as
the biological motors that pull the chromosomes along the spindle. In meiosis,
the kinetochores have more specific roles that relate to their critical function
in ensuring that the genetic information is transmitted accurately from
generation to generation. Maize is an excellent organism for studying
kinetochores, because of the unusually large size of the chromosomes and of the
kinetochores themselves. In prior studies, advanced three dimensional light
microscmpy has been used to identify subtle structural features, first in the
chromosomes and more recently in the kinetochores using a human antiserum that
recognizes maize meiotic kinetochores. The major cell biological advantages of
maize are coupled with extensive genetic resources with which to analyze
kinetochore function. One such resource is an unusual variant of chromosome 10
that induces facultative centromeres ("neocentromeres") as a part of a more
complex meiotic drive system. In the presence of Abnormal chromosome 10,
quiescent heterochromatic regions called "knobs" are converted into meiotic
kinetochores that stretch the chromosome arms towards the spindle poles.
Neocentromeres and true centromeres are probably closely related, because knobs
have strong sequence similarity to true centromeres. However, unlike true
centromeres, mutations of neocentromere formation can be readily identified. The
method for identifying neocentromeres relies on the fact that their formation is
closely associated with a preferential segregation, or meiotic drive, of genetic
markers that are linked to knobs. If the genetic marker affects kernel
pigmentation, meiotic drive is visible as an excess of pigmented kernels. In
prior stud ies, a meiotic drive mutation called Ab10-smd1 was identified, which
proved to be a defect in neocentromere formation. This proposal contains
experiments leading to the cloning and characterization of Ab10-smd1 by virtue
of the fact that the mutation was induced by a transposable element. It should
be possible to identify the genes that regulate normal meiotic kinetochore
behavior by homology to Ab10-smd1 and other genes like it. Additional studies
are proposed that relate to how neocentromeres promote meiotic drive, and how
normal kinetochores direct meiotic chromosome segregation. It will be possible
to verify a long-standing model for how neocentromeres lead to meiotic drive by
directly labeling knobs with fluorescent oligonucleotides. Labeling the knobs as
well as the kinetochores and spindle using specific antibodies will make it
possible to study the interaction of these three components during chromosome
segregation. Finally, experiments are proposed to analyze neocentromere behavior
using time lapse three dimensional light microscopy. The conspicuous nature of
the neocentromeres coupled with a powerful new light microscope workstation will
make it possible to study meiotic kinetochores in the living state. Such time
lapse microscopy will also provide an added level of resolution to the
characterization of neocentromere mutations. ***