* 9513707
* Two-Photon Circular Dichroism Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Bruce Hudson, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 64,101.00

Two-photon circular dichroism (TPCD), the differential absorption of two left
circularly polarized photons vs. two right circularly polarized photons, was
first discussed theoretically by Tinoco (1975) and by Power (1975). This
technique, which is theoretically similar to Raman optical activity, has not yet
been demonstrated experimentally although the related TP-ORD effect has been
demonstrated (Gedanken & Tamir, 1987). We propose to construct a TPCD
spectrometer based on recently developed commercially available Ti:sapphire
femtosecond laser technology using the very sensitive transient thermal grating
detection method. Our primary area of interest is the secondary structure of
proteins. Given the lack of fluorescence of such proteins, this application
dictates a direct absorption or thermally based methodology for detection of the
TPCD signal. TPCD offers several potential advantages as a method complimentary
to conventional circular dichroism (CD) for the determination of protein
secondary structure and detection of subtle conformational changes. These are (1
) a new, linearly independent data set is provided potentially permitting a
unique determination of secondary structure, (2) the TPCD spectrum extending
from 300 to 600 nm covers electronic excited states corresponding in one-photon
energy to 150 to 300 nm thus extending the range of the excitations to higher
energy and covering the expected higher exciton components of the a-helix, (3)
there are three independent TPCD spectra (for two-photons of the same frequency
and randomly oriented samples) proving independent information. The spectrometer
to be constructed is based on high-repetition rate (1 kHz) femtosecond laser
technology. The detection of the two-photon CD signal will be based on the
differential transient thermal grating method. This method has been recently
shown to provide a very sensitive method for CD measurements and has previously
been shown to be a very sensitive method for performing two-p hoton absorption
measurements. Our proposal is to combine these two capabilities to provide new
two-photon CD information. A detailed signal to noise calculation based on prior
two-photon measurements using this grating method and a reliable estimate of the
expected differential two-photon cross section shows that excellent signal to
noise will be achieved.