* 9513175
* Middle Miocene Grasslands of Kenya
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Gregory Retallack, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/1998
* USD 89,469.00

This is a proposal to study fossil soils and grasses as evidence for Middle
Miocene grasslands in East Africa and their role in the evolution of apelike
ancestors of humans. The role of grasslands in human evolution has been debated
since Charles Darwin's day, and the existence of Middle Miocene (14 Ma)
grasslands in Kenya has continued to be controversial. Several lines of evidence
now converge to indicate Middle Miocene grasslands in Kenya: (1) isotopic study
of carbonate in fossil soils and apatite of mammalian teeth indicating tropical
grassy vegetation, (2) fossil soils similar to those of modern grasslands
(Mollisols), (3) grazing muzzle and tooth scratching on antelope fossils, and
(4) fossil grasses with the abundant opal (phytoliths) and scarce pores
(stomates) of open country grasses. These findings are in some cases based on
only preliminary studies and now need to be extended to more sites of Middle
Miocene age (13-16 Ma) scattered through southwestern Kenya: Ombo, Majiwa,
Maboko, Nyakach, Fort Ternan, Serek and Kapsibor. Fossil soils at each site will
be described and sampled for laboratory analysis. Fossil grasses will also be
collected and returned to the laboratory for the microscopic examination needed
to identify them using a computer database. Also planned are isotopic studies of
the grasses and fossil soils to determine the kinds of grasses and vegetation
present (C3 or C4 grasses). This project builds on the highlights of a
previously successful program to provide a detailed view of the physiology,
nature, botanical composition and extent of the earliest East African
grasslands.