* 9513340
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Monitoring the Radio   Outburst of Eta Carinae
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Stephen White, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 03/31/2000
* USD 22,082.00

9513340 White This award, covering a period of three years, will support the
travel of Dr. Stephen White, Department of Astronomy at the University of
Maryland, to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Robert Duncan of the
Australian Telescope National Facility (AT). The research will focus on a study
of the radio emission from the Southern Hemisphere star Eta Carinae. Dr. White
is currently conducting research through an NSF award on radio continuum
observations of active stars. This grant will add an international dimension to
his current research. Radio images of Eta Carinae, thought to be among the most
massive known stars in our Galaxy, can only be obtained through the 25m AT dish
located at Mpora. Observations of this star have revealed extraordinary radio
emissions which have made it one of the brightest radio stars in the sky. The
radio flux continues to rise as gas surrounding the star apparently is being
ionized by a disturbance propagating outward from the star. The goal of the
investigation is to follow the evolution of the outburst and determine its
nature, to study the ionized gas in order to determine the kinematics of gas
ejected from the star and the cause of the different asymmetries seen in the
outflow, and to determine the physical conditions in the outflow by observing
the newly-ionized gas recombining.