* 9513582
* Molecular Characterization of Phosphatidylcholine           Biosynthesis and Regulation in Soybean
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Ralph Dewey, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9513582 Dewey Biological membranes are complex assemblies of protein and lipid,
held together primarily through noncovalent interactions. Of the numerous lipid
species found within eukaryotic membranes, phosphatidylcholine (PC)
predominates. In higher plants, PC is important not only because of its role as
the primary phospholipid constituent of most cellular membranes, but also
because it serves as a source of polyunsaturated fatty acids for both membrane
lipids and seed storage oils. Although numerous studies have been conducted
describing the biochemical pathways responsible for PC production in plants,
relatively little is understood about the genes that encode the enzymes
involved, or the processes by which cells are able to monitor and maintain
appropriate PC levels. The primary objective of this proposal involves the
utilization of the soybean Ckase- and CCTase- homologous cDNAs to facilitate a
detailed characterization of these genes and their protein products, and better
understand their role in the biosynthesis and regulation of PC. The other major
objective of this study involves examining the possibility that SEC14p-like
proteins in higher plants function as molecular sensors in monitoring and
regulating phospholipid content of cellular membranes as has been reported in
yeast. The detailed study of genes encoding enzymes of the CDP-choline pathway
outlined in this proposal will generate valuable insights into the molecular
basis of PC biosynthesis and regulation in higher plants that have not been
previously attainable. Furthermore, by characterizing and establishing the
function of SEC14p-like proteins in soybean, it may then be possible to begin to
answer some of the fundamental questions regarding the mechanisms by which plant
cells are able to monitor and regulate the phospholipid content of specific
biological membranes.