* 9513662
* VirB Mediated DNA and Protein Transfer from A.tumefaciens
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Andrew Binns, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1999
* USD 428,676.00

9513662 Binns The movement of DNA from Agrobacterium tumefaciens into plant
cells depends upon the activities of the virulence (vir) genes of the Ti
plasmid. Several of the Vir proteins are required for the production of a
single-stranded DNA-binding protein, VirE2. This "T-complex" is thought to be
the transferred intermediate. VirB proteins are proposed to form a membrane-
localized apparatus responsible for T-complex transfer. Consistent with this
hypothesis, VirB proteins are membrane associated and required for virulence.
Others have shown, surprisingly, that a T-DNA containing a mutant virE2 (minus)
strain could function to deliver its T-DNA to plant cells if, just prior to
plant infection, it was mixed with a strain carrying wild type vir genes (VirE2
donor) but lacking the T-DNA. This "extracellular complementation" suggests that
VirE2 can move into plant cells independent of T-DNA transfer. Because VirB
genes are required for a bacterium to serve as a VirE2 donor, it appears that
the VirB complex may also function to transfer proteins. In this project, three
aims are designed to further characterize the interaction of VirB proteins
amongst themselves and with transported substrates. First, continued genetic
analysis of the virB operon is required in order to understand how the various
VirB proteins interact to form a membrane bound complex capable of
macromolecular transfer. These studies will focus on virB5, 7, 8, 9, and 10.
Data suggest that virB7-10 interact in a fashion that is critical for the
construction of a transfer complex, and the genetic basis of this interaction
will be defined; virB5 is of interest because it has been proposed to encode a
protein that interacts with the transported substrate, but has not been
extensively characterized. Second, the phenomenon of extracellular
complementation indicates that Agrobacterium may be capable of transporting
proteins into plant cells independent of the T-DNA. Despite this intriguing
observation, and the similarity o f the virB operon to genes encoding the
protein secretion apparati of certain bacteria, there has been virtually no
genetic or cellular characterization of this process. A quantitative analysis of
extracellular complementation at the single plant cell level will be carried
out, and the genetic and cellular basis of the proposed VirE2 movement into
plant cells will be characterized. Methods to monitor the presence of VirE2 in
plant cells will be developed and used to characterize VirE2 transfer after
initiation of plant-bacterial interaction, and a genetic analysis of the regions
of VirE2 necessary for transport will be carried out. Third, the inhibition of
macromolecular transfer by the incQ RSF1010 derivative plasmid pjW323 will be
analyzed. These experiments will increase our understanding of the mechanism
whereby DNA is specifically transferred from Agrobacterium tumefaciens to plant
cells. Agrobacterium-mediated DNA transfer is a significant gene transfer method
in agricultural biotechnology. A better understanding of the molecular basis of
this process may lead to improved gene transfer technologies. ***