* 9513010
* National Center for Environmental Decision Making Research
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Milton Russell, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Cooperative Agreement
* Cheryl Eavey
* 09/30/2000
* USD 2,500,000.00

9513010 Russell The Joint Institute for Energy and Environment at the University
of Tennessee, a collaborative arrangement of the University of Tennessee, Oak
Ridge National Laboratory, and the Tennessee Valley Authority, will establish
the NSF National Center for Environmental Decision-Making Research (the Center).
The Center will engage environmental decision makers, primarily at the
subnational level, with the processes and data they need to confront and solve
difficult environmental decision problems. Now, and even more in the future,
these decision makers are the ones critical to achieving measurable improvement
in the environment at acceptable social and economic costs. Yet they are ill-
equipped to know how their decisions should be effectively structured to assure
effective implementation. The Center will improve environmental decision making
by performing a series of complementary tasks: (1) synthesizing and analyzing
existing research to provide in an accessible form findings relevant to
improving environmental decision making; (2) performing case studies of
decisions made (or not made) in response to environmental problems as a
diagnostic tool to illuminate what has been and what remains to be learned; (3)
assembling a toolkit of processes and techniques that decision makers can use in
addressing their environmental problems; (4) designing a 21st century
information system to support decision makers; (5) involving decision makers as
both partners in the research and clients for its products. %%%% 9513010 Russell
The Joint Institute for Energy and Environment at the University of Tennessee, a
collaborative arrangement of the University of Tennessee, Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, and the Tennessee Valley Authority, will establish the NSF National
Center for Environmental Decision-Making Research (the Center). The Center will
engage environmental decision makers, primarily at the subnational level, with
the processes and data they need to confront and solve difficult envir onmental
decision problems. Now, and even more in the future, these decision makers are
the ones critical to achieving measurable improvement in the environment at
acceptable social and economic costs. Yet they are ill-equipped to know how
their decisions should be effectively structured to assure effective
implementation. The Center will improve environmental decision making by
performing a series of complementary tasks: (1) synthesizing and analyzing
existing research to provide in an accessible form findings relevant to
improving environmental decision making; (2) performing case studies of
decisions made (or not made) in response to environmental problems as a
diagnostic tool to illuminate what has been and what remains to be learned; (3)
assembling a toolkit of processes and techniques that decision makers can use in
addressing their environmental problems; (4) designing a 21st century
information system to support decision makers; (5) involving decision makers as
both partners in the research and clients for its products. ****