* 9513521
* In Vivo Localization and Function of Bacterial Cell Cycle   Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2000
* William Margolin, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 12/31/2000
* USD 358,492.00

9513521 Margolin A fundamental problem in biology is how a single cell divides
to become two. In bacteria, cytokinesis is a differentiation event: normal
longitudinal growth of the cell wall changes to inward growth at the division
site, culminating in the separation of daughter cells. This localized wall
ingrowth implies that bacterial cells have a cytoplasmic organization and a
mechanism for directing proteins involved in cytokinesis to the division site.
The FtsZ protein has properties expected of a cytoskeletal element: it is
probably present in all prokaryotes; it is related to the eukaryotic
cytoskeletal protein tubulin; purified FtsZ forms polymers in the present of
GTP; it probably functions as part of a complex with other cell division
proteins; and it forms a ring-like polymer at the division site during the
initial stages of cytokinesis and it is present at the leading edge of the
invaginating wall. The goal of this project is to combine genetic and whole-cell
approaches to determine how prokaryotic cell cycle and "cytoskeletal" proteins
are targeted to specific cellular sites. Preliminary results indicate that
localization of FtsZ in living E. coli can be tracked at high resolution by
tagging it with a small fluorescent reporter protein, GFP (green fluorescent
protein). The GFP tag will be used to determine localization and structural
organization of cell cycle proteins in living bacteria. Specifically, it will be
used to define cell cycle protein domains important for cellular targeting, to
visualize cytoskeletal structures and dynamics during the cell cycle, to
correlate structure and function among FtsZ proteins from diverse species, and
to determine whether two other essential cell division proteins, FtsA and FtsQ,
localize to the division site. Preliminary results show that the fusion product
of FtsZ with GFP at the C-terminus forms the expected ring structures at the
division site in living cells, indicating that the GFP tag does not interfere
with FtsZ assembly o r localization. Specific FtsZ mutants (deletions, point
mutants, and interspecies chimeras) will be constructed with GFP reporter tags
and assayed in vivo in order to identify domains important for FtsZ localization
and polymerization. This type of analysis will be extended to FtsA and FtsQ,
whose function an cellular localization are not yet known. Localization of FtsQ-
GFP and FtsA-GFP will be determined in wild type and various cell division
mutant cells in an effort to define the sequence of events and participants in
the cell division pathway. These studies should make a major contribution to our
understanding of cell division mechanisms, protein targeting, and subcellular
organization in prokaryotes. The longer-range goal of the research is to
understand the mechanism whereby cell cycle proteins become localized to
specific regions within the prokaryotic cell. The use of GFP reporter protein
tags to track protein spatial dynamics in prokaryotes has the advantage that a
large number of genetic constructions can be assayed quickly, easily, and with
high sensitivity, without the need for antibodies, fixation of cells, or
electron microscopy. The knowledge acquired from these studies should contribute
to the basic biology of prokaryotic cell division, as well to further
applications of fluorescent proteins in visualizing fundamental processes in
living cells. ***