* 9513989
* Structural Studies with the Receptor for the Insulinotropic Glucagon-like Peptide I
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Svetlana Mojsov, Rockefeller University
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9513989 Mojsov The maintenance of steady levels of glucose in response to a meal
is controlled by a complex network of metabolic factors. Insulin plays a major
role in modulating circulating glucose levels, and is a part of a feed back loop
that maintains both glucose and insulin levels constant in a basal state. In
addition, a number of neurotransmitters, as well as metabolic hormones secreted
in the gut in response to a meal, can influence glucose metabolism by
stimulating secretion of insulin from the pancreas. The failure of insulin
producing beta cells to respond to elevated levels of blood glucose leads to the
metabolic disorders manifested in patients with Type II diabetes mellitus. The
PI has discovered that a new peptide called glucagon-like peptide I (GLP-I),
which is secreted in the gut in response to a meal, is one of the most potent
insulin releasing peptides described to date. Results from clinical studies
demonstrated that administration of GLP-I together with a meal in patients with
Type II diabetes mellitus eliminates the rise in blood glucose in these
individuals. On the basis of these findings it has been proposed that GLP-I
based therapeutic agent can be used as a new treatment of glucose imbalance
observed in patients with Type II diabetes mellitus. Recently, the receptor for
GLP-I has been cloned from the rat and human pancreas. GLP-I receptor is
structurally related to a newly identified family of G-protein coupled receptors
for several endocrine peptides. At present, there is no understanding about the
mechanism of interaction of these G-protein coupled receptors with their
respective ligands. The objective of the proposed research is to determine the
structural factors that contribute to the specific interaction of the insulin
releasing GLP-I peptide with its receptor. To gain insights into the binding
specificity of the mammalian GLP-I receptors, GLP-I receptor will be cloned and
sequenced from the whole catfish cDNA library. It is hypothesized that the
highest degree of structural homologies will be found in domains of the receptor
that play a role in the specific binding to its GLP-I ligand, receptor
interactions with G-proteins and expression of the receptor on the cell surface.
To test these predictions, mutant GLP-I receptors will be obtained and their
functional properties will be determined in mammalian cell lines that do not
exogenously express GLP-I receptor. Results of these studies will contribute to
a better understanding of basic principles in biology. In addition, these
results can potentially be useful for commercial development of new generation
of "gut-based" therapeutic agents for treatment of patients with Type II
diabetes mellitus. ***