* 9513025
* X-ray Diffraction Facility for Macromolecular               Crystallography
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Wesley Sundquist, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 155,424.00

This proposal requests funds for the purchase of an area-detector facility for
macromolecular crystallography. Requested equipment includes an image-plate area
detector and associated computer for data collection, an X-ray generator, a heat
exchanger, focusing mirrors, and cryogenic equipment for low temperature (100 K)
data collection. This proposal is part of a major effort by the University of
Utah to move from a single-investigator laboratory in the area of macromolecular
crystallography to a multi-user facility. An important first step in this effort
was the hiring of Dr. Ramakrishnan (P.I.) as a senior faculty member. The
University also recently created a Research Assistant Professorship, currently
held by Dr. Bancroft, whose duties include maintaining and upgrading X-ray
equipment and associated computing. The expanded facility will be used to solve
structures of macromolecules related to a wide variety of research at the
University of Utah, including: HIV-1 structure and assembly, ribosome structure
and function, chromatin structure, protein-RNA recognition, transcriptional
regulation, ubiquitin biochemistry, protein turnover, isoprene biochemistry, and
hypertension. Macromolecular crystallography at the University of Utah is
currently being performed by Dr. Hill (co-P.I.). The Hill laboratory maintains
and operates an R-axis II image-plate area-detector. A large number of projects,
originating both within the Hill laboratory and in collaboration with others,
have saturated the existing equipment. Indeed, many projects already languish
for lack of available detector time. With the arrival of Dr. Ramakrishnan in
September 1995, this already large demand will increase dramatically.
Furthermore, the thriving biomedical research community at the University of
Utah is increasingly focused on biological problems with essential structural
components and this new emphasis will place increased demand upon the X-ray data
collection facility in the near future. Finally, a number of new structural
projects are expected to emerge with the recent opening of the Huntsman Cancer
Center (est. 40 new faculty positions) and a new Genome Sequencing Center
(focused on extreme thermophilic bacteria). Thus the purchase of a second data
collection facility is essential and, indeed, the anticipated growth is expected
to more than saturate even the expanded facility. The University of Utah will
provide matching funds for 50% of the instrumentation requested in this
proposal. A second significant University contribution to the expansion of
macromolecular crystallography at Utah is the remodeling of space to provide the
infrastructure necessary for an efficient, multiuser crystallographic facility.
Following proposed remodeling, the major structural groups will occupy greater
than 10,000 sq. ft. of contiguous space with extensive shared facilities
including X-ray data collection and computer graphics suites, biophysical
instrumentation laboratories, constant-temperature crystallization rooms, and
preparative laboratories and cold rooms. In summary, the University has made a
major commitment to create an expanded macromolecular crystallography facility
that will both complement and serve a vital biomedical research community. The
purchase of the new area detector facility described in this proposal is an
essential step in realizing that goal.