* 9513060
* XL-A Analytical Ultracentrifuge for the Analysis of Protein-Protein Interactions
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Walter Stafford, Boston Biomedical Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1998
* USD 157,775.00

This is a proposal to acquire a Beckman Instruments Optima Series XL-A
Analytical Ultracentrifuge equipped with UV scanner and Rayleigh optical
systems. This instrument will replace 2 heavily used Beckman Model-E's in the
Analytical Ultracentrifuge Research Laboratory (AURL) at Boston Biomedical
Research Institute (BBRI). One of the Model-E's is currently equipped with a
real-time video-based Rayleigh optical system, developed by the PI, that is
being used heavily in sedimentation velocity and sedimentation equilibrium
analyses. The rapid acquisition Rayleigh system has allowed the efficient
application of the high precision time derivative method, also developed by Dr.
Stafford, for sedimentation velocity analysis achieving a 100-1000 fold increase
in the sensitivity of the ultracentrifuge optics. The Model-E's have become
increasingly difficult to maintain and it is unlikely that Beckman Instruments
will continue to support them after they introduce the Rayleigh optical system
in late 1995. Many researchers at BBRI as well as many outside collaborators
have benefited from the ultracentrifuge facility over the years. The continued
viability of the AURL requires the acquisition of a new XL-A equipped with
Rayleigh optics. The instrument will be shared by seven major research groups at
BBRI and will be used in several on-going or planned outside collaborations.
Some of these researchers have benefited from the facility in the past. Others
are either currently or will in the future use the ultracentrifuge facility to
investigate various protein-protein and protein-nucleic acid interactions. These
include but are not limited to: P. and A. Wang, structure, molecular weight of
Caldesmon and the affect of phosphorylation on its interactions with actin; T.
Tao, structure and molecular weight of calponin; future studies will involve
studies of the interaction of calponin with actin; T Tao, calcium dependence of
interactions between troponin I and troponin C; R Lu, interactions of myosin
regulatory and essential light chains with the cloned regulatory domain of the
myosin Sl head; S.S. Lehrer, interactions of calponin and caldesmon with
tropomyosin, and studies of the end-to-end polymerization properties of various
cloned fragments of tropomyosin; H. Wohlrab, investigation of properties of the
mitochondrial phosphate transport protein and interactions between it subunits;
N. Sarkar, characterization of recombinant poly (A) polymerase I and poly(A)
polymerase I and their interactions with primer RNA; Z. Grabarek, investigation
of calcium dependent conformational changes in calmodulin and troponin-C and the
calcium dependence of their interactions with target proteins; V. Raso,
Targeting c-erbB-2 Epitopes with scFv Immunotoxins and Acid-Releasable Anti-
Diphtheria Toxin (DT) Monoclonal Antibodies.