* 9513016
* A CHNS Analyzer to Investigate Resource Use and Availability In Biotic Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Henry Harlow, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 24,670.00

This proposal involves a request to purchase the Molecular Dynamics 425SI
Phosphorimager, a device for the detection and quantitation of radioactivity
used in a variety of biochemical experiments. The quantitative and high
resolution capabilities of this instrument will allow performance of biochemical
experiments not currently possible. The primary advantages of this technology
over conventional autoradiography using X-ray film are an increased linear
response, dynamic range, and sensitivity, as well as reduced exposure time. The
instrument provides quantitative data from experiments involving the use of
radioisotopes such as 32p, 35S, 14C, and 1251. An instrument of this type is not
currently available in our building (Koshland Hall) at the University of
California at Berkeley. The quantitation of radioactive samples will be carried
out by the user groups in a variety of biochemical and molecular biology
experiments detailed in Section 8. The primary areas of quantitative analysis
will be nucleic acid-protein (DNA and RNA) interactions and signal transduction
(GTPase activities of signalling proteins). The technology involves the use of
storage phosphor screens which store energy from sample beta particle emission.
The stored energy is then released by scanning the storage screen with a laser
beam. This emission is detected by the instrument and stored on a computer hard
disk. The data can then be accessed and analyzed using a software package
provided with the instrument and transmitted through an ethernet network to user
computer terminals. A number of quantitative biochemical experiments not
currently possible will be feasible because the Molecular Dynamics
Phosphorimager is vastly superior to X-ray film autoradiography.