* 9513273
* RUI: X-chromosome Meiosis in Caenorhabditis elegans
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Philip Meneely, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 10/31/1999
* USD 261,914.00

9513273 Meneely Recessive mutations in at least two autosomal genes, him-5 and
him-8, cause high rates of non-disjunction of the X chromosome. Previous work
has shown that him-5 also affects the autosomes, although at a much lower
frequency, whereas him-8 affects the X chromosome exclusively. Very few of the
known meiotic genes affect only one chromosome, although there is indirect
evidence for chromosome-specific meiotic regulation in many organisms including
humans. Mutations in both him-S and him-8 alter both the number and the
distribution of exchanges on the X chromosome. Thus, by genetic tests, these
genes appear to be necessary for the stable synapsis of the X chromosome but not
for the initiation of pairing. Both genes have been cloned. The him-8 gene will
be characterized in detail by sequencing of wild-type and mutant alleles. The
expression of the gene will be examined by RT-PCR at different developmental
stages, in both sexes, and in various mutant strains affecting meiosis, germ-
line development or both. %%% Meiosis is the process by which eukaryotic
organisms reduce their chromosome number in half during gamete formation. Early
in meiosis, homologous chromosomes pair stably along their length. This synapsis
precedes and is necessary for genetic exchange between the homologues. Failure
to synapse or exchange leads to chromosome non-disjunction and loss. Mutations
that ease non-disjunction are known in many organisms, including the nematode
Caenorhabditis elegans. One goal of this project will be to identify many new
mutations affecting X chromosome and autosome disjunction in C. elegans, and to
characterize these genetically and cytologically. Among the properties
characterized will be which chromosomes, germ-line, and meiotic division are
affected. This work will be carried out by senior biology majors working for
academic credit. A third project Will use strain polymorphisms and multiplex PCR
to quantitate all of the crossovers that occur on the X chromosome during
oogenesis in both wild-type and mutant animals. Genetic data and the preliminary
data from this analysis indicate that most of the X chromosome exhibits complete
interference, such that there is exactly one crossover on the X chromosome
during oogenesis. This will be confirmed. ***