* 9513464
* Genes That Affect Sperm-Egg Interaction in Mammals
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Patricia Olds-Clarke, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9513464 Pilder The objective of this proposal is to identify and localize
mutations in the mouse t complex whose products perturb sperm penetration of the
investment-free oocyte, a process whose molecular nature is not well understood
in mammals. The proximal 30-40 million base pairs of mouse chromosome 17 is
known as the t complex. Variant forms of the t complex, called t haplotypes, can
be distinguished from wild type homologs structurally, by the presence of four
large, non-overlapping inversions which extend nearly over the entire region,
and phenotypically, by their detrimental effects on male fertility. Male mice
carrying two t haplotypes (t/t) are invariably sterile, and their sperm are
unable to penetrate investment-free mouse eggs, indication that there are t
complex genes intimately involved in the process of sperm-oolemma penetration
(SOP). Preliminary data suggest that at least one gene affecting sperm-egg
fusion is located in the largest and most distal t haplotype inversion (In4).
Specific Aim I is designed to determine if or how well sperm from a mouse that
is homozygous only for In4 of the t haplotype (In4/In4) can penetrate the
investment-free egg, in comparison to sperm from nearly congenic +/In4
heterozygotes or +/+ homozygotes. More precise localization of a t haplotype
specific sterility phenotype to an intra-inversion sub-region requires an
indirect approach, since intra-inversion recombinants between t haplotypes and
wild type homologs are extremely rare. Since male laboratory mice carrying the t
complex from M. spretus (S), a distantly related mouse species, and a t
haplotype homolog are invariably sterile, and because S and + homologs of the t
complex are not inverted relative to each other in the t haplotype inversions in
which sterility factors are known to reside, intra-inversion S-+ recombinants
can be produced and used to more precisely map these sterility factors.
Preliminary data suggest that a SOP factor that poorly complements the t
haplotype SOP defect maps to the In4 region of the M. Spretus t complex.
Specific Aim II is designed to use S-+ recombinants to examine the genetic basis
of the S/t SOP detect for evidence of allelism between S and t haplotype SOP
genes. Additionally, the phenotype of defective sperm penetration of investment-
free mouse eggs will be more precisely mapped using sperm from congenic mice
carrying a variety of S-+ recombinant t complexes (specific Aim III). the
precise localization of t complex SOP genes will make possible their future
isolation and molecular characterization. ***