* 9513762
* The Emergence of a Sign Language in Nicaragua
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/09/1999
* Howard Poizner, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 07/09/1999
* USD 366,856.00

Nicaraguan Sign Language arose fifteen years ago when hundreds of previously
isolated deaf individuals were brought together in schools for the first time as
the result of an educational reform movement dedicated to providing literacy
training and a fourth-grade education to everyone. For virtually the first time,
it became possible to directly observe the emergence of a new language. This
case is particularly interesting because this language arose not as the result
of language contact or the creolization of previously existing languages, but
rather from the merging of idiosyncratic gesture systems, called "home signs"
that were used for communication within the immediate family by the first
generation of deaf children to enter the schools. Home signers quickly began to
share their idiosyncratic system imparting to the communication system more and
more conventionality. In one generation, young children exposed to a mix of
gesturing began to produce a communication form radically different from their
input. The new form was more fluid, more complex and wholly language-like. With
no co-existing signed languages and limited access to Spanish as a result of low
literacy and inability to hear, the only source from which this highly complex
linguistic structure could have come was the human brains of those very young
first language learners. This constitutes the cleanest case to date in support
of the proposal that humans are innately endowed with the capacity to acquire
language--even when the input is non-optimal. This project will explore the rich
source of evidence for innate language capacity offered by the Nicaraguan case.
It begins with a systematic archiving, transcription and analysis of the
language data collected over the past ten years including vocabulary, sentence
structure, free conversation and controlled narratives elicited via 1.5 minute
nonverbal cartoons. These cartoons are the stimuli for a population study that
will document the signi ng of the entire population of signers in Nicaragua. The
research involves several components: 1. the population study where a variety of
factors conditioning sign fluency are considered including age, chronological
year, and amount of exposure to signing; 2. the issue of critical mass (i.e.,
"How many gesturers does it take to make a language?); 3. the process by which a
language emerges. While addressing issues of critical period, critical mass and
the innate contribution of the human brain to language, the project will also
produce a systematic linguistic analysis of Nicaraguan Sign Language. The areas
of focus include the "phonetics" of this new language, an indepth analysis of
its classifier and coreference systems, and the coding and analysis of the use
of nonmanual gestures and facial expressions marking questions, topics, and a
host of other grammatical functions.