* 9513756
* Increased Translation Initiation at Non AUG Codons by       eIF-4E
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Arrigo De Benedetti, LSU Health Sciences Center -Shreveport
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 04/30/2000
* USD 299,912.00

DeBenedetti 9513756 Our laboratory studies the mechanism of translation
initiation and the role of eIF-4 factors (particularly 4E) in this process. The
premise of this proposal emerged from studies of two important growth control
genes: c-myc and FGF-2, in which translation can begin from either the first
AUG, or from CUG codons located upstream and in-frame with the AUG codon. The
resulting amino-terminal extension alters the properties of these regulatory
proteins and particularly their intracellular distribution. For instance, FGF-2
is a powerful cytokine, but it is not normally secreted; we found that the
CUG1-initiated isoform is exported, making it a more potent mitogen. Elevating
the level of eIF-4E results in overexpression of c-myc and FGF-2, but it also
enhances synthesis of the larger, CUG-initiated isoforms. A few additional
important mRNAs have similar translation features (Oskar, L-myc, lyl-1, pim-1,
int-2 and Mod5). We anticipate that this work will: i) elucidate the role of
eIF-4E in enhancing translation of weak mRNAs; ii) improve our understanding of
the synthesis of the larger forms of c-Myc and FGF-2; iii) improve our
understanding of the mechanism of translation initiation and selection of start
codon(s); and iv) elucidate the mechanism of recognition of translation start
codons. %%% The mechanism of translation initiation and the role of certain
factors in this process are not well understood. It is proposed to study two
important growth control genes: c-myc and FGF-2, in which translation can begin
from either the first initiation codon (AUG), or from other (CUG) codons located
upstream and in-frame with the AUG codon. The resulting amino-terminal extension
alters the properties of these regulatory proteins and particularly their
intracellular distribution. For instance, FGF-2 is a powerful cytokine, but it
is not normally secreted. We found that the CUG1-initiated isoform is exported,
making it a more potent mitogen. Elevating the level of the transcr iption
factor eIF-4E results in overexpression of c-myc and FGF-2, but it also enhances
synthesis of the larger, CUG-initiated isoforms. We anticipate that this work
will: i) elucidate the role of eIF-4E in enhancing translation of weak mRNAs;
ii) improve our understanding of the synthesis of the larger forms of c-Myc and
FGF-2; iii) improve our understanding of the mechanism of translation initiation
and selection of start codon(s); and iv) elucidate the mechanism of recognition
of translation start codons. ***