* 9513347
* Phytoremediation by Reduction of Toxic Metal Ions
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Richard Meagher, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 03/31/1999
* USD 160,000.00

9513347 Meagher Heavy metal contamination has reached toxic levels in many
parts of the world and has become an urgent problem. Our long term goal is to
identify and utilize single gene traits to effect ecologically sound solutions
to metal ion contamination based on phytoremediation. The project of the
bacterial merA gene, mercuric ion reductase (MerA), catalzes the detoxification
of ionic mercury, Hg++, reducing it to its less toxic metallic form, Hg0.
Recently it has been shown that a highly mutagenized merA gene, merApe9, confers
remarkable levels of resistance to Hg++ in transgenic Arabidopsis plants.
Transgenic seeds germinate, seedlings grow, and plants flower and set seed on
media containing up to 100 uM Hg++ (20 ppm), while control seedlings die during
or shortly after germination at 25 uM. These plants evolved significant levels
of Hgo in the process. The most resistant plant lines grow as well on Hg++ as
unchallenged control plants and acturally require mercury for optimum growth.
The transgenic plants also show resistance to toxic levels of Au+++ in media.
The immediate goal of this project is to explore metal ion reduction as a method
of phytoremediation for a variety of heavy metal pollutants. Preliminary
evidence is presented to suggest that besides Hg++ merA pe9 also can reduce
Au+++ and Cu++ in E. coli. MerA belongs to a diverse family of sequence-related
reductases, which recognize a wide variety of organic and thiol substrates in
addition to Hg++. Besides Hg++ MerA already binds Ag+, Cu++, Cd++, and Au+++.
Therefore, it is hypothesized that: the merA gene can be mutated to direct the
efficient reduction of a wide variety of metal ions for remediation or
extraction. The specific aim of the proposal is to generate merA mutants with
novel substrate specificities (e.g., enhanced reduction of Hg++ and novel
reduction of Cu++, Pb++, and Cd++). In the future transgenic constructs will be
examined in model plants for their potential use in the phytoremediation of
metal ion pollution.