* 9513995
* Acquisition of an Electronic Particle Counter
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Nickolas Waser, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 25,025.00

A critical need for an electronic particle counter is identified and funds are
requested to purchase a Multisizer lle electronic particle counter made by
Coulter Corporation. The particle counter will be used (1 ) to study the feeding
ecology of larval mosquitoes and the relationship of feeding rates and particle
selection to trophic state of larval developmental sites; (2) to study natural
selection, population genetics, and plant reproductive ecology by quantifying
traits such as pollen production, the amount of pollen removed by pollinators
and pollination success, and by examining variation and environmental influences
on the male component of plant reproductive success; (3) to determine the
selection of different particle types by mosquito larvae and the impact of
behavioral changes in feeding ecology (which cause resistance to ingestible
toxins) on particle selection. feeding rates and, eventually, on the life
histories of resistant vs susceptible strains of Culex mosquitoes; (4) to
measure particle size distributions and abundance in mosquito developmental
sites; and (5) to quantify and size occluded bacculoviruses. In addition to
fulfilling the needs of the major and minor users, a particle counter will
foster collaborations with colleagues at University of California - Riverside
(UCR) and other institutions, meet the needs of postdoctoral scientists and
graduate students working in our laboratories, and enhance the education of
undergraduate and graduate students at UCR. The particle counter will be used by
investigators applying diverse methodologies to a wide range of particle size.
Therefore, funds are requested to purchase four additional aperatures. Funds are
also requested to purchase software designed for the Multisizer lle, a free-
standing IBM-compatible computer and a printer. As compared to comparably priced
electronic particle counters, the advantages of the Multisizer lle system
include ease of operation, a greater dynamic range of particle size, features
that significantly enhance user safety, flexible and user-friendly software,
features that reduce electronic interference from outside sources. and superior
user-support services.