* 9513073
* U.S.-China Young Investigators Workshop on Emerging         Trends in Mechanics and Processing, Beijing, China,         August 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1996,09/30/1997
* jianmin qu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 09/30/1997
* USD 19,400.00

9513073 Qu This award supports US participation in a bilateral US-China workshop
on basic research issues and emerging technologies in the areas of mechanics and
processing of advanced materials. US participants will be chosen from applicants
within ten years of their Ph.D. The purpose of the workshop is to provide an
opportunity for young investigators from the two countries to exchange ideas and
develop partnerships for cooperative research in important areas of advanced
materials research. The workshop topic is timely and of common interest. The
area of advanced materials is critically important to both China and the US. The
Chinese PI, Dr. Yang Wei of Tsinghua University, Beijing, earned a Ph.D. at
Brown University and is a regular contributor to refereed journals. He was named
one of China's top ten young scientists in 1994, and maintains strong research
collaborations within and external to China. In a September 1995 report
published by NIST on materials research in China, a number of recommendations
for improving the cooperation in materials science were made. One calls for
increased scientist to scientist interaction to define research opportunities
for collaboratimn. This workshop should be an important first step in allowing
new US investigators to see the research programs in China and to define where
collaboration will advance US interests in materials science. The workshop will
be held in August 1996 at Tsinghua University, Beijing, China. ***