* 9513814
* Site-directed Mutagenesis of Glucose 6-Phosphate            Dehydrogenases
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,08/31/1999
* H. Richard Levy, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 08/31/1999
* USD 271,175.00

9513814 Levy Glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenases (G6PDs) from different organisms
differ with respect to their coenzyme specificity in vivo. Most, including human
G6PD (hG6PD), are specific for NADP; a few, including G6PD from the bacterium
Leuconostoc mesenteroides (LmG6PD), can utilize either NADP or NAD. This
proposal seeks to elucidate differences among the coenzyme binding sites of
these G6PDs with different coenzyme specificities. The investigators intend to
identify critical amino acid residues in LmG6PD and the roles they play in
differential binding of NADP and NAD, binding of G6P, and catalysis. All G6PDs
consist of 2 or 4 identical subunits. The projected studies will also identify
amino acids involved in interactions between the subunits of LmG6PD, and assess
the role of intersubunit communication in this enzyme's functions. Steroids
inhibit G6PD uncompetitively with respect to both coenzyme and substrate by
binding to the ternary enzyme-NADP-subtrate complex. The proposal also seeks to
identify the steroid binding site in hG6PD. The principal techniques to be used
in identifying the amino acids responsible for these various properties are: a)
site-directed mutagenesis, b) kinetic analyses and determination of binding
constants on the purified mutant and wildtype enzymes, and c) X-ray
crystallography. The proposed research will lead to an understanding of how the
same enzyme (G6PD) catalyzing the same reaction (oxidation of
glucose-6-phosphate) has evolved in different organisms (L. mesenteroides, and
humans) to exhibit differences in coenzyme specificity and susceptibility to
steroid inhibition, and precisely what protein structural features determine
these differences. It will also provide a detailed description of the catalytic
mechanism of G6PD, and identify those amino acids that are responsible for
catalysis, binding of coenzyme and substrate, and transmitting information
between individual enzyme subunits. %%% Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (G6PD)
is a key enzyme in t he metabolism of carbohydrates and fats. It functions in
the synthesis of two key metabolites: pentose sugars, required for the synthesis
of nucleic acids, and NADPH, required for the biosynthesis of fats. This project
seeks to elucidate which amino acids of G6PD from the bacterium Leuconostoc
mesenteroides interact with coenzymes and substrate. The bacterial G6PD is used
because it is a more stable and simpler enzyme, and because we have solved its
three-dimensional structure. Also, unlike human G6PD, it can interact with two
coenzymes (NADP and NAD) and how this occurs is, in itself, of great interest
since most dehydrogenases are specific for only one coenzyme. We will also
determine which human G6PD amino acids interact with inhibitory steroids. The
principal technique to be used is site-directed mutagenesis, which allows us to
replace any G6PD amino acid by any other one. By examining the kinetic and other
properties of the mutant G6PD we can deduce the function of the amino acid that
was replaced. ***