* 9513367
* Circadian Rhythms of Gene Expression in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Susan Golden, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/2000
* USD 401,198.00

95-13367 Golden The approach to unveiling the mechanism of circadian oscillators
in this project focuses on the least-complex and most technically-approachable
organism in which a biological clock has been demonstrated, namely the
cyanobacterium, Synechococcus sp. strain PCC 7942. The technical advantages that
accrue from using this organism are that it has a small genome which is easily
manipulated genetically, and that a bioluminescent strain has been developed in
which the monitoring of circadian gene expression is the most flexible and
facile of any system presently available. Screening of thousands of colonies for
mutations that disrupt the clock or otherwise cause aberrant rhythmic behavior
is possible within a single experiment. Therefore, this cyanobacterial system
has excellent tools for detailed molecular genetic analyses and for clock
investigations. The project will use this system to address three aspects of
biological rhythmicity: (1) identification and characterization of genes that
are involved in generating circadian rhythms, (2) characterization of the
mechanism by which the oscillator controls rhythmic outputs, and (3) assessment
of the fitness advantage that organisms derive from their circadian oscillators.
Living organisms at all levels of biological complexity manifest circadian
(daily) rhythms which are controlled by an internal "clock." The biochemical
nature of these biological clocks has been elusive, but one principle which has
emerged is that their fundamental properties are conserved in all organisms in
which circadian behavior has been observed, from bacteria to mammals. This
principle has encouraged the hope that the biochemical mechanism has also been
conserved, at least in terms of the general components and composition of the
clock. This project investigates the composition of the biological clock by
using the simplest organism known to show circadian rhythms: a cyanobacterium.
Many processes in humans, including sleeping/waking, body temperature , gene
expression, cell division, and enzymatic activities, are regulated by the
biological clock.. In addition, these clocks are also the timers that measure
the day length in timing of reproductive processes in plants and animals.
Therefore, understanding the biochemical mechanism of- circadian clocks is of
fundamental biological interest and may lead to insights which will be useful
for example, in agriculture. ***