* 9513549
* An Instrument Combining Computerized 3D Plant Photogrammetry With Automated Physiological Monitoring
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Alan Knapp, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 03/31/2001
* USD 334,186.00

There is an extensive history of measuring plant photosynthetic processes and
water relations. However, a major impediment has been the impossibility of
actually determining the light distribution over the entire surface of a
particular plant during a physiological experiment; plant geometry is just too
complex. While much useful information has been obtained in spite of this,
other, important questions have gone begging. Information of this type would
contribute to the understanding of (1) the partitioning of biomass among plant
components and its relationship to photosynthesis; (2) examination of subtle
morphological differences between species and subspecies; (3) influence of
photobiology on morphology and phenology (e.g., elongation, heliotropism); (4)
plant morphological responses to chemical and environmental factors (e.g., water
stress, temperature, and CO2); and many others. This project seeks to develop a
laboratory instrument capable of measuring transient photosynthetic and
transpiration rates of a plant while simultaneously determining the complete 3D
structure of its canopy. The instrument will combine elements of machine vision
and stereophotogrammetry with traditional methods of gas exchange monitoring and
online sap flow measurement. The basic design will involve a gas tight,
transparent chamber containing the experimental plant with connections to
CO2/H2O gas analyzers. Sap flow sensors will be attached to the plant. All
outputs will be monitored by microcomputer. Illumination will be controlled and
the plants will be photographed at various angles by a robotically operated
camera. Machine vision techniques will be used to separate the plant from the
background and then segment it into leaves, stems, etc. Multiple images will be
combined through stereophotogrammetry to obtain a solid, 3D computer model of
the plant. The plant surface illumination distribution can then be calculated
using standard radiosity imaging software. Given the num ber of plant scientists
who make laboratory measurements of photosynthesis and transpiration, there is a
large potential audience for this device. There is also good reason for
confidence that the effort will be successful. One PI has already developed a
stereophotogrammetry system which computes and images 3D plant models from
manually digitized photos. The team also includes machine vision expertise and
examples of segmenting digital plant images exists in the literature. The
physiological techniques are well established and three PI's are versed in their
use. Team members also have experience with data acquisition system design and
general engineering. Finally, appropriate radiosity codes are available in the
public domain.