* 9513628
* Phagocytosis in Dictyostelium
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Catherine Chia, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 08/31/2000
* USD 311,395.00

95-13628 Chia A major goal in membrane biology is to understand how
transmembrane signals trigger rearrangements of the cytoskeleton that effect
cell movement and changes in cell shape. Phagocytosis, a specialized form of
receptor-mediated endocytosis, is the dominant host defense mechanism in
vertebrates and in invertebrates as well as a feeding mechanism in most
primitive organisms. The long term goals of this project are to understand how
phagocytosis receptors are linked to the cytoskeleton in Dictyostelium
discoideum in order to gain insights into the membrane-cytoskeletal interactions
that occur during phagocytosis. A 150 kilodalton, plasma membrane glycoprotein,
gp150, is a putative phagocytosis receptor in D. discoideum. When cells are
grown in the presence of bacteria, gp150 is associated with detergent-insoluble
cytoskeleton and is found in phagosome vesicles. In contrast, in axenically-
grown cells, gp150 is largely detergent-soluble. To gain insights into the role
of gp150 in phagocytosis, the gene that encode for gp150 will be cloned and
sequenced and molecules that link gp150 to the cytoskeleton will be identified.
Antibodies directed against gp150 will be generated and used to localize gp150
in situ in axenically- and bacterially-grown cells. Using established gene
disruption techniques, the gene encoding gp150 will be disrupted to generate
cell lines deficient in gp150. The phenotypes of the mutant cells will be
characterized. The primary structure of gp150 will provide insights into
putative functional domains that will guide future experiments that will be
focused on the signaling mechanisms of endocytosis and of phagocytosis. To
detect molecules that link gp150 to the cytoskeleton, antibodies against gp150
will be used in immunoprecipitation and in crosslinking studies with whole cells
and with phagosomes isolated from cells fed latex beads. These studies will be
conducted with axenically- and with bacterially-grown cells. These studies
should provide insights into the role of gp150 in phagocytosis as well as
providing a contribution toward understanding the regulation of cytoskeletal-
based activities such as cell motility, cell-cell adhesion and cell substrate
adhesion, activities that are fundamental to tissue and organ development. %%% A
major goal in cell biology is to understand how transmembrane signaling events
trigger restructuring of the cytoskeleton which in turn effect cell movement as
well as cell morphology. Phagocytosis, a specialized form of receptor-mediated
endocytosis, acts as a host defense mechanism in vertebrates and in
invertebrates as well as a feeding mechanism in most primitive organisms. Little
is known about how receptors that are involved in phagocytosis are linked to the
cytoskeleton. This project aims at identifying molecules that link plasma
membrane receptors to the cytoskeleton. ***