* 9513486
* Mechanism of Flagellar Rotation in Escherichia coli
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* David Blair, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/29/2000
* USD 269,180.00

9513486 Blair Many species of bacteria are propelled by reversible rotary motors
that derive the energy for rotation from the proton gradient across the cell
membrane. The rotary motor is thus a transducer that converts chemical energy
into mechanical energy, with very high efficiency. Among the many proteins
needed to assemble and operate these motors, only a few have been suggest to
function directly in torque generation. These include MotA and MotB, which form
a proton channel across the cell membrane, and FliG, FliM and FliN, whose
precise functions are not known. Recent work has shown that FliG, FliM, and FliN
form a complex that can be detected in vitro, and that FliG is extensively
involved in the process of torque generation whereas FliM and FliN are not.
Further, a relatively small domain at the C-terminus of FliG was shown to
function specifically and extensively in torque generation. Continued progress
in understanding the mechanism of flagellar rotation in bacteria will require
that the interactions among the FliG, FliM, and FliN proteins will be mapped
using linker-scanning mutagenesis coupled with existing binding assays. The FliG
C-terminal domain will be characterized by intensive mutational studies, and it
will be purified and characterized in preparation for structural studies. The
locations of these proteins in the flagellum is known only approximately. To
locate the proteins and certain protein domains of interest more precisely,
molecular genetic approaches will be used to underexpress the proteins, express
subdomains of the proteins, or express forms that can be specifically labeled
with an electron-dense probe, and the resulting flagellar structures will be
examined in the electron microscope. The ultimate goal of these studies is to
understand, at the molecular level, how the flagellar motor converts chemical
energy into mechanical energy. The proposed studies will achieve significant
progress toward that goal by clarifying the arrangement and function of the key
protein components. Understanding mechanisms of energy conversion, particularly
those that involve proton movements, is a central concern in bioenergetics.
Also, this example of a biomolecular machine may be a useful model for
nanofabrication engineering of nanoscale motors or switches. ***