* 9513571
* Rapid Mechanochemical Screening of Biologically Ligands     Using Submicrogram Amounts of Proteins
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Victor Morozov, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 144,810.00

We have developed a mechanochemical method of assay (MCA) to rapidly test the
binding ability of proteins or other macromolecules for substances with low (no
more than 1 kD) mol. weight. A characteristic feature of this method consists in
monitoring of ligand binding by measuring changes in the isometric tension or
elastic modulus of cross-linked films of biomacromolecules which result from
changes in the conformation and/or mechanical properties of the macromolecules.
The method has been evaluated on samples of 17 different proteins, and found to
be a general and reliable probe of specific binding, capable of determining the
scale of ligand-induced conformational changes, quantitative ligand affinities,
and distinguishing specific from nonspecific binding. MCA effectively
complements other methods of protein bioassays, which can fail to detect binding
of small ligands, especially in cases where the binding site does not contain
any reporter group(s) or when there are no known ligands binding the protein. A
laboratory version of the mechanochemical device uses samples containing only
100 ng of protein. Thus, in principle, even proteins that are available in small
quantities, such as receptors, can be tested by this method. However, much
larger amounts of protein (more than 0.3-0.5 mg) are presently needed to prepare
samples from protein films. The present method of sample preparation also
requires micromanipulations with special instruments. These two drawbacks
present a barrier to wide applicability of this method. For this reason, the
main objective of this project consists in improving the technology of sample
preparation from microgram amounts of proteins without micromanipulation. The
electrospray (ES) technology which has been developed to introduce protein ions
into mass spectrometers will be adapted to fabricating protein microsamples. The
ES technology project has the following objectives: (i) design and construction
of a device that will allow ES of protein solutions under controlled conditions
of humidity, temperature, composition of atmosphere and other parameters that
affect the quality of deposited samples, (ii) study of ES of protein solutions
to identify ES conditions that retain native properties of protein molecules
(effects of humidity, path of flight, temperature, pH, protecting agents, etc.),
(iii) investigation of ES conditions ( optimal configuration of electrostatic
field, distance to substrate, form of masks, etc.) to precisely deposit a
protein sample onto a substrate, (iv) studies on the dependence of internal
structure of protein films upon ES regimes, to make the MCA applicable to
ligands with mol. wt. larger, than 1 kD and (v) elaboration of special
substrates and procedures for easy detachment of protein sample from an
intermediate holder and its transfer to the measuring device without
micromanipulation. The improved MCA should have broad applications in
biochemistry, for investigating the specificity of newly discovered proteins or
proteins available in small quantities, since a single sample, containing only
100 ng of protein can be used repeatedly in tests with different ligands,
provided the binding is reversible. It should also become possible to use the
MCA on receptor proteins. The quantity of protein available from analytical
electrophoresis will be enough to allow screening of its possible specific
inhibitors, allosteric effectors etc. Since the MCA and the device based on it
makes it possible to detect specific binding and evaluate the concentration of a
bound ligand, they can be used also as universal biosensors with replaceable
sensitive elements and as detectors allowing easy recognition of analytes in
chromatography.