* 9513725
* High Resolution SQUID Magnetometer for Imaging Biological   Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1997
* John Wikswo, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 121,687.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop ultra-high resolution,
Superconducting QUantum Interference Device (SQUID) magnetometers (UHRSM) that
are optimized for the imaging of the magnetic fields produced by action
currents, remanent magnetization, and magnetic susceptibility in isolated living
tissue and small experimental animal preparations at the scale of 100m.. Such
measurements are not yet in wide spread use, primarily because of the
limitations and costs of existing instrumentation. This project is designed
specifically to address these points. The proposed instruments will be capable
of making measurements that are impossible with any other technique, and should
lead to new insights into cellular biology and electrophysiology. As they are
being developed, these instruments will be immediately incorporated into the
electrophysiological research on cardiac muscle, nerves, and intestinal smooth
muscle that is ongoing at Vanderbilt, and will be made available to
collaborators from other institutions. The proposed research involves the staged
development of the cryostats, SQUIDs, and vacuum windows required for a high-
sensitivity UHRSM utilizing a liquid-helium-cooled, low-temperature
superconductivity (LTS) SQUID, and a lower sensitivity, higher resolution UHRSM
with a liquid-nitrogen-cooled, high-temperature superconductivity (HTS) SQUID.
The first system will use hand-wound pickup coils, a commercially-packaged LTS
SQUID, and a custom-built, continuous-flow cryostat that should provide a semi-
automatic system not requiring periodic helium and nitrogen transfers. The more
advanced versions will utilize custom LTS and HTS SQUID gradiometers and
magnetometers mounted in inexpensive commercial dewars designed for infrared
spectroscopy. While this is under development, specialized LTS SQUIDs with on-
chip pickup coils will be fabricated at Hypres at no cost to NSF. Apodization
and other coil design techniques will be used , to develop arrays of SQUIDs
whose pickup coils are optimized for high- resolution biomagnetic j imaging and
inverse calculations of the current and magnetization distributions in the
biological samples. Digital SQUIDs will be provided by Hypres for evaluation.
These instruments are based upon proven cooling and vacuum- window technologies;
the challenge lies in integrating these with optimized SQUID magnetometers to
create user-friendly, inexpensive magnetic microscopes. These instruments will
be unique in their ability to measure quantitatively magnetic fields at the
near-cellular level. While electrical measurements of neural and cardiac tissue
have been explored extensively over the past century, only in the past few years
has it been possible to use SQUIDs to image cellular action currents. High
resolution magnetic susceptibility imaging has yet to be applied to biological
systems. Many biological phenomena involving electrical cell-to-cell
communication and non-uniform propagation, such as those that are key to the
behavior of cardiac~ihuscle and intestinal smooth muscle, are governed by the
transfer of electrical charge. Since the distributed electrical resistivity and
capacitance of these systems is often unknown or poorly characterized,
electrical measurements alone cannot suffice to quantify this charge transfer.
Hence direct measurements of current are crucial to understanding cell-to-cell
coupling. More importantly, the combination of magnetic measurements of current
and electrical and optical measurements of voltage offers unique promise towards
improving the understanding of not only th e transfer of charge between cells
but also the tissue properties that relate current to voltage. Other biological
applications include the study of cortical oscillations, spreading depression,
action currents in algae and higher plants, iron biominerals in living systems,
and magnetic tracers. The proposed program of instrumentation development,
coupled with an aggressive program of biophysical measurements, should advance
the ability to study the electrical behavior of cellular systems and their
response to physical and pharmacological interventions.