* 9513713
* Structure-function Analysis of the KSS1 MAP Kinase          in S. cerevisiae
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* William Welch, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Jermelina Tupas
* 02/29/2000
* USD 317,604.00

9513713 Courchesne A mutational analysis of Kssl was begun in an effort to
genetically separate its dual functions. Site-directed mutagenesis of the KSS1
gene was used to create single amino acid substitutions in the protein. These
mutants were then analyzed for Gl-arrest, mating, desensitizing, and in vitro
kinase activities. Using this approach, two novel classes of mutant Kssl kinases
were generated. Mutants of the first class allow Gl arrest but are defective for
desensitization, while mutants of the second class promote desensitization but
do not allow Gl arrest. Surprisingly, desensitization occurred in the absence of
kinase catalytic activity, suggesting that protein-protein interaction, rather
than protein phosphorylation, is required for desensitization. These mutations
provide insight into the nature of Kssl 's dual physiological activities, and
may define domains important for interaction with substrates, regulatory
proteins, or proteins required for proper localization. This research utilizes
molecular genetic, biochemical, and molecular modeling approaches to elucidate
the molecular mechanisms that allow Kssl to control both arrest and activation
of cell proliferation. These studies will be continued by pursuit of the
following aims: 1. Mutational and functional analysis of Kssl. The Gl arrest,
mating, desensitizing, and in vitro kinase activities of mutant Kssl kinases
will be determined following site-directed mutagenesis of the gene using the
"Charged-to-alanine" approach within two regions that preliminary studies
suggest may regulate either Gl arrest, desensitization or localization. 2.
Identification of genes encoding Kssl-interacting proteins. Kssl-interacting
proteins will be sought by two distinct methods, first, isolation of
"suppressor" genes which can, when mutated, compensate for mutant Kssls that are
defective for either Gl cell-cycle arrest or desensitizing activities. (Such
suppressor genes should encode either substrates o f Kssl or proteins that
regulate Kssl activity or proper cellular localization.) Second, the ability of
the mutant Kssls to interact with known components of the pheromone-response
pathway will be tested. 3. Biochemical/structural analyses of Kssl. Kssl will be
analyzed biochemically and physically, including purification of the wild type
and mutant kinases, and development of an alternative in vitro kinase assay. A
molecular model of the wild type Kssl will be completed, including incorporating
into it the amino acid substitutions that have already been created or will be
created as described in the first aim above. The functional results of each
mutant will be correlated with those predicted by the model. Mitogen-activated
protein kinases (MAP kinases) play important roles in myriad signal transduction
pathways controlling proliferation and differentiation. Because of their
critical roles, it is essential to understand their biochemical and
physiological activities, and identify their substrates and regulators. The KSS1
gene encodes one of two MAP kinases (Kssl) that are required for pheromone-
signal transduction. Pheromones are negative growth factors that promote Gl
cell-cycle arrest. Kssl has two distinct biological activities. Kssl can promote
Gl arrest in response to pheromones. Kssl also promotes a return to
proliferation of Gl-arrested cells, a phenomenon called desensitization.
Although inconclusive, some data suggest that MAP kinases in higher eucaryotes
exert a feedback control on their pathways by phosphorylating upstream protein
kinases; however, none have as yet been shown to have the clearly defined role
in desensitization described for Kssl. A detailed understanding of how Kssl can
both turn off and turn on cell proliferation is important in understanding
control of proliferation in all eukaryotes. ***