* 9513881
* RUI:  Arrows of Time in Infancy
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* William Friedman, Oberlin College
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 08/31/1999
* USD 93,386.00

9513881 FRIEDMAN This research is concerned with early development of temporal
knowledge in normal human infants. The findings will tell us how children come
to adapt to an important feature of their environment, its temporal
regularities. The results will complement recent discoveries about infants'
knowledge of other fundamental domains, such as space, gravity, the continued
existence of objects when they are hidden, and causality. As part of a broader
program of research on the developmental psychology of time, this work can help
us better understand the growth of temporal knowledge in children. Along with
research on the psychology of time in adults, this research will help us
understand how humans abstract a sense of time from the flow of experience.
Knowledge of how children adapt to the temporal features of their world will be
useful to practitioners who design preschool curricula and early childhood
intervention programs. It will also provide comparative information about normal
development that can be used by clinicians who work with children with
disabilities. The focus of this research is on humans' sensitivity to temporal
order in simple event sequences. Adults are highly attuned to forward vs.
backward presentations of transformations that can only happen in one temporal
direction: A film of liquid pouring, when viewed in reverse, is strikingly
anomalous. Adults must have internalized, temporally-organized representations
of how thousands of such transformations normally unfold. However, very little
is known about the origins and nature of this sensitivity. Preliminary work has
suggested that expectations about the temporal direction of several
transformations, such as pouring a liquid or breaking an object, develop between
4 and 12 months of age. These experiments will add to these findings in a number
of ways. All of the studies involve comparisons of infants' visual attention to
videotapes of temporally normal and reversed or mi s-ordered events. A first
experiment is designed to illuminate the role that learning plays in the
development of temporal expectations by teaching infants specific, novel
transformations. Two other studies will test the limits of competence in
4-month-olds, a group which has failed to show directional preferences in some
studies. A fourth study will sample new transformations in order to shed light
on the breadth of 8-month-olds' knowledge and on the specific features of the
films that are responsible for their looking preferences. A final experiment
will test whether 1-year-old infants have developed expectations of the temporal
order of familiar event sequences made up of discrete actions. This evidence can
reveal whether infants in the first year of life have developed representations
of lengthier time patterns than have been tested to date. ***