* 9513439
* A Collaborative Project:  Molecular Studies of A            Mitochondrial Ion Channel
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Henry Tedeschi, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 08/31/1999
* USD 375,473.00

; R o o t E n t r y F p+- C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t ; O b j e c t
P o o l &gt;*- &gt;*- 4 @ 5 6 7 8 9 : ; &lt; = &gt; ? F Microsoft Word 6.0
Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9513439 Kinnally Oxidative phosphorylation
is intimately connected to the flux of ions and metabolites across the two
membranes enclosing mitochondria; one pathway for ion flux is through ion
channels. The regulatory role of the outer membrane and of the contact sites
between the inner an outer membranes is just beginning to be recognized and
understood. This proposal focusses on the energy-coupling inner membrane and its
predominant channel activity, a multiple conductance channel, MCC. Gated
channels are adjustable molecular apertures through membranes whose opening is
regulated by physiological stimuli such as voltage and the intracellular calcium
in the case of MCC. The main goal of this proposal is to determine the
physiological and molecular basis of MCC. This knowledge is necessary for
understanding factors controlling the inner membrane permeability at the
molecular level. Furthermore, this information may provide insight into the
mechanisms by which all five inner membrane channels interact with the
regulation of energy production in mitochondria under changing conditions, e.g.
durin g exercise or ischemia. This proposal has several objectives related to
its overall goal, which are to be achieved through a combination of
electrophysiological and biophysical techniques. It has been proposed by others
that channels are involved in the translocation of mitochondrial proteins
synthesized in the cytoplasm and we have evidence MCC may play a role in protein
import. Antibodies to and several mutants of the putative inner membrane channel
portion of the hetero-oligomeric import apparatus will be examined for effects
on MCC activity primarily using patch-clamp techniques. At the same time, MCC
activity will be examined in deletion mutants of proteins implicated in MCC
activity by other studies, e.g. voltage dependent anion channel and adenine
nucleotide translocator. These two lines of investigation will continue until
MCC s molecular basis and physiological role are determined. A biophysical
characterization of the purified MCC constituent(s) will include
electrophysiological comparisons to MCC in mitoplasts and circular dichroism
determination of (-helix and (-sheet content. Finally, structure/function
studies will be made of MCC and its relationship with contact sites between the
inner and outer membranes. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT
S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 4 9513439 Thomasina M Osborne Thomasina M
Osborne @ &gt;*- @ @ &gt;*- @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e A ; A j j j j j j
j u 1 # 7 W T A u j u j j j j ~ j j j j j 9513439 Kinnally Oxidative
phosphorylation is intimately connected to the flux of ions and metabolites
across the two membranes enclosing mitochondria; one pathway for ion flux is
through ion channels. The regulatory role of the outer membrane and of the
contact sites between the inner an outer membranes is just beginning to be
recognized and understood. This proposal focusses on the energy-coupling inner
membrane and its predominant channel activity, a multiple conductance channel,
MCC. Gated channels are adjustable molecular apertures through membranes whose
op