* 9513002
* A Video-Based Motion Analysis Facility for Neuroethological Research on Insects
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Richard Levine, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1998
* USD 69,307.00

The aim of this proposal is to establish a multi-user instrumentation facility
for the fine-scale analysis of video-recorded orientation and locomotory
movements of insects, and the simultaneously recorded underlying electrical
activity of groups of neurons and muscles. The entire facility will comprise the
Peak Performance Technologies Inc. 2D/3D software, two 486 desk-top computers,
color and low-light video recording equipment (for recording behavior in 3
dimensions), the Peak Performance Technologies Inc. automatic point tracking
software, and a video recorder and camera which has been modified by Peak
Performance Technologies Inc. for high-speed (120 frames/sec) recording.
Simultaneously recorded electrophysiological data will be precisely synchronized
with the video record using the Peak Performance Technologies Inc. electronic
synchronization unit. The electrophysiological data will be played back with an
8-channel Vetter PCM data recorder, and analyzed using Run Technologies Inc.
Data Pac II wave form analysis software. The ultimate goal of these
neuroethological studies is to understand the sensorimotor mechanisms underlying
complex movement patterns. These studies, using insects as model organisms, will
specifically address questions of, how the development of circuits of identified
neurons affect behavior, associative learning and memory, specific brain
structures and their role in spatial learning and memory, integration of
multimodal sensory inputs and control of motor output, and plant-insect
interactions and their role in crop protection. The major users of this
equipment facility will be performing fine-scaled analyses of the movements of
animals with respect to their environments, and the movements of the segments of
the body and limbs with respect to each other, in both 2 and 3 dimensions. These
projects involve the study of body postures and movements, and the neural and
muscular activity underlying them in: (1) moths flying freely (closed- l oop
conditions) in a laboratory wind tunnel and natural field conditions, (2) in
moths during tethered flight open-loop conditions activated by various sensory
stimuli (pulse trains of pheromone compounds, visual flow fields, mechanosensory
inputs) or endogenously, (3) and walking in different successive developmental
stages (e.g., caterpillars and moths) of the moth Manduca sexta. Projects
proposed by minor users include: (1) quantification of the movement patterns of
freely walking insects as they interact with the chemical environment on the
surfaces of leaves, (2) high-speed video analysis correlating the effects of
changes in the intracellularly recorded firing patterns of identified neurons on
the head and neck movements of flies in tethered flight, (3) orientation and
movement of body segments during visually guided learning in freely walking
animals, and its associated neural activity, (4) analysis of movement patterns
used by plant-feeding insects to locate their host plant, and the strategies
utilized by parasitic insects to locate their insect herbivore prey. An
additional use, yet to be explored, may be to analyze the growth and development
of single neurons growing in culture, video recorded through a compound
microscope. The most important components of this facility are the Peak
Performance Technologies Inc. motion analysis software and the video and
computer equipment that interact with this software. This motion analysis system
has been designed to perform sophisticated analysis of animals moving with
respect to their environment and of separate segments of the body or limbs with
respect to each other. The motion analysis software is also designed to interact
with the electrophysiological analysis software produced by Run Technologies
Inc., enabling the researchers to analyze the behavior of interest and easily
and precisely correlate it with appropriately synchronized recordings from the
muscles and nerves involved in the generation and contro l of that behavior. Our
current video recording and analysis capabilities does not provide the level of
spatial and temporal resolution necessary to test existing hypotheses or
formulate and test new ones. Without the interactive components of the Peak
system, the work proposed can only be performed with a prohibitively large
investment in time and investigator effort. A-1