* 9513651
* Development of a Field-Portable Omnidirectional Video System to Quantify Three-Dimensional Motion
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Robert Stevenson, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 12/31/1999
* USD 147,998.00

To study motion in natural settings, especially out of doors, a battery-powered
weather proof two-camera video system and computer analysis system are
developed. In the data collection system each camera is oriented and focused by
a human operator. The cameras will be able to pan and zoom so that a subject can
be easily followed. Other systems designed to study biological motion require
that the orientation of the cameras be fixed, but here the pan and tilt angles
measured by two optical shaft encoders (resolution 0.036 degrees) and zoom
factor (measured by a linear shaft encoder) are stored at video frame rates (30
Hz) on the image in bar code. The two video images are synchronized in time by
genlocking the cameras and mixing the same SMPTE time code with each video
signal. The image processing system is consists of a RISC workstation that runs
software to decode the pan and tilt angles of the cameras and the time code. In
addition, the software can compute the pixel coordinates of the center of mass
of multiple objects in each video frame. The object recognition software was
designed by Dr. Jack Sanders-Reed of SVS Inc. and was originally used at weapons
test ranges. It features modules for pixel processing, background clutter
suppression, object detect and description, and frame to frame tracking. The
camera angles and pixel coordinates of the center of mass of the objects from
both cameras are used to compute the position of the objects in three-
dimensional space as a function of time. From this basic information other
important performance characteristics such as velocity, acceleration and turning
radius and the distance between different objects can be computed. The new image
analysis techniques will help automate the processing of video images, which if
done manually is a time intensive activity. A series of collaborative
experiments with 15 other scientists is designed to test the usefulness and
versatility of the system for the study of a nimal locomotion, animal behavior
and conservation biology under field conditions. This instrumentation greatly
increases our ability to quantify motion and behavior outdoors. It will provide
flexibility in data gathering and power for image analysis that no commercial
motion analysis system can match.