* 9513962
* Ecophysiology and Phylogeny of Diverse Beggiatoa Species,   Bacterial Specialists of the Sulfide-Oxygen Interface
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Douglas Nelson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 02/29/2000
* USD 237,837.00

9513962 Nelson The surfaces of a variety of marine sediments are dominated by
colorless sulfur bacteria of the genera Thioploca and Beggiatoa. Although few of
these bacteria have been grown in pure culture, the best characterized
representatives can multiply at the oxic-anoxic interface where there are steep
gradients of hydrogen sulfide and oxygen, which can serve as their oxidizable
substrate and oxidant, respectively. There is emerging evidence that these
bacteria are also autotrophs, i.e. they can synthesize their cell material
starting with carbon dioxide as their sole carbon source. In some environments
with little or no available oxygen, the dominant representatives of these
bacteria are extremely large and they contain a membrane-bound central vacuole,
comprising roughly 80% of cell volume. These are the only bacteria for which
this structure has been reported. In dense samples from three different
locations, vacuolate Beggiatoa and Thioploca were very recently demonstrated to
contain nitrate in concentrations 10,000-fold higher than in their surrounding
habitat. This proposal postulates that these bacteria use this internal nitrate
as a terminal electron acceptor facilitating their respiration of soluble
sulfide and/or organic compounds. Proposed studies include microelectrode and
chemical gradient analysis of in situ consumption rates of potential electron
donors (sulfide and organics) and electron acceptors (nitrate and oxygen).
Assays of diagnostic enzymes and studies using radiolabelled organic and
inorganic carbon compounds will help elucidate the relative roles of these
compounds in their metabolism. Studies of the time-course of utilization of
internal nitrate and the resultant products, coupled with various enzyme assays,
will measure the capacity these bacteria have for denitrification. Additionally,
using pure cultures in spatially structured cultu re media the relative rates by
which these bacteria use organic and inorganic energy and carbon sources sill be
assessed. Vacuolate Beggiatoa are proposed as a model of an important link
between the vigorous sulfur cycle of eutrophic marine sediments and the nitrogen
cycle. If they and Thioploca prove to be denitrifiers, they will be the first
example of an ecologically dominant bacterium capable of removing combined
nitrogen from a marine ecosystem.