* 9513197
* US-Korea Cooperative Research in Nonlinear Laser            Spectroscopy of Semiconductor Heterostructures
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Jin-Joo Song, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 04/30/2000
* USD 26,706.00

9513197 Song This award provides funds to permit Dr. Jin-Joo Song, Center for
Laser Research, Oklahoma State University, to pursue with Dr. Dai-Sik Kim,
Department of Physics, Seoul National University, Korea, for 24 months, a
program of cooperative research on nonlinear laser spectroscopy of semiconductor
heterostructures. In this study, the collaborators plan to investigate recently
found strong femtosecond nonlinearities in wide band gap materials such as ZnSe,
ZnCdSe/ZnSe quantum wells, or GaN, that are of increasing technological
importance. Femtosecond wave mixing experiments will be carried out near the
exciton resonance using a second harmonic of a femtosecond Ti:Sapphire laser.
These experiments will be performed varying intensity, polarization,and
temperature on various samples grown under different conditions and on different
substrates. In order to study the effect of polarity and band gap on the
femtosecond nonlinearities, the femtosecond nonlinearities of GaN or InGaN will
be investigated. The effect of changing the band gap on the femtosecond
nonlinearities will be isolated by performing four- wave mixing experiments
under pressure in a diamond anvil cell. The collaborators expect to obtain a
coherent picture of femtosecond nonlinearities of wide bandgap materials through
these and other novel experiments. Through their investigations, the
collaborators will expand the frontiers of knowledge of the selected classes of
semiconductor materials, some of which may have useful electronic applications.
The collaborators have considerable complementary research experience in the
field of their proposed project. This project is relevant to the objectives of
the U.S.-Korea Cooperative Science Program which seeks to increase the level of
cooperation between U.S. and Korean scientists and engineers through the
exchange of scientific information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through
collaboration on problems of mutual benefit. Korean part icipation in the
project is supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF).
***