* 9513937
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Modelling,         Simulation and Performance Analysis of an SCI-based         Multiprocessor System
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Dan Moldovan, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 04/30/2000
* USD 19,850.00

This award supports Professors Dan Moldovan and Eric Lin and two graduate
students, all from Southern Methodist University, to collaborate in computer
science and engineering research with Professor H. Richter and others of the
Computer Science Department of the Technical University of Munich, Germany. They
share an interest in parallel computing systems and in particular the
architecture of the `Scalable Coherent Interface` (SCI) - based parallel
computers. Together they plan to study, design and evaluate a distributed
computer system consisting of a network of multiprocessors. The U.S. group has
developed a parallel computer called `Semantic Network Array Processor` (SNAP),
which they want to scale up. The German group has done similar work with a
network of multiprocessors. Their joint effort will benefit from their
complementary expertise in different operating systems, network architecture and
approaches to parallel programming environments. The increasing sophistication
of microprocessors still lags behind the escalating demand in science and
industry. This research addresses scalability questions related to a new
aggregation architecture for a Local-Area Multiprocessor (LAMP). The objective
is to satisfy rapidly evolving network user needs at the lowest long term cost
and high efficiency.