* 9513795
* RUI: Mutagenesis Studies to Probe Function of the Large     Extrinsic Loop of the CP-43 Apoprotein of Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Cindy Putnam-Evans, East Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 02/29/2000
* USD 180,000.00

9513795 Putnam-Evans This project describes the production and characterization
of mutants containing random and site-directed lesions in the large extrinsic
loop region of the Photosystem II (PSII) protein CP43. CP43 is an integral
thylakoid protein and component of the photosynthetic apparatus of higher
plants, algae and cyanobacteria. These mutants will be constructed in the
cyanobacterium Synechocystis 6803, a widely used model system for higher plant
photosynthesis. CP43 appears to be required for the stable assembly of the PSII
complex, and also appears to play a role in photosynthetic oxygen evolution. The
goal of this project is to determine the function of the large, lumenally-
oriented extrinsic loop of CP43. Deletion of long segments of the loop results
in mutants incapable of evolving oxygen. Therefore, it is probable that this
region interacts directly with other PSII proteins and inorganic cofactors
(manganese, chloride and calcium) that are necessary for oxygen evolution. In
addition, CP43 functions as a chlorophyll-a antenna for PSII. The large
extrinsic loop may thus interact with other PSII antenna proteins or proteins
comprising the PSII reaction center. Mutations will be introduced into the psbC
gene encoding CP43 by both random and oligonucleotide-mediated mutagenesis.
Mutations will be re-introduced into Synechocystis 6803 along with a closely-
linked antibiotic resistance marker. Putative mutants will be screened initially
for antibiotic resistance and possible loss of photoautotrophic growth. This
will be followed by an in-depth characterization of photosynthetic
characteristics including measurements of steady state rates of oxygen
evolution, electron transport capability, PSII polypeptide composition,
manganese and calcium content and chloride requirement. %%% The Photosystem II
(PSII~ complex forms part ofthe photosynthetic apparatus of higher plants, algae
and cyanobacteria. This complex catalyzes the light-driven oxidation of water
and the reduction of plastoquinon e. Oxygen is given off as a by-product of the
PSII reaction. CP43 is one of the protein components of PSII and appears to be
required for the stable assembly ofthe PSII complex. It also appears to play a
role in both photosynthetic oxygen evolution and the harvesting of light energy.
This membrane-bound protein is unusual in that it contains a large, hydrophilic
loop which protrudes from the membrane in which is it embedded. Deletion of
short stretches of amino acids in the large extrinsic loop result in mutants
that cannot evolve oxygen. The goal of this project is to identify specific
amino acids involved in the function of the large, lumenally-oriented extrinsic
loop of CP43 to further test the hypothesis that this region is necessary for
normal PSII activity. This will be accomplished by 1) introducing mutations into
the gene encoding CP43 in vitro using the techniques of both random and site-
specific mutagenesis, 2) exchanging these mutated genes for their normal
counterparts in the blue-green algae Synechocystis 6803 and 3) evaluating the
resulting mutant organisms for their ability to assemble a normal PSII complex,
evolve oxygen and carry out electron transport. *** ??