* 9513030
* Molecular Genetics Core Facility
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Anthony Pegg, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 12/31/1997
* USD 120,500.00

This proposal requests funds to dramatically increase the sensitivity of
calorimeters used to study biological systems. The ultimate goals in this
calorimetry includes the study of the thermodynamics of protein-protein and
protein-DNA interactions, the thermodynamics and kinetics of drug binding (both
proteins and DNA), drug occupancy studies, and studies of protein folding. Dr.
Hellman has used semiconductor-based micromachining technology to develop
microcalorimeters for measuring the specific heat of thin film materials of
interest to solid state physics. These devices have been successfully used to
measure a wide variety of materials, all less than 5000 A thick and weighing
under 10 ,u g; it is not an exaggeration to say that these measurements could
not be made anywhere else in the world. There is however one requirement to all
the measurements made to date using these microcalorimeters: measurements must
be made in vacuum. This requirement is due to the excess thermal conductance
from the sample area to the surrounding environment which would occur if the
measurements were attempted in a gas or in water vapor. Biological systems
however cannot be held in vacuum; they are typically based in an aqueous
solution which would evaporate. A proposed modification of Dr. Hellman's work
will allow use in xenon saturated with water vapor and will produce calorimeters
capable of much more sensitive measurements than is presently possible. Because
many of these biological systems are only available in minute quantities, this
work would be of great significance for basic research on macromolecules not
accessible to present methods .