* 9513285
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Cloning P450           Insectide Resistance Genes
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Richard ffrench-Constant, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 05/31/1997
* USD 30,947.00

9513285 ffrench-Constant This award will provide partial travel support for Dr.
Richard ffrench-Constant, and two of his graduate students, from the Department
of Entomology at the University of Wisconsin, to conduct collaborative research
with Dr. Stephen C. Trowell of the Australian CSIRO Division of Entomology,
Black Mountain Laboratory, in Canberra. The focus of the research is on
technology transfer gained in the analysis of Drosophila cytochrome P450 to the
economically important pest Helicoverpa, species of which show P450 mediated
resistance to pyrethroid insecticides. The more specific objectives of this
collaborative study are: 1) to document cytochrome P450's role in insecticide
resistant strains of Drosophila; 2) to clone homologous P450's from resistant
strains of Helicoverpa; and, 3) to examine the role of resistance conferring
P450's from both Helicoverpa and Drosophila in insecticide metabolism following
functional expression of recombinant clones. The budworm, Helicoverpa, is the
primary pest of cotton in both the United States and Australia. The pest is
currently being controlled using pyrethroids, but the mechanism of pyrethroid
resistance is not known. This collaborative study aims to define the precise
mechanisms of pyrethroid metabolism in resistant strains in order to look for
selective P450 inhibitors or synergists, and to enable a rational choice of
effective pyrethroid compounds and alternative pesticides. The collaboration is
supported in Australia through the Department of Industry, Science and Tourism
(DIST).