* 9513596
* Mechanism of Sphingomyelinase Aativation by the Low Affinity Neurotrophin Receptor
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Rick Dobrowsky, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 02/29/2000
* USD 290,328.00

Abstract 9513596 Dobrowsky The objectives of this proposal are to determine the
structural components and the molecular mechanisms which regulate the coupling
of the low affinity neurotrophin receptor, p75NTR, to the activation of a novel
lipid second messenger system, the sphingomyelin (SM) cycle. Activation of the
SM cycle produces ceramide which has been implicated in mediating the growth
suppressing or apoptotic effects of specific cytokines and growth factors.
Neurotrophins are growth factors which are necessary for the differentiation and
maintenance of neuronal cells. The PI has recently demonstrated that
neurotrophins induce SM hydrolysis through p75NTR. The cellular location of this
SM pool will be determined. The structural requirements for the interaction of
sphingomyelinase with the the p75 NTR will be determined, and their interaction
will be studied in the presence and absence of the neurotrophin ligand. Since
activation may also occur through intermediary molecules, the effect of
neurotrophins on p75NTR dependent phospholipase A2 activation and arachidonic
acid production a potential physiologic activator of SMase) will be examined.
Since there are some indications of crosstalk between this pathway and tyrosine
kinase, p75NTR dependent SM hydrolysis will be examined in tyrosine kinase
receptor mutants, or by using inhibitors to uncouple tyrosine kinase from
downstream signaling proteins. These studies will provide mechanistic insights
into factors which regulate the coupling of p75NTR to SMase and elucidate the
functional role of crosstalk pathways in the coordinate regulation of
neurotrophin signaling pathways. They will also provide information on the role
of lipids in intracellular signaling. ***