* 9513918
* Democratization and the Politics of Ethnic Identity
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Thomas Koelble, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 04/30/2000
* USD 69,678.00

9513918 Koelble Democratic practices are widely believed to alleviate ethnic,
racial, religious and class conflicts better than other systems of governance.
Nowhere is this proposition more clearly articulated than in South Africa. Yet,
most extant theories of democratization and its relationship to ethnic and other
conflicts focus on very narrow criteria such as "free and fair elections" or
certain kinds of institutional structures to define what democracy is and when
its implementation can be deemed to be successful. But can we really speak of
democracy when fundamental reforms to address long-standing social and economic
grievances are not undertaken? When inter-ethnic or police violence increases?
When democratic principles are not heeded at the local level? This study argues
that narrow conceptions of democracy fail to capture specific local
circumstances which impinge upon the implementation of democratic principles.
Only if theorists pay attention to the "embeddedness" of constitutional
arrangements in a set of local political interactions, the historical dynamics
of ethnic and other conflicts, distinct cultural practices and symbols, social
norms and behaviors, international and local economic conditions, only then will
a comprehensive account of democratic successes and failures emerge. This
investigation has tow objectives: first, it examines constitution-making in
South Africa by providing a detailed analysis of the current constitutional
committee's deliberations. Second, the study deals with the question of how
"post-apartheid" local. regional and national government functions. The analysis
investigates how constitutional commitments to democracy, social and economic
justice are implemented. It maintains that ethnic and racial conflicts are
confrontations over the distribution of resources, patronage opportunities and
power in the political economy. New institutional structures will provide
incentives for new ethnic and racial coalition-building, but will not er adicate
the possibility of mobilizing ethnic and racial groups on the basis of perceived
discrimination. Levels of ethnic and racial confrontation vary widely across
South Africa despite a uniform constitutional system. The intriguing question
is: how do we account for such variations in the efficacy of similar
institutions to deal with ethnic conflict? The study argues that democratization
proceeds along differentiated paths dependent upon its agents and agencies in
interaction with their opponents. While the constitution imposes uniform
decision-making parameters, the interpretations of local political actors are
likely to shape these institutions providing them with a great deal of local
flair. The methods of inquiry are standard social scientific approaches. Eight
city councils (four urban and four rural towns), four regional governments and
the constitutional committee will be monitored over the next four years to
discover their mechanisms of decision-making. This is done through interviewing
political actors ate each level, observing the participants, and collecting
accounts of events from as wide a variety of sources as possible. A policy
analysis of the implementation of the Reconstruction and Development Program
concerning zoning, housing, land use, expropriation, and access to basic
amenities provides additional data to measure the impact of the new constitution
on the local and regional level. The study will substantially enhance our
understanding of this topic. ***