* 9513065
* A Confocal Laser Scanning Microscope for Cellular and       Molecular Imaging
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Nina Allen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1998
* USD 118,857.00

This proposal requests funds for a confocal laser scanning microscope system
based on an infmity corrected Zeiss Axiovert microscope with both differential
interference and fluorescence capabilities for high resolution imaging. The
confocal microscope will have a Krypton/Argon laser, three photomultiplier tubes
(PMT) and a motorized transmitted light PMT. This microscope will be used to
image a variety of cellular and molecular structures in both dynamic and still
specimens at high resolution and in 3-dimensional detail. Different recording
devices are requested. An optical disc and a CD-ROM unit will store images
digitally and a hard copy color printer will allow quick retrieval of images.
Dynamic structures will be recorded by a Panasonic Optical Memory Disc Recorder
This proposal comes from 19 scientists from 9 different Departments and three
Colleges at North Carolina State University and one Department at Wake Forest
University. To our knowledge there is no other confocal laser scanning
microscope for precise high resolution imaging available on either campus. Most
of the seven project leaders are plant biologists investigating basic cellular,
developmental and molecular processes using a combinatorial approach involving
genetic, molecular, biochemical, and cell biological techniques and all have a
very real need of confocal microscopy. The projects include investigations of
the relationships between cytoskeleton and cell signaling (especially Calcium
ions) as it influences plant development (Boss, Allen, Davies, Muday), of the
targeting of storage proteins in maize (Boston) of viral pathogenesis and
transport (Robertson and Lommel), of nematode pathogenesis and root specific
gene expression (Conkling), and of ferredoxin localization as well as nuclear
scaffold attachment regions in plant cells (Thompson). In addition, Peretti will
study plasmid transfer in biofilms. Another group of investigators, who
initially will be minor users, include the following: Thr ee members of Zoology
will study various aspects of cell signaling in epithelial cells (Black),
neurons and glia (Grossfeld) and from pituitary glands of fish (Borski).
Mahaffey (Genetics) will study segmentation in Drosophila larvae and Weissinger
will investigate fungal pathogenesis in transgenic plants. Foegeding (Food
Science) will study biorheological properties of biopolymer gels and Laster
(Microbiology) will investigate tumor induced apoptosis. Muday will study auxin
transport in plants. Finally in Botany, Burkholder will study dinoflagellate
life cycles. It is essential for many of these studies that fluorescent
molecules or structures be precisely localized and resolved. The unique ability
of the confocal microscope to make very thin optical sections at high resolution
has opened new frontiers in cell biology in the last ten years, and this group
of scientists has realized the opportunities available to greatly enhance their
research efforts by applying the newer methods of molecular staining with
confocal imaging and image analysis and quantification. North Carolina State
University and the Department of Botany have made a very real commitment to
strengthen cell biology and cellular imaging. This interest in imaging was
driven in part by a need of the biotechnology and molecular biology oriented
faculty to incorporate advanced imaging in their work. For example, it is now
possible to use molecular biology techniques to express transgenically
fluorescent probes such as Green Fluorescent Protein in plants. Several cell
biologists have recently been hired in Botany and Zoology. A Cellular, Molecular
and Developmental Biology Program is in development and will include faculty
from many diverse Departments. Nina Allen will direct the Cellular and Molecular
Imaging Center (CMIC) to be housed in the Botany Department in the area being
renovated for Allen and Davies. Several high resolution video microscopes have
been purchased with set-up money provided by NCSU to Allen. Wendy Boss has
obtained funds to purchase a cooled-CCD imaging system that will be housed in
CMIC. These microscopes in combination with the confocal microscope will allow
great flexibility in imaging capabilities available in the Center and should
greatly strengthen many areas of research at the University.