* 9513648
* Time-Domain EPR Studies of Tyrosine Z of Photosystem II
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Ralph Britt, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2000
* USD 273,333.00

9513648 Britt The Photosystem II component of the plant photosynthetic apparatus
utilizes light energy to oxidize water and reduce membrane diffusable
plastoquinone. Photon-induced charge separation occurs at the chlorophyll moiety
P680 . The electron transfer components that donate to the photogenerated
chlorophyll cation P+680 are unique to Photosystem II. A tyrosine residue
designated as YZ serves as an electron transfer intermediate between P+680 and
the manganese cluster of the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) where water oxidation
occurs. Fast optical excitation will be combined with pulsed electron
paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy to examine the role of YZ in electron
transfer and water oxidation. With laser pulsewidths of (3 ns, and microwave
pulsewidths of (10 ns, we will be able to measure the kinetics of formation and
depletion of the YZ( tyrosyl radical at each of the "S-state" transitions of the
oxygen evolving cycle. The kinetic isotope effects will be measured by repeating
these experiments in 2H2O-enriched buffer. The time dependence of the YZ EPR
lineshapes will be examined at each S-state transition to look for evidence of
magnetic interactions with the Mn cluster and/or conformational changes of the
tyrosyl radical. Electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) and electron
spin echo - electron nuclear double resonance (ESE-ENDOR) experiments will be
performed to further test recent models that postulate that YZ( acts directly to
abstract protons or hydrogen atoms from water ligands to the Mn cluster. These
experiments will greatly advance our knowledge of the structure and dynamics of
the Photosystem II reaction center. The experiments represent a state-of-the-art
merging of fast laser excitation with pulsed EPR methods and provide excellent
training opportunities for a number of graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers. %%% The Photosystem II component of the plant photosynthetic
apparatus utilizes light energy to strip electrons from water mo lecules, with
molecular oxygen released into the atmosphere as a fortunate byproduct. When
light is absorbed by a certain chlorophyll molecule designated P680, it
spontaneously transfers an electron to an adjacent pigment molecule. This light-
induced charge separation is the first step in converting light energy into
useful chemical energy. The resulting positively charged chlorophyll P+680
molecule has a strong affinity to regain an electron, and the electron comes
initially from a tyrosine amino acid residue of the surrounding protein. This
tyrosine residue, designated YZ, in turn pulls an electron from a small cluster
of manganese atoms where the water-splitting chemistry is thought to occur. Our
experiments will examine the magnetic properties of this YZ tyrosine during the
fast electron transfer events. Laser light pulses of only 3 billions of a second
duration will be combined with comparably short microwave pulses to measure the
changes of magnetic properties on this ultra-short timescale. The measurements
will be interpreted to understand the dynamics of this YZ tyrosine during
electron transfer. The goal is to test controversial new models that propose
that the YZ tyrosine pulls protons as well as electrons off water molecules
bound to the metal cluster. These experiments will greatly advance our knowledge
of the structure and dynamics of the Photosystem II reaction center. The
experiments represent a state-of-the art merging of fast laser excitation with
pulsed magnetic resonance methods and provide excellent training opportunities
for a number of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers. ***