* 9513751
* Characterization of a Translational Regulatory Particle fromXenopus Oocytes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Mary Murray, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 02/29/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9513751 Murray Nontranslated mRNAs are packaged by protein particles into
messenger ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs) in male and female germ cells.
Both the storage of these mRNAs and their correct temporal mobilization to
polyribosomes are required for germ cell differentiation and the earliest stages
of embryogenesis. This research will study the evolutionarily conserved protein
components of translationally regulated mRNPs. Translational regulation of
maternal and paternal mRNPs is likely to involve both general mRNP proteins and,
in some cases, sequence-specific mRNA-binding proteins dedicated to specific
mRNAs. The goal of this research project is to characterize the general mRNP
component and the mechanism by which it regulates translation of maternal mRNAs
in Xenopus laevis. This research will identify Xenopus oocyte protein particles
that inhibit in vitro translation of particle-bound mRNA. The translational
regulatory particle (TRP) will be purified, and its composition and activities
characterized. Its mechanism of translational inhibition will be determined by
analyzing TRP-mRNA interactions, and how this effects translational initiation.
We will also evaluate possible involvement of TRP in the translational
mobilization process. This analysis of Xenopus oocyte TRP will lead to an
understanding of an evolutionarily conserved process that is essential for germ
cell differentiation, fertility and early embryogenesis of many species,
including human. %%% Nontranslated mRNAs are inactive templates for protein
synthesis that are packaged by protein particles into messenger
ribonucleoprotein particles (mRNPs) in male and female germ cells, the
precursors to sperm and egg. Both the storage of these mRNAs and their correct
temporal mobilization to polyribosomes when they become active templates for
protein synthesis are required for development of the fertilized egg. The frog
Xenopus laevis is best suited for this analysis because of its reproductive
strategy of releasing thousands of eggs, and the high degree of evolutionary
conservation of some previously studied mRNP proteins to the mammalian proteins.
Xenopus oocyte (egg) protein particles that inhibit in vitro translation of
particle-bound mRNA will be identified, the translational regulatory particle
(TRP) purified, and its composition and activities characterized. Its mechanism
of inhibition of protein synthesis will be determined by analyzing TRP-mRNA
interactions, and how this effects translational initiation. We will also
evaluate possible involvement of TRP in the translational mobilization process.
This analysis of Xenopus oocyte TRP will lead to an understanding of an
evolutionarily conserved process that is essential for germ cell
differentiation, fertility and early embryo development of many species,
including human. ***