* 9513231
* Meiotic Crossing-Over:  How it Ensures Disjunction
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Dean Dawson, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 275,000.00

MCB-9513231 Dawson Haploid cells (e.g., eggs and sperm) are formed from diploid
cells by two rounds of chromosome distribution called meiosis. In the first
round, the two members of each homologous chromosome pair are drawn to opposite
poles. For each haploid cell to receive all the genetic information in the
proper number of copies, it is essential that this segregation of homologs be
accurate. In most eukaryotic organisms, meiotic exchange between homologous
chromosomes is required for this segregation to be successful. Mutants with
defects in meiotic recombination are frequently sterile or exhibit reduced
fertility. Meiotic crossovers serve to physically link homologs, and in
conjunction with an activity referred to as chiasma binder activity, hold the
homologs stably together until they are properly attached to the meiotic spindle
and migrate away from each other at anaphase I. Despite the importance of
crossovers in enhancing the fidelity of meiotic chromosome segregation, little
is known about the factors that influence the ability of crossovers to perform
their meiotic role. %%% The long term goal of the investigator's laboratory is
to contribute to a comprehensive understanding of the apparatus which utilizes
crossovers and other factors to keep homologs joined until anaphase I, thus
ensuring meiotic disjunction. These experiments will utilized the yeast
Saccharomyces cerevisiae as a research organism. The objective of this project
is to determine the characteristics of recombination events which do and so not
ensure the disjunction of YLps. Experiments will be performed to determine the
characteristics of crossovers with different abilities to enhance disjunction.
The chromosomal location of recombination eventq, t he sequences in which
crossovers occur, and the relationship of meiotic DSBs to the generation of
crossovers which ensure disjunction will be explored. The experiments are
designed to test four models that describe why crossovers are not equally able
to ensure disjunction. These models follow: 1. The ability of a crossover to
enhance segregation is influenced by its distance from the telomere, or 2. by
its distance from the centromere. 3. Some sequence environments allow nearby
crossovers to ensure disjunction while others do not. 4. The ability of a
crossover to ensure disjunction is related to the manner in which the crossover
is initiated. ***