* 9513622
* Microfabricated Thermoelectric Probes and Probe Arrays for  Highly Localized Temperature Sensing and Control
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Wanjun Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Individual probes and arrays of probes which take advantage of thermoelectric
principles to measure and modulate temperature on the cellular level will be
microfabricated with the LIGA process. The LIGA process is a German-developed
process which combines x-ray lithograpy,electrodeposition, and plastic molding.
Within the arrays, probes for temperature measurement and temperature modulation
will be interspersed according to the requirements for a specific process, and
all probes will be individually addressable. The devices will give the biologist
or bioengineer highly localized control of the temperature over large areas, or
monitor temperatures at many locations in the same volume. In addition to being
independent instruments for thermal and energetic studies of biological systems,
the probes and probe arrays can become basic components in instruments requiring
fine thermal control to assist in other investigations. Thermoelectric probes
for temperature measurement are based on the Seebeck effect, and in the form of
thermocouples are common sensor. The new development in this proposal will be
the microfabrication of arrays of thermocouples at the cellular level or over a
broad range of dimensions above that. Probes and probe arrays for temperature
modulation based on the Peltier effect will also be a new develcpment. Prior
applications of thermoelectric heating and cooling in microsystems have been
limited by material issues. Materials with a suitable figure of merit for use in
Peltier effect elements include bismuth and its alloys, which can be
electrodeposited as one step in the LIGA process, overcoming those constraints.
By taking advantage of the high aspect ratio microfabrication capabilities of
the LIGA process, probes combining Peltier and Seebeck capabilities can be
produced. The principal investigators and their collaborators are members of the
LSU Microsystems Engineering Team (IlSET), which is one of the leading groups in
LIGA process microfabrication in the United States. The team has the use of the
synchrotron x-ray source at the Center for Advanced Microstructures and Devices
(CAMD) at LSU, which is currently the premiere x-ray lithography facility in the
world. In related work, IlSET investigators have produced arrays of scanning
probe microscope (SPM) tips with initial diameters as small as 2 micrometers and
heights up to 15 micrometers. With the LIGA microfabrication process probes with
extremely high aspect ratios may be fabricated with single layers as deep as one
millimeter. The spacing and arrangement of the thermocouples on a substrate will
be a design variable open to change with each application. The proposed
instruments will give biologists and bioengineers powerful new tools for
studying and manipulating cellular systems. Three representative areas of
application are: (1 ) Cryobiology, (2) Neuroscience, (3) Metabolic studies of
cellular systems. The Pls have contacted and discussed applications and possible
collaboration in the first two areas with investigators in those fields.
Additional relationships will be developed as the design and fabrication of the
probes progresses.