* 9513189
* US-Czech Research on Plant Taphonomic Character of          Intermontane Carboniferous Floras
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1998
* Robert Gastaldo, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/1998
* USD 23,563.00

INT 9513189 Gastaldo This U.S.-Czech paleobotanical research project between
Robert Gastaldo of Auburn University and Zbynek Simunek of the Czech Geological
Survey will examine Carboniferous plants of the Bohemian Massif as represented
in geologic deposits of three intermontane basins of the Czech Republic. The
intent is to compare the characteristics of these deposition environments with
lowland coastal floras of peat swamps and clastic substrate plant assemblages
found in the Mississippian-Pennslyvanian stratotype section of the Appalachians
which are well known to the U.S. participants. The comparative work will draw
heavily upon a large fossil plant collection extracted from boreholes over past
decades by the Czech Geological Survey. The intent is to interpret these data
sets within dispositional context. Results of this cooperative study should
contribute to our knowledge of the taphonomic conditions of Carboniferous floras
in the intermontane basins of the United States. This is significant because
most Euramerican strata were subjected to wide-scale fluctuations in eustatic
sea level. In contrast, samples from the Bohemian Massif offer examples of
continuous disposition within intermontane basins. A comparative understanding
of the sedimentological and floras aspects in these basins is expected to yield
valuable new information on paleoclimate change and vegetational responses
during an area spanning the Namurian (Late Mississippian) into the Autunian
(Late Pennsylvanian-Early Permian). This will provide an opportunity to assess
Carboniferous vegetation change over this geological interval in a setting
outside coastal influences. Additionally, results may provide practical insights
concerning the origin of sulfur and ash in coal beds as well as coal bed methane
potential in intermontane basins, in general. This project in paleobotany and
paleoenvironmental research fulfills the program objective of advancing basic
scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in the United States and
Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and pool research resources in
areas of mutual interest and competence. ??