* 9513863
* Proteasomes in the Methanogenic Archea
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/2000
* James Ferry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Hector E. Flores
* 08/31/2000
* USD 255,000.00

9513863 Ferry Proteasomes are prevalent in the Eucarya domain where they have at
least three distinct endopeptidase activities which catalyze hydrolysis of
peptide bonds on the carboxyl side of hydrophobic, basic, and acidic amino acid
residues. It is proposed that the eukaryotic proteasome is the "catalytic core"
in a larger complex that degrades proteins labeled with ubiquitin in an ATP-
dependent process. A earlier survey of species from the Bacteria and Archaea
domains led to the suggestion that Thermoplasma species are the only prokaryotes
containing proteasomes. Recent documentation of proteasomes in phylogenetically
and physiologically diverse species of methanogenic microbes, the largest group
in the Archaea, demonstrates that proteasomes are more widespread among
prokaryotes than previously known. The overall focus of this work is an
investigating into the physiology, biochemistry and molecular biology of protein
turnover in this large group of anaerobic microbes. The specific aims of this
project are: (1) biochemically characterize the Methanosarcina thermophila
proteasome, and (2) address its physiological function by ascertaining the
factors influencing the regulation of proteasome synthesis and activity, and
determining the roles for the proteasome and ubiquitin in protein turnover. The
results are expected to: (1) expand the fundamental knowledge of the evolution,
mechanism and function of ubiquitin and proteasomes in all of nature, (2)
provide a broader understanding of the biochemistry, genetics and physiology of
M. thermophila and the methanogenic Archaea, and (3) help to further define the
evolutionary relationships between the Archaea and Eucarya domains. %%%
Proteasomes are complex enzyme aggregates that mediate protein breakdown in
eukaryotic cells. Recently, proteasomes have been identified in archaebacteria,
one of the two major groups of prokaryotes. In this project, the molecular
structure of proteasomes from a methane-producing bacterium, Methanosarcina
thermophila will be studied. In addition, the function of these structures will
be investigated. The results will provide evidence about evolutionary
relationships among major groups of organisms as well as information about how
archaebacteria regulate degradation of their proteins, an unexplored area. ***