* 9513843
* US-Indo Binational Workshop on Classical and Quantam GravityPune, Dec. 13-19, 1995,  Award in US and Indian Currency.
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Jorge Pullin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 10/31/1996
* USD 15,300.00

9513843 Ashtekar Description: This proposal requests support for the "US-Indo
Binational Workshop on Classical and Quantum Gravity", to be held at the Inter-
University Centre for Astronomy and Astrophysics (IUCAA), Pune, December 13-19,
1995. The workshop organizers are Professor Abhay Ashtekar and Post-doc Jorge
Pullin of the Center for Gravitational Physics and Geometry, Penn State
University, and J.V. Narlikar, Director of IUCAA. This workshop will take
advantage of India's distinguished tradition in general relativity as well as
their significant investments in radio and optical astronomy which recently have
stimulated further research in general relativity, astrophysics and cosmology.
Rapid progress in the interface of general relativity with astrophysics,
cosmology, particle physics, quantum theory and certain branches of mathematics
has added to the number of directions of active research. The workshop will
bring US participants together with key Indian scientists working in
gravitational physics with the aim of developing collaborative links between
research groups in the US and India in well-defined areas of gravitational
physics. Scope: The event will be hosted by the IUCAA and is supported by the
Department of Science and Technology. US scientists will have a unique
opportunity to gain direct knowledge about the research being carried out by
first-rate Indian scientists and to meet next generation leaders. Considering
the calibre of young Indian scientists now working in this field, there is a
high probability that even more important contributions will arise from
collaborative efforts with the US scientists. ***