* 9513214
* Solution Structure of the E. coli Homologue of the Signal   Recognition Particle
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Uli Schmitz, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1999
* USD 260,000.00

9513214 Schmitz In mammalian cells, protein translocation across the endoplasmic
reticulum is facilitated by the signal recognition particle (SRP). Upon
recognizing a specific signal sequence, SRP essentially shuts down the ribosome
by forming a tight complex. Once the latter has been positioned on its receptor
in the membrane, SRP dissociates from the ribosome which can then secrete the
new protein across the membrane. Mammalian SRP is comprised of six proteins and
one large RNA molecule. One domain in the RNA has been found to be
phylogenetically conserved over a wide range of species. Furthermore, the
protein that interacts with this domain, SRP54 is also involved in recognizing
the peptide signal sequence. A homologue of SRP54 has been found in E.coli which
also exhibits a two domain structure. The domain which interacts with the RNA
and the signal sequence can be expressed alone and binds efficiently to shorter
versions of the SRP RNA hairpin exhibiting two bulged regions. We will determine
the solution structure of a 24 nucleotide hairpin involving one of bulged region
and a 43 nucleotide hairpin with both bulges. Ultimately, we will study the
structural changes in the RNA concomitant to binding to the E. coli SRP54
fragment. Methods will involve multidimensional heteronuclear NMR and molecular
dynamics refinement methods. The ultimate goal is to understand the RNA protein
interactions in SRP on a molecular, structural level. %%% All proteins are
manufactured on ribosomes which reside inside of the cell. However, a large
number of these proteins is utilized throughout the body and must therefore be
translocated across the cell walls. Efficiency and accuracy of protein
translocation is essential for all higher organizms and a disturbance in these
processes can lead to many different diseases, including cancer. Some of the key
cellular players in the protein translocation process have been identified
including a large particle called the signal recognition particle. Its fu nction
is to recognize if a protein belongs across the membrane by examining the first
part of the new molecular as it is synthesized on the ribosome. In the case of a
trans-membrane protein the particle will turned off the ribosome, helps it find
the whole in the cell membrane and protein secretion through the membrane can
start. At present we know virtually nothing about how these complex interactions
involving proteins and RNA molecular occur on a molecular level. Our main goal
is therefore to determine three-dimensional pictures of some of the involved
parts of RNA and protein molecules as they exist in solution . We will compare
the structures of the molecules when they are alone and when they are
interaction with each other. This will help identify the crucial parts of the
molecules that are essential for these interaction and hopefully reveal unique
schemes that can be recognized in other processes as well. ***