* 9513608
* A Multiple Beam Optical Trapping Microscope
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Steven Block, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

This proposal would fund an advanced optical trapping microscope facility. The
recent success of one- and two-beam optical traps in cell biology has led to
breakthroughs in our understanding of how biological motors work, and provided
scientists with unprecedented means of micromanipulation. The time is ripe to
extend the utility of optical trapping in interdisciplinary directions,
particularly towards the interface of molecular biology and materials science,
to address outstanding problems in such areas as biophysics and nanotechnology.
The Multiple Beam Optical Trapping (MBOT) microscope is a versatile, third-
generation device, designed ab initio for micromanipulation and micromechanical
measurement. It will be capable of generating several simultaneous trapping
beams under computer control, each equipped with independent controls, and will
incorporate position sensors to detect displacements of objects down to the
subnanometer level. The beams can be alternately configured to grasp,
manipulate. develop tension, determine position, image, or, in feedback mode, to
measure force. Aspects of the microscope hardware will be linked to
microprocessors that will control the operation, collect data, and perform image
processing.. A set of four auxiliary microscopes will constitute an integral
part of the overall facility, serving double-duty as teaching tools and as test
beds for prototyping and developing equipment destined for the central
microscope, as well as to explore new approaches to imaging and optical
trapping. A key feature of multiple independent traps is that they permit two or
more objects to be freely manipulated, oriented, and juxtaposed in all three
dimensions, without necessarily passing laser light directly through the objects
themselves, which might not tolerate the exposure. In addition, experimental
geometries can be achieved that are quite impossible with conventional, single-
or double-beam optical tweezers. A way to generate multiple traps and avoid
optical interference effects is to time share the traps. In this scheme, all
traps are produced by a single laser beam that is scanned rapidly among
different positions, pausing at those locations where traps are desired. A
prototype for this concept was developed in the Netherlands, where galvanometer
mirrors were used to scan the beam. The MBOT design calls for the use of
acousto-optic beam deflectors to achieve faster scan rates with inherently less
jitter. Among the potential uses of the MBOT instrument are: (1) Single-motor
motility assays, to measure the tiny stepwise displacements and forces produced
by individual mechanoenzymes, such as kinesin and myosin, as well as those
produced by processive nucleic acid enzymes, such as RNA polymerase; (2)
Picotensiometry, to measure the molecular elasticity of biopolymers such as
microtubules and actin filaments, as well as the micromechanical properties of
biomimetic and other novel materials; (3) Optical force microscopy (OFM), a
promising variation of scanned-probe microscopy that uses an optically-trapped
stylus to obtain images under physiological conditions with a resolution
exceeding that possible with the conventional light microscope; (4)
Characterization of coupling forces involved in protein receptor-ligand binding,
cell-cell and cell-substrate recognition, and RNA/DNA base-pairing; and (5)
Creation of miniature hybrid devices consisting of both biological components
(cells, microtubules, enzymes) and synthetic components (glass, silicon, etc.)
on rnicrofabricated chips. As proposed, the instrument would be jointly funded
by the .NSF and a private foundation, and housed in the Princeton Materials
Institute. It is anticipated that the MBOT facility will serve as a catalyst to
stimulate a range of interdisciplinary studies on rnicrostructures and
nanodynamics.