* 9513846
* Provasoli-Guillard Center for Culture of Marine             Phytoplankton
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Robert Andersen, Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,125,409.00

9513846 Anderson This award provides renewed support for the algae collection at
the Provasoli-Guillard Center for Culture of Marine Phytoplankton (PGC) at the
Bigelow Laboratory. The PGC formally established in 1980, and was designated a
National Center and Facility by Act of Congress in 1992. The collection
maintained by the PGC is a unique resource for the study of marine algae,
especially those found in the open ocean. Approximately 1450 cultures consisting
mainly of well-identified organisms in pure culture are propagated by serial
transfer in liquid or on agar. The PGC currently sends about 1000 cultures a
year to public and private sector researchers in the U.S. and abroad. There is a
small charge for each culture. Funds raised through sales amount to about 25% of
the total budget and are used for collection activities, including purchase and
maintenance of equipment, and purchase of materials and supplies. The collection
is managed by a part-time Director, with the assistance of a curator and
assistant curator. Oversight is provided by an external advisory committee which
meets annually to advise the Director of the Collection and the CEO of the
Bigelow Laboratory. The committee has a formal charter describing its duties and
provisions for appointing new members as current members expire. Funds provided
through this award are largely devoted to staff salaries, purchase of equipment
and part of the costs of the annual advisory committee meeting. ***