* 9513979
* Genetic Applications of a Phage Exclusion System
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Loren Snyder, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9513979 Snyder Many plasmids and prophages exclude superinfecting phages by
killing the host cell to prevent multiplication of the phage. The DNA element
el4 is a defective prophage of E. coli K12 that excludes T4 and related phages
by encoding a zinc metalloprotease that cleaves translation elongation factor Tu
(EF-Tu) after infection. Cleavage of EF-Tu blocks cellular translation and
prevents development of the phage. The protease is normally inactive, but is
activated after infection by a short peptide determinant of only 25 amino acids
internal to the major head protein of the infecting phage. Part of this grant is
to begin to determine the mechanism of activation of the Lit protease which may
serve as a prototype for signal transduction in other systems. The protease can
be activated in crude extracts by the chemically synthesized peptide from the
major head protein, making it possible to study the activation in vitro. This
work will require purifying the protease to determine if any other factors are
required, and determining whether the activating peptide binds to the protease
or to EF-Tu. Clues to the mechanism of activation will come from an analysis of
what amino acids in the protease are required for its activity and activation,
and what amino acids in the peptide are required for the activation. Mutants in
the protease and the peptide will be obtained both by site-specific mutagenesis
and by directly selecting mutants defective in the activation. Other proteins
may be cleaved by the protease since the amino acid sequence surrounding the
site of cleavage of EF-Tu has been conserved throughout evolution and is also
similar in other translation factors and in Gproteins in general. In addition,
the role of the peptide coding region in the major head protein gene of T4 will
be studied. This region of the major head protein gene seems to play a special
regulatory role, greatly increasing the expression of downstream genes in
transcriptional fusions. Experiments will establish whether thi s region is an
transcription antiterminator, or acts by some other mechanism. If the region is
an antiterminator, as seems most likely, the minimum sequence required for
antiterminator activity will be determined, as well as the role of specific
sequences and the function of translation in activating the antiterminator
activity. Finally, the ability of this system to specifically inactivate Ef-Tu
in vivo will be used to investigate the function of EF-Tu in the cell, including
the proposed mechanism for the generation of ppGpp and a possible more direct
role for EF-Tu in ribosomal RNA synthesis. Many types of cells make highly
specific enzymes that kill cells in response to virus infection to prevent the
spread of the virus to other cells. Components of the translation appparatus
that synthesizes proteins is often the favored target of these enzymes because
these are among the most highly conserved cellular constituents. Some of these
enzymes are already finding applications in cell biology and biotechnology.
Bacteria are known to make a number of enzymes that kill the cell in reponse to
virus infection, but the molecular target of most of most of these enzymes is
not understood. These studies should determine how the EF-Tu specific enzyme is
activated by a peptide, anticipating that this mechanism will be used in other
types of cells. These studies will also determine the potential of the EF-Tu
specific protease in studying how cells regulate the expression of their genes.
??