* 9513935
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Optimal Generation of Elastic Waves in Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Fu-Kuo Chang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 05/31/2000
* USD 19,950.00

This award supports Professor Fu-Kuo Chang and three graduate students from
Stanford University to collaborate in mechanical engineering research with
Professor Peter Hagedorn and his colleagues and students of the Mechanics
Institute of the Technische Hochschule of Darmstadt, Germany. They are studying
ultrasonic elastic wave propagation in a structure, where the waves are
generated by piezoelectrics (PZT) built into the structure. The U.S. team uses
PZT-generated waves to detect damage in functioning structures made of composite
materials. The German team is particularly interested in the propagation of such
waves as an aspect of the design of advanced ultrasound motors. The cooperating
groups will be involved both in experiments using surface-mounted and embedded
piezoceramics and in developing the analytical models of these systems. Because
of the complementarity of their interests and approaches, both groups should
benefit from this coordinated joint research. Early detection of service-induced
damage in structures such as airplanes and bridges plays an essential role in
prolonging the lifespan of the structures and in providing safe use of the
structures. Clearly damage detection techniques must be non-destructive and
ideally they should be convenient to perform on-site during routine maintenance.
Ultrasonic wave generation is a promising new approach to this diagnostic
process. The results of the proposed cooperative research will improve
fundamental understanding of piezo-induced ultrasound propagation, and it will
provide the basis for tailoring the production of ultrasonic waves for specific
applications by means of controlling the piezo electrics.