* 9513892
* Renal Function in Vertebrates
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* William Dantzler, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 02/29/2000
* USD 220,225.00

9513892 Dantzler This project involves comparative studies of kidney function in
vertebrates. The studies emphasize the general area of transport by the kidney
tubules (the primary functioning units in the kidney), particularly of organic
substances, and the regulation of excretion of ions and water. Within these
broad areas, the investigations will involve continuations of studies on: 1) the
mechanisms and regulation of kidney tubular transport of negatively charged
organic substances (organic anions), primarily p-aminohippurate (PAH),
fluorescein, and urate, and positively charged organic substances (organic
cations), primarily tetraethylammonium (TEA); 2) the regulation of intracellular
pH (pHi), especially as it relates to the transport of organic anions and
cations; and 3) the mechanisms and regulation of the kidney tubular reabsorption
of filtered fluid. These studies concentrate on reptilian kidneys, with their
simple renal tubule structure, and on avian kidneys, with their kidney tubules
ranging from simple, superficial reptilian-like ones to deep, complex mammalian-
like ones. The kidney tubular transport of organic substances plays a
particularly important role in eliminating urate (the major excretory end
product of nitrogen metabolism in birds and most reptiles) and many toxic
exogenous substances and in regulating the concentrations of important
endogenous substances. The cellular steps in transport and the tubular sites of
transport of these organic substances show considerable variation in reptiles
and birds and may relate to the types of renal tubules and their function in the
transport of other organic substances and ions and water. The regulation of
intracellular pH, which may be quite different in reptilian and avian renal
tubules, may play an important role in determining the transport of these
organic substances. The regulation of net tubular reabsorption of filtered fluid
is essential to maintaining normal fluid balance. It appears to show variations
in the different t ubule populations in the avian kidney and this may relate to
differences in filtration rate and its regulation. The coupling of fluid
reabsorption to solute reabsorption may differ significantly between reptilian
and avian kidney tubules and among populations of avian kidney tubules and this
coupling may relate to changes in filtration rate as well as the elimination of
organic substances. The approach to these studies will involve work primarily
with isolated perfused and nonperfused renal tubules and will take advantage of
quantitative optical techniques as well as isotopic techniques to evaluate rates
of transport, intracellular transport steps, and intracellular pH. Evaluation of
the process of fluid reabsorption will involve direct qualitative and
quantitative measurements of the fluid being reabsorbed. The results should
supply significant information on the mechanisms and regulation of kidney tubule
transport of organic molecules and the reabsorption of fluid and how these
processes relate to structural and other functional differences in reptilian and
avian kidneys. The information obtained will help in understanding how these
species survive in hostile environments and the ways in which their kidneys help
them deal with current and potential environmental toxins. ***