* 9513512
* Mechanism and Function in Nitrogenase
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,12/31/1999
* James Howard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 12/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9513512 Howard Nitrogenase is a two-protein component enzyme which mediates both
electron transfer between the two proteins (Fe-protein and Mo-Fe protein) and
ATP hydrolysis, which provides the energy for the electron transfer. Fe-protein
has a strong secondary structural motif similar to G-proteins and Ras which
suggests that Fe-protein functions as a nucleotide-dependent switch. The
important distinction is that Fe-protein is competent for electron transfer to
MoFe-protein only in the complex and during ATP hydrolysis. The objective of
this proposal is to develop methods to stabilize the complex by trapping the
transition from ATP to ADP states. Mutagenesis and kinetic analyses with
nucleotide analogues provide a rational approach based upon the nucleotide
switch model. Specific questions to be addressed are: l. What is the location of
the electron in the AlF4- ADP complex of Avl and Av2? 2. Can electron transfer
be trapped in one of the redox clusters of the complex? 3. What are the amino
acid residues that stabilize the transition state during the electron transfer
step? %%% Nitrogen fixation is the process whereby atmospheric nitrogen gas is
converted to the biologically important form, ammonia. The latter is
incorporated into all major classes of biomolecules and, hence, is a required
component of all living systems. How this process is performed by the
nitrogenase enzyme has both practical and general biological importance. For
example, nitrogenase is able to catalyze the reaction at 30 C and normal
atmospheric pressure while the industrial process requires a hundred times the
normal atmospheric pressure and elevated temperature. Understanding details of
the enzyme catalysis portends more efficient and therefore more cheaply abundant
ammonia for fertilizer. The nitrogenase reaction involves the transfer, one at a
time, of electrons between the component proteins. Concomitant with the electron
transfer, 2 ATP are hydrolyzed (broken down) to provide the energy for the
transfer. It is the coupling of the two events that controls the overall
chemical reaction. Based upon the elegant x-ray crystal structures of the two
nitrogenase proteins, we noted that the electron donor component (Fe-protein)
had a striking structural similarity to other nucleotide-dependent switch
proteins such as those involved in muscle contraction, metabolic regulation
associated with tumor initiation and others. In all of these molecules, the role
of the nucleotide is to stabilize specific protein conformations; the
conformation switches as the nucleotide is hydrolyzed. The hypothesis that a
conformational "gate" in nitrogenase is opened during ATP hydrolysis that allows
the electron to move from one site to another will be tested by trapping the
proteins in the conformation where the gate is momentarily open. Because of the
similarity between the nitrogenase protein and the proteins involved in the
other biological processes, these results should help to elucidate the
mechanisms of these other systems as well. ***