* 9513041
* U.S.-Mexico Workshop:  Collaborative Long-term Research     Across North American Biomes, May 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Terry Yates, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 03/31/1998
* USD 27,180.00

9513041 Yates This Americas Program award will fund travel and related expenses
for eight U.S. scientists to participate in a workshop on International Ecology
and Biodiversity. The workshop will consist of two meetings, one in Puerto
Vallarta, Mexico and the second one in the U.S. at the Sevilleta Long-Term
Ecological Research site at the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge in New
Mexico. The primary objectives are to establish new collaborations between
researchers from the U.S. and Mexico and to open new directions for
international research. Holding meetings at the two sites will allow the
participants to gain a much better understanding of the ecological diversity
represented across the North American continent. The second meeting will be held
a few months after the first to provide time for consideration of discussions
from the first meeting, and facilitate better and more rapid proposal
development at the second meeting. Variation and diversity are essential
elements in the maintenance of population, species, communities, ecosystems and
the entire biosphere. Biological systems serve as a buffer against dramatic
change, and are critical to ecosystem maintenance, but despite this important
function, species are being lost and ecosystems altered at an ever increasing
rate. Much of the observed changes on local scales are the results of larger
scale problems, such as global change. The solutions to these problems will
require international cooperation and research on multiple scales. This project
will contribute to the development of an international network of scientists
interested in researching these problems in the North American continent. ***