* 9513366
* Molecular and Genetic Analysis of the COP9 Complex, A Novel Light-Regulated Developmental Regulator in Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Xing-Wang Deng, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* linda hyman
* 03/31/2001
* USD 590,450.00

9513366 Deng Signals from the environment are perceived by specific regulatory
receptors in plants, and transduced and integrated with developmental signals to
control growth and development. The long term goal of this research is to
dissect the molecular mechanisms by which such signals are transduced and
integrated to modulate plant development by using light-regulated seedling
development of Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system. Ten pleiotropic
COP/DET/FUS loci have been identified, which when mutated fail to suppress the
photomorphogenic development in darkness and result in dark-grown seedlings
phenocopying the light-grown siblings. One of the ten loci, COP9 locus, has been
cloned and found to encode a novel, ubiquitously expressed 23 kDa protein. It
was demonstrated that COP9 acts as a subunit in a large (560kDa) multiple
subunit complex, which is nuclear localized and whose conformation is probably
modulated by light. The results suggest that the COP9 complex defines a step in
the nexus of the network mediating light control of seedling development. To
further characterize the structure of the complex and its functional role in the
network mediating light control of plant development, the next stage of
investigation will focus on accomplishing two major goals: 1) cloning of the
genes and biochemical characterization of the subunits of the complex and 2)
understanding the biochemical and cellular basis of the function of the COP9
complex function and its molecular interaction with other components in the
light regulatory network. %%% Accomplishment of the proposed investigation will
ascertain the nature of a critical regulatory complex that links light and
possibly other signals to seedling development and could provide novel insights
into the relationships between regulatory components of the network of elements
affecting light control of plant development. ***