* 9513933
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Chemical           Determinants of an Operational RNA Code for Amino Acids
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Paul Schimmel, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 04/30/1998
* USD 21,000.00

This award supports graduate students and other junior members of the research
group of Professor Paul Schimmel at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to
collaborate in biochemical genetics research with Professor Volker Erdmann and
members of his research group at the Institute of Biochemistry of the Free
University of Berlin, Germany. They are investigating the early development of
the genetic code, by studying the chemical groups which are functional
determinants of the operational RNA code for the amino acid alanine. Their joint
effort on the alanine system benefits from the complementary expertise of the
German group in chemical synthesis and characterization of novel RNA molecules
combined with the expertise of the U.S. group in functional analysis of
aminoacyl transfer RNA synthetases. The genetic code is an algorithm which
specifies a relationship between trinucleotides and amino acids. This universal
code is established by a process that attaches a specific transfer RNA (tRNA) to
a given amino acid, and the process in turn is catalyzed by a group of twenty
enzymes known as aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. These enzymes are believed to be
among the earliest proteins to emerge from an RNA world to establish the genetic
code. This collaborative work will improve understanding of these very
fundamental steps that led to the assembly of the genetic code.