* 9513091
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Single, Double, and Triple Photoionization and Photoexcitation in Alkali Metals, Rare  Gases, and Negative Ions
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Ivan Sellin, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/2000
* USD 29,250.00

9513091 Sellin This award supports a three-year cooperative research project
between Prof. Ivan A. Sellin of the University of Tennessee at Knoxville, and
Prof. Yoshiro Azuma of the Photon Factory, KEK National Laboratory for High
Energy Physics, Tsukuba, Japan. The collaborators assembled also include other
faculty, postdocs, and graduate students from the University of Tennessee as
well as from the Photon Factory, the University of Tokyo, and Meisei University.
Initially, the joint research will concentrate on interpreting new data on the
properties of multiply excited, "hollow" atomic states of lithium and other
simple atoms resonantly excited by synchrotron radiation at the Photon Factory,
the first among which was obtained just before the submission of the present
proposal. Subsequently, studies of the corresponding photoelectron production
and their energy and angular distributions will be undertaken, utilizing new
time-of-flight spectrometers and a cylindrical mirror analyzer equipped with
position-sensitive detection electronics and associated software newly developed
at the University of Tennessee. As it is anticipated that a significant fraction
of the proposed studies will be carried out at the Brookhaven, Lawrence
Berkeley, and Argonne National Laboratories in the US in addition to further
work at the Photon Factory utilizing dye laser equipment recently acquired there
for use in joint laser- and synchrotron- radiation excitation experiments, the
objectives of the US- Japan program in facilitating the exchange and transfer of
scientific knowledge through genuinely bilateral international collaboration are
likely. ***