* 9513390
* RUI:  Conformation Analysis of Proteinaceous Bioadhesives
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2002
* Marion Olivieri, D'Youville College
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/2002
* USD 153,676.00

9513390 Olivieri This study seeks to elucidate the molecular structure(s)
associated with the physical-chemical mechanism(s) whereby proteins bind to
solid surfaces. To achieve the specific aim of the current proposal it is
necessary to obtain data that will assist in the calculation of the three
dimensional structures of known bioadhesives. Specifically, MAP extracted from
the Blue Sea Mussel, (Mytilus edulis) will provide the model compounds. MAP is
composed of 75(85 repeating decapeptide units with the primary sequence NH2-A-K-
P-S-Y-HYP-HYP-T-DOPA-K-COOH (Waite et al., 1985). Since MAP is active at
interfaces, it is therefore important to study its behavior while adsorbed to a
surface. Solid-state techniques, such as multiple attenuated internal
reflectance infrared (MAIR-IR) spectroscopy, ellipsometry, contact angle
analysis, and solution-state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy,
already have given some structural information about these peptides' abilities,
but have not been used to their fullest potential. These techniques, in addition
to crystallization efforts, will be employed to study the decameric repeat unit
in addition to other MAP protein fragments (e.g., +NH3-proline-serine-tyrosine-
hydroxyproline-hydroxyproline-thereonine-tyrosine-lysine-alanine-lysine-proline-
serine-tryosine-hydroxyproline-COOH, and +NH3-proline-serine-tyrosine-
hydroxyproline-hydroxyproline-threonine-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine-lysine-
alanine-lysine-proline-serine-tyrosine-hydroxyproline-COOH). Data will be
collected for the MAP peptides in both the solid-and solution-states, with the
information compiled to create molecular models of the peptides. The first step
of structure elucidation will be to use NMR data to create solution-state
models. The variety of solid-state techniques would then be used to characterize
the molecular changes that are responsible for the bioadhesion process. %%% The
PI has worked to combine research with teaching. She takes her teaching
responsibilities very s eriously, and is dedicated toward providing a learning
environment for students that is thorough, yet inviting. The variety of courses
the PI has taught at D'YC reflects her multi-disciplinary background
(Introduction to Computers, Statistics, Biochemistry, General Chemistry I-II,
Student Research I-II, and Chemistry for the Health Sciences II). She has
prepared a 80+ page hand-out of lecture notes for the biochemistry class has co-
authored a manual for the Chemistry for Health Sciences Laboratory and is
working on a manual for the Biochemistry laboratory. To increase availability to
the students, she conducts study sessions and distributes her home telephone
number. Some students have attributed some of success to hand-outs distributed,
graded homework and oral presentation assignments. A Biomaterials course will be
developed that introduces implantology and describes the methods for choosing
and characterizing materials for specific biological applications. The PI has
already developed several new laboratory exercises for her biochemistry
laboratory course and will prepare additional exercises that combine science
disciplines. ***