* 9513023
* A Phosphorimager for Analyses of the Molecular Genetics of  Signal Transduction, DNA Replication and Gene Expression
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1996
* Janet Hearing, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Karl A. Koehler
* 12/31/1996
* USD 52,622.00

A multi-user group proposes to purchase a phosphorimager for the rapid,
sensitive, and accurate detection and quantitation of radioactive and
chemiluminescent species in analyses of the molecular genetics of signal
transduction, DNA replication, and gene expression. Specific projects include
analysis of the mechanism by which DNA replication is initiated in eukaryotic
cells and how this process is regulated; the mechanism of activation of Ras
proteins by receptor tyrosine kinases and the identification of downstream
targets of activated Ras proteins; the dissection of protein-protein
interactions that regulate transcription of genes in eukaryotic cells by RNA
polymerase II; testing models for the structure of large RNA molecules and
determination of the ways in which RNA structure can influence gene expression,
and exploration of signal transduction pathways involved in cell growth and
development. Specific applications that will utilize the phosphorimager include
in vivo radiolabelling of proteins; determination of protein half-life; analysis
of protein posttranslational modificatimns, subcellular localization and
oligomeric states; analysis of protein-protein, protein-nucleic acid, and
intranucleic acid interactions; analysis of transcriptional control elements;
analysis of in vivo and in vitro DNA replication products. The results of these
studies will significantly extend our understanding of basic cellular processes.