* 9513904
* U.S.-Germany Collaborative Research on Magnetic Bolometers  for Particle Detection
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,09/30/2002
* George Seidel, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 09/30/2002
* USD 16,800.00

This award supports George Seidel and junior members of his research group at
Brown University to collaborate in materials research with Professor Siegfried
Hunklinger and his group from the Institute of Applied Physics of the University
of Heidelberg. The objective of their research is to develop cryogenic particle
detectors. Both groups are actively studying low temperature calorimetric
detection of particles using the magnetization of localized spins in metals for
the sensing element. They will coordinate their efforts to determine which
materials will make the best magnetic sensors and under what conditions. The
special microstructure fabrication facility at the University of Heidelberg will
be used to create the integrated systems. Brown University is better equipped to
investigate particle interactions in solids as they apply to the performance of
the calorimetric particle detectors. There has been a rapid growth of interest
over the past decade in the development of particle detectors that operate at
low temperatures, because such conditions offer the potential for very large
increases in sensitivity and resolution. Such detectors have a variety of
applications in astronomy and physics. These collaborating investigators have
calculated that the performance of detectors based on the technology of magnetic
bolometry is superior to existing devices, but little work has been done
experimentally to demonstrate this potential. Because of the broad range of
materials to be investigated, and of the complexity of facilities required for
the fabrication and testing of samples, the proposed collaboration offers
substantial benefits of efficiency and cost reduction.