* 9513229
* Laser Flash Studies of Bacterial Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* William Parson, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2000
* USD 367,000.00

9513229 Parson This proposal describes experimental and theoretical studies of
photosynthetic bacterial reaction centers, with a focus on reaction centers that
have been modified by site-directed mutagenesis. Amino acid substitutions that
are likely to alter the energies of the initial radical-pair states or modify
the reaction center's spectroscopic properties have been chosen on the basis of
electrostatics calculations. The major targets for mutagenesis are four aspartic
acid residues and three arginines, which will be replaced by amino acids with
nonionizable or oppositely charged side chains. Effects of the mutations on the
spectroscopic properties of the reaction center and on the midpoint potential
(Em ) of the primary electron donor (P) will be examined. To study the
photosynthetic electron-transfer reactions, mutant and wild-type reaction
centers will be excited with flashes of light lasting about 15 fs. The excited
state of P and radical-pair states created by charge separation will be probed
by measuring the optical absorption and stimulated emission with a second pulse
of light at various times after the excitation. These studies will explore how
the mutations affect the relaxation dynamics of the excited state, the rate and
temperature dependence of the electron-transfer reactions, and the stabilities
and free energies of the radical-pair states. Neutron scattering also will be
used to study the temperature dependence of nuclear motions in reaction centers.
The theoretical studies will include calculations of the free energies of
radical-pair states, spectroscopic properties and Em values in mutant and native
reaction centers, using a microscopic treatment of dielectric effects.
Comparisons of calculated and measured properties will be used to refine and
test the theoretical methods, and thus to increase the reliability of
calculations of properties that are important for an understanding of the
electron-transfer reactions but are not directly accessible experimentally. Tim
e-dependent fluctuations of the calculated energies will be examined by
molecular-dynamics simulations and will be related to the kinetics of electron
transfer. %%% This project concerns pigment-protein complexes termed "reaction
centers," which carry out the initial reactions that plants and photosynthetic
bacteria use t o capture the energy of sunlight. Dr. Parson's studies will focus
on bacterial reaction centers that have been modified genetically to alter the
energies of the transient states created by light. The modifications have been
chosen from theoretical considertions based on the reaction center's structure.
The major targets for mutagenesis are seven amino acids with electrically
charged side chains, which will be replaced by amino acids with neutral or
oppositely charged side chains. Effects of the mutations on the reaction
center's optical absorption spectrum and on the electrochemical properties of
the pigments will be examined. To study the photosynthetic electron-transfer
reactions, mutant and wild-type reaction centers will be excited with flashes of
light lasting about 15 femtoseconds. (A femtosecond is one millionth of a
billionth of a second.) The very short-lived states generated by the light pulse
will be probed by passing a second pulse of light through the sample at various
time after the excitation. These studies will explore how the mutations affect
the rate and temperature-dependence of the electron-transfer reactiions. Neutron
scattering also will be used to study the temperature dependence of nuclear
motions in reaction centers. Parallel theoretical studies will include
calculations of the energies of the transient states in mutant and native
reaction centers. Comparisons of calclated and measured properties will be used
to refine and test the theoretical methods, and thus to increase the reliability
of calculations of properties that are important for an understanding of the
electron-transfer reactions but are not directly accessible experimentally. ***