* 9513722
* RUI:  Structure/Function Studies of Alpha 1,3-              Fucosyltransferases
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Bruce Macher, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 07/31/1999
* USD 257,500.00

9513722 Macher Human alpha-l,3 fucosyltransferases (alpha-l,3FTs) are
biologically important enzymes which catalyze the final step in the synthesis of
adhesion molecules and important antigens. In spite of their important
functions, very little biochemical information exists on these proteins beyond a
predicted amino acid sequence and the identification of a limited set of
naturally occurring mutants. The goal of the proposed research is to obtain
information on the biochemistry of this class of enzymes, with the ultimate aim
of identifying amino acids within these proteins that are involved in substrate
binding and catalysis. This proposal focusses on the features of these proteins
that lead to the strict acceptor specificity of each individual alpha-l,3FT.
Preliminary results with FucT III and V demonstrate that truncated forms of
these proteins, differing at 21/300 amino acids, maintain their unique substrate
specificities. Domain swapping experiments have been done to obtain a better
definition of which of the 21 amino acids are involved in defining the distinct
specificity of these two enzymes. Additional domain swap and site-directed
mutagenesis experiments are proposed to more precisely define the amino acids
that are involved in acceptor substrate recognition. An analysis of the
disulfide bonding pattern of the FucTs will be done by mass spectrometric
analysis. These studies will provide information on the spatial relationships of
different portions of the coding regions of these enzymes. The information
obtained from the combination of molecular biology, biochemistry and protein
analysis will provide detailed information on this family of
glycosyltransferases and this information will generate a model which can be
utilized to design future studies of these important proteins. It is clear from
studies of other enzymes (e.g., proteases) that the fundamental biochemical
information obtained from the proposed experiments in this application is
necessary to answer basic questions about al pha-l,3FTs and glycosyltransferases
in general. %%% Proteins are one of the many important biological molecules that
are produced by cells of all organisms. Some proteins are important as
structural components, whereas others function as biological catalysts. In this
project the objective is to obtain detailed information about a protein that is
a member of a class of enzymes involved in the synthesis of complex carbohydrate
molecules. All enzymes bind substrates, or reactants, and increase the rate of a
chemical reaction. In addition, enzymes provide the information for the
specificity of the chemical reaction. A major goal of scientific investigation
is to understand how proteins bind specific compounds and catalyze reactions.
This research will use biochemical and molecular biological approaches to
investigate these aspects of a family of enzymes known as alpha-1,3
fucosyltransferases. The results of these studies will provide important, new
information on these proteins. Since these proteins are members of a much larger
group (i.e.approximately 100 proteins), the information obtained will add to the
knowledge base for this entire family of enzymes. ***