* 9513388
* Regulation of Microtubule-Dependent Motility
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1996,10/31/2001
* Vladimir Gelfand, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ronald M. Weiner
* 10/31/2001
* USD 561,953.00

9513388 Gelfand The ultimate goal of this study is to understand how organelle
transport along microtubules is regulated. To answer this question, a cloned
immortalized cell line of Xenopus melanophores will be used. The unique
properties of these cells make them especially attractive for the proposed
study. First, unlike most other systems, where physiological stimuli triggering
the movement of organelles are poorly understood, movement of thousands of
pigment granules called melanosomes can easily be manipulated by the addition of
the appropriate hormones to the culture medium. Second, melanosome proteins
represent about 10% of the total cellular protein. Availability of a large
number of cells grown in culture and the development of a simple protocol for
melanosome purification makes it the system of choice for purification and
characterization of the components involved in the motility and for the
reconstitution of regulated motility along microtubules in vitro. Third,
phosphorylation of specific sets of proteins during pigment aggregation and
dispersion in melanophores has been documented. Fourth, Xenopus melanophores can
be effectively transfected with exogenous DNA. Thus, using cloned genes that
encode proteins that are targets for phosphorylation, the function role of
phosphorylation can be analyzed in transgenic cells. The proposed studies will
identify motor proteins that drive anterograde and retrograde movement of
organelles in melanophores and in a cell-free system. Modifications of the
motors or other organelle proteins that are associated with the switch in the
polarity of these transport processes will be identified and the genes for
proteins undergoing modification will be cloned and sequenced. The functional
role of the modifications will be determined by site-directed mutagenesis and
the analysis of the phosphorylation state and activities of the modified
proteins in vitro and in vivo. The potential significance of this project
extends well beyond the speci fic question of melanosome movement, because
similar control mechanisms are likely to operate during mitosis, secretion,
axoplasmic transport and the beating of cilia and flagella. Thus, understanding
the regulation of melanosome movement will significantly enhance our knowledge
of microtubules work, and will be relevant to a broad range of studies of
fundamental aspects of cellular function and malfunction. ***