* 9513702
* U.S.- Germany Cooperative Research on Direct Current and    High Frequency Plasma Spraying
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Joachim Heberlein, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 03/31/1999
* USD 13,396.00

This award supports Professors E. Pfender and J. Heberlein and two U.S. graduate
students from the High Temperature Laboratory of the University of Minnesota to
collaborate in engineering research with Professor Nutsch and his group at the
Surface Technology Division of the Technical University of Ilmenau, Germany.
They propose to quantify the major advantages and disadvantages of two coating
technologies, direct current (D.C.) and high frequency (R.F.) plasma spraying.
Their detailed comparison will include characterization of both D.C. and R.F.
plasma jets through a number of techniques. They will prepare metallic and non-
metallic coatings with both methods, then compare the microstructure, adhesion,
hardness and surface roughness of the resulting coatings. The collaborative
arrangement joins the expertise of the University of Minnesota group in D.C.
spray technologies with the German group's expertise in R.F. plasma spraying.
They will coordinate their complementary experimental and modeling research on
the two methods, and exchange both samples and junior members of each research
group in order to maximize the comparability of their research Thermal plasma
spraying is a widely used technology that can deposit an increasing variety of
coatings, even superconducting materials, on many types of substrates. In spite
of the extent of its applications in industries as diverse as aerospace and
biomedical implants, some of the fundamental phenomena of the plasma spray
process remain poorly understood. Both of the dominant methods being studied in
this collaboration have advantages and disadvantages. The results of this
detailed characterization will provide guidelines for choosing the most
appropriate spray process for a particular application.