* 9513129
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  Development of X-ray CCD   Detectors and their Applications to Synchrotron Radiation   Time-resolved Solution Scattering
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Keith Hodgson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 09/30/2000
* USD 20,216.00

9513129 Hodgson This award supports a three year cooperative research project
between Dr. Keith Hodgson of Stanford University and Dr. Yoshiyuki Amemiya of
the National Laboratory for High Energy Physics in Tsukuba, Japan. This project
represents a program of cooperative instrument development for time- resolved
solution, small-angle x-ray scattering (SAXS) using synchrotron radiation. The
new instrumentation will be applied to selected collaborative research projects
on protein folding and allosteric transitions. The principal aspects of the
research plan are 1) to participate in the joint development of advanced CCD-
based detectors for SAXS studies; 2) to collaborate on the development of
techniques to investigate structural changes in a faster time domain (down to
about 1 ms) than currently utilized, and 3) to utilize these developments at the
Photon Factory in Japan and then on an ultra high flux beam line at the Stanford
Synchrotron radiation Laboratory (SSRL) for actual structural studies of
biological systems. The U.S. investigators will benefit significantly by
participating in the development of advanced x-ray detector systems in Japan
whereas the Japanese collaborators will gain experience with the new synthetic
multilayer monochromator at SSRL. This proposal fulfills the objectives of the
Program in its joint endeavor bringing state of the art methods from two
countries into a joint international collaborative effort. ***