* 9513873
* SYMPOSIUM:  Control of Arterial Blood Gases:  Ventilatory   and Circulatory Perspectives; December, 1995, Washington,   DC
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Carl Reiber, Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
* Standard Grant
* Stacia A. Sower
* 11/30/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9513873 Reiber Dr. Reiber requests financial support for a one day symposium
entitled "Control of Arterial Blood Gases: Ventilatory and Cardiovascular
Perspectives", to be held as part of the national meeting of the American
Society of Zoologists, December 27-30, 1995 Washington D.C. The symposium will
be sponsored by the Division of Comparative Physiology and Biochemistry. The
proceedings will be published in the American Zoologist. The control of blood
gases is vital and ultimately encompasses such homeostatic processes as acid-
base balance and oxygen supply for cellular metabolism. Early studies on the
control of blood gases in mammals as well as within comparative physiology,
centered around questions of gas exchange and its implications for metabolism.
While this line of research proved highly successful by explaining important
concepts and identifying controlled parameters, the underlying control
mechanisms could not be elucidated. Thus, especially within the last two
decades, subsequent studies devoted to neurophysiology and the neurological
mechanisms have emerged. The new techniques and questions brought about by the
recent neurophysiological approach has unraveled pivotal mechanisms and promises
exciting future research. Nevertheless, in spite of the enormous progress, the
contemporary dominance of neurophysiology may engender conceptual problems
because such studies are becoming increasingly removed from the study of gas
exchange, which is the evolutionarily significant factor which is acted upon by
natural selection. Consequently, as a main objective of the proposed symposium,
Dr. Reiber feels it is pertinent to maintain an integrated view which keep the
original questions of gas exchange in perspective but fully utilizes the
emerging neurophysiological understanding. In this symposium we will discuss
several aspects in which the comparative approach seems most promising. Although
not always recognized, studies of invertebrates and non-mammalian vertebrates
have contributed enormously to the understanding of gas exchange mechanisms.
This will also be the case within the neurophysiological aspect of blood gas
regulation, because the receptor systems and mechanisms seem rather conserved
and findings in a given group will therefore often provide insight to general
relationships. The first half of the proposed symposium focuses on the receptors
which control ventilation and the cardiovascular system. Experimental work on
both central and peripheral (arterial as well as airway) receptors will be
presented. The same overall focus is maintained in the afternoon section, but
the main emphasis is placed on the influence of the environment on blood gas
regulation. As an interesting objective, he hopes to compare and contrast
studies involving acute changes in the environment (such as acute reductions in
inhaled Po2) with those of more subtle but longer lasting changes during
development. Such comparisons may contribute to the understanding of important
questions regarding how receptor "set points" are determined. Thus, the proposed
symposium has a very broad scope. The proposed presentations span all major
taxonomic groups and touch upon developmental, as well as environmental issues.
He therefore expects to capture the interest of a wide audience. ***