* 9513874
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Comparative Studies on the Macrofungi of China and Eastern North America
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Gregory Mueller, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 04/30/2000
* USD 133,440.00

9513874 Wu This award supports cooperation in studies of macrofungi of China and
North America between the Field Museum of Natural History, Chicago, and the
Institute of Microbiology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. Fungi
play vital roles in forest and grassland systems, yet knowledge of species
diversity and distribution of fungi in many areas of the world is sparse
compared to information available on nearly all animal and plant groups. The
situation is especially critical in China where little is known about the
biodiversity and biogeography of Chinese fungi. This project is the first study
designed to obtain biodiversity data for Chinese fungi that are comparable with
information from other parts of the world. During the two year study, US and
Chinese scientists will conduct cooperative research on the biological diversity
of macrofungi in China and undertake comparisons with the mycotas of eastern
North America and Central America. The proposed research requires field work in
both the US and China to sample fungal biodiversity and to collect materials for
DNA analyses as well as laboratory work to assay genetic divergence among
allopatric populations suing DNA RFLP and direct sequencing techniques. The
combined expertise of the US and Chinese participants and the resources of their
herbaria and laboratories are necessary for the successful completion of the
project. Support on the Chinese side will be provided by the Chinese Academy of
Sciences.