* 9513522
* Genetic Mechanism of Root Meristematic Activity
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Z. Renee Sung, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/1999
* USD 205,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l & ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; MZ} e@ @ Sign-out Date s}+ ' Sign-out Time # s}, ' Sign-out
Explanation # s}% ' Pay Hours Table List + s}' ' Tour Hours for Sign-out Date *
s}( ' Tour Type for Sign-out Date 0 s}) ' " Hour Type Indicator for T 9513522
Sung The proposed research will use a set of Arabidopsis root mutants to
characterize the genes necessary for continuous root growth. These mutants,
called root meristemless (rml), are impaired in the ability to initiate and
maintain cell division in the root apex, resulting in meristemless roots of 1-2
mm in length. Complementation analysis has identified two RML genes, RML1 and
RML2, which are mapped to chromosome four and three, respectively. Although rml1
mutants produce normal embryonic roots, root apical cells undergo no, or
limited, cell division after germination. rml1 mutants are able to initiate
lateral and adventitious roots, However, these roots also arrest cell division
once the size of the embryonic root is reached. It is hypothesized that the two
wild type RML genes are involved in the signal transduction pathway mediating
cell proliferation at the root tip. To test this hypothesis, Dr. Sung will
identify and clone the genes involved in root apical cell proliferation. The
RML1 gene will be cloned first to develop a molecular probe for studying the
temporal and spatial expr ession of the RML1 gene in the wild type and mutant
plants. The phenotype of the 35S:RML1 transgenic plants will be characterized to
seek evidence supporting the proposed role of the RML1 gene. The long term goal
is to understand the principles and mechanisms of localized cell proliferation
in plants. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( %
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9513522 eozsaruh eozsaruh @ M @ @ M @ F #
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; ; e = e j j j j j j j H 1 * y T + H j H j j j j ~ j j j j
B 9513522 Sung The proposed research will use a set of Arabidopsis root mutants
to characterize the genes necessary for continuous root growth. These mutants,
called root meristemless (rml), are impaired in the ability to initiate and
maintain cell division in the root apex, resulting in meristemless roots of 1-2
mm in length. Complementation analysis has identified two RML genes, RML1 and
RML2, which are mapped to chromosome four and three, respectively. Although rml1
mutants produce normal embryonic roots, root apical cells undergo no, or
limited, cell division after germination. rml1 mutants are able to initiate
lateral and adventitious roots. However, these roots also arrest cell division
once the size of the embryonic root is reached. It is hypothesized that the two
wild type RML genes are involved in the signal transduction pathway mediating
cell proliferation at the root tip. To test this hypothesis, Dr. Sung will
identify and clone the genes involved in root apical cell proliferation. The
RML1 gene will be cloned first to develop a molecular probe for studyin