* 9513889
* Assessment of Landuse and Land Cover Change Using Remote    Sensing and Artificial Neural Networks
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Curtis Woodcock, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 10/31/1999
* USD 192,516.00

SBR-9513889 The research funded by this award will test the utility of
artificial neural networks (ANN) in detecting changes in remotely sensed images.
The ability to detect and monitor changes in conditions at the Earth's surface
is fundamental to an understanding of human impacts on the environment and to
the assessment of the sustainability of development. Ground based measurements
are severely limited by logistical constraints, particularly in the research and
assessment of global change. Therefore, remote sensing provides the potential
for frequent assessment of surface conditions and their change over large areas.
Currently, the greatest success in change detection via remotely sensed data is
for situations of dramatic change. The goal of the research funded by this award
is to test the utility of ANN in assessing less dramatic change. The expectation
that ANN will allow significant improvements in change detection is based on two
factors: ANN have proven more effective than conventional statistics-based
methods for classification of remote sensing imagery, and the investigators have
had some success in a preliminary effort to use ANN in this way. The testing
entails several components: exploring alternative ANN architectures,
interpreting the internal structure of the ANN to analyze the changes signal in
the remotely sensed data, evaluating the performance of the ANN relative to
conventional methods for change detection, developing measures to interpret ANN
output signals for quantifying change, and estimating the robustness of trained
ANN outside of the training domain. The investigators will use existing data
sets containing remotely sensed and ground measurements for all these tests,
allowing rapid progress at minimal cost. The research has both theoretical and
applied implications. It will lead to a greater conceptual understanding of the
spectral and temporal signals contained in remotely sensed images resulting from
land surface change. It should help determine what analytic methods are better
suited to measuring change in different contexts. The research will lead to an
improved understanding of the use if neural networks in a data-analytic
framework, and thus enhance the appropriate is of ANN in geographic research.