* 9513647
* U.S.-Netherland Cooperative Research in Linquistics:        Polyadic Quantification and Reciprocals
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Stanley Peters, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 02/29/2000
* USD 16,400.00

This award supports Professor Stanley Peters and three junior members of his
research group at Stanford University to collaborate in linguistics research
with Professor Frank Veltman and others of the Institute for Language, Logic and
Computation of the University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands. They are studying
abstract aspects of information content and informational equivalence, centering
on the concept of `reciprocals` (the expertise of the US group) and `polyadic
quantifiers` the logical tools used to define reciprocals (which is the area of
expertise of the Dutch group.) The Stanford group has undertaken a comparative
study of the nature of the relation between syntactic representation and
semantic interpretation, taking reciprocals as a case study. The Dutch group is
part of a European consortium applying new understanding of the dynamic nature
of information to the interpretation of natural language. Dynamic interpretation
is becoming increasingly important, not only in linguistics, but also in
computer science and artificial intelligence. This research provides US
participants access to a larger regional European collaborative project named
DYANA (`Dynamic Interpretation of Natural Language`) funded by the European
Commission, which brings together some of the most important scholars in the
foundations of language and information processing in Europe. This relatively
focused U.S.-Dutch research collaboration is intended to be the starting point
for a broader and longer-term collaboration in the future. Their mutual goal is
to develop theories of information that can be applied in a variety of areas
within the study of language and computation. The results of their research are
likely to have far reaching implications, not only for the study of natural
languages, but also for the analysis and design of computer languages.