* 9513357
* Development of Parallel-Aligning Magnetically Orientable    Model Membranes for Use in NMR Studies of Membrane Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Charles Sanders, II, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 06/30/1998
* USD 130,000.00

Sanders 9513357 Membrane proteins reside in the thin sheaths which encapsulate
cells and subcellular compartments throughout all biological systems. These
proteins represent an important class of biological molecules for which three-
dimensional pictorial or "structural" information on the molecular level has
been very difficult to obtain. In principle, a physical technique known as
"oriented sample nuclear magnetic resonance" (OSNMR) is capable of yielding
experimental data which can lead directly to the structures of membrane proteins
in a membrane-like environment. However, one of the limitations of current OSNMR
technique is the lack of an ideal method for uniformly orienting membrane
proteins so that all of the proteins in a sample are lined up in the same
direction. The work of this project will seek to overcome this limitation by
carrying out the rational design of a new class of membrane-mimicking "model
membranes" in which purified membrane proteins can be solubilized and oriented
for OSNMR studies. The novel model membrane system which is the goal of this
proposal must simultaneously satisfy four criteria: (i) Water must be the
solvent. (ii) The liquid crystalline assemblies must be soluble, micelle-like
discoidal bilayered particles ("bicelles"). (iii) The bicelles must exhibit
nematic order under the influence of a strong magnetic field such that their
bilayer normals align in the direction of the applied field. (iv) The liquid
crystalline system must not denature membrane proteins solubilized in the novel
media. %%% Various considerations predict that these goals will be met by liquid
crystals involving a novel series of detergent-like molecules: the "PF-DAPA"
surfactants. These compounds will be synthesized via amide condensation of long
chain perfluorinated carboxylic acids with the 3-amino group of 2,3
diaminopropionic acid. Their liquid crystalline properties will be characterized
using nuclear magnetic resonance. Compositions which satisfy criteria i-iii
above will be tested for their ability to solubilize and magnetically orient
membrane proteins in native-like conformational states. ***