* 9513576
* Genetic Analysis of Complementary Chromatic Adaptation
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Arthur Grossman, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

95-13576 Grossman The phycobilisome, a light-harvesting complex in both
eukaryotic red algae and prokaryotic cyanobacteria, can constitute up to 40% of
the cellular protein. A number of filamentous cyanobacteria can acclimate to
different wavelengths of light by altering the polypeptide and chromophore
composition of the phycobilisome, thereby making the complex more effective in
absorbing the prevalent wavelengths of light in the environment; this process is
called complementary chromatic adaptation. We have isolated several mutants of
the filamentous cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon that exhibit aberrant
complementary chromatic adaptation. Complementation of one of these mutants (red
mutant or FdR) led to the isolation of rcaC, a gene that encodes a key regulator
of chromatic adaptation. RcaC has similarities to regulators of two component
regulatory systems, although it has two rather than one receiver domain (which
contains the aspartate residue important for the function of the protein). The
main goal of the project is to elucidate the mechanisms that govern chromatic
adaptation by identifying the photoreceptor(s) and components of the light-
responsive signal transduction chain. The photoreceptor(s) and some of the
elements of the signal transduction chain are likely to bear functional and
evolutionary relationships to photoregulatory systems in eukaryotic algae and
land plants. Specifically, we will complete the characterization (both
wavelength-and intensity-dependent responses) of strains in which RcaC has been
altered in each or both of the aspartates of the receiver domains. Furthermore,
we will characterize the genes that complement additional strains that have
aberrant chromatic adaptation. One mutant that exhibits no complementary
chromatic adaptation has been complemented by a gene that encodes a protein that
has some similarity to phytochrome. This suggest that the phytochrome
photoreceptor of higher plants may have evolved from cyanobacterial
photoreceptors. Analy ses of the genes that complement mutants in chromatic
adaptation should enable us to define elements of the signal transduction chain
and the ways in which the element interact. Finally, we will continue to use
both in vivo and in vitro methods to analyze the promoter region of the red
light-activated cpcB2A2 gene set (encoding phycocyanin polypeptides) and the
green light-activated cpeBA gene set (encoding phycoerythrin polypeptides), and
are developing strategies to define both cis and trans acting factors that are
involved in controlling cellular responses to both light quality and intensity
during chromatic adaptation. %%% The research will help us understand how light
affects the growth and development of photosynthetic organisms. An understanding
of how light modifies processes in photosynthetic organisms may enable us to
tailor plants to specific light environments. ***