* 9513492
* The Johns Hopkins Protein Folding Meeting being held        March 16-19, 1996 at the Coolfont Conference Center in      Berkeley Springs, West Virginia
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* George Rose, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 02/28/1997
* USD 5,000.00

9513492 Lattman The 1996 Johns Hopkins Protein Folding Meeting will be held
16-19 March 1996 at the Coolfont Conference Center, located about 2 hours from
Baltimore and Washington in Berkeley Springs West Virginia. The meeting will
include 4 three-hour sessions of presented talks, planned and chaired by leaders
in the field. Additional events include the first Christian Anfinsen Lecture, a
poster session, and the opportunity for informal exchanges. Material from the
meeting will be published in Proteins: Structure, Function and Genetics. %%%
Protein folding is the name given to the process by which protein molecules
assume their normal functional form. In cells protein molecules are manufactured
in the form of flexibly, extended chains - rather like a microscopic piece of
cooked spaghetti. Each strand then spontaneously folds up into a compact ball
that represents the active form of the protein molecule - the so-called native
state. The remarkable fact is that all the molecules of a particular protein
fold up into exactly the same native state. In contrast, if one folds up
individual strands of spaghetti, say by putting them in a spoon, each of the
strands will fold up in a different way. Protein molecules are called chains
because they are built up as a sequence of chemical links called amino acids.
there are 20 different amino acid types. The information telling the protein how
to fold up is contained in the sequence of the amino acids in the protein chain.
The 1996 Johns Hopkins Protein Folding Meeting will gather together experts from
all over the world to present and discuss new research on various aspects of
protein folding. Topics will include attempts to predict the native structure of
a protein, and studies on the details of the actual folding process. Funds are
requested to defray the costs of attendance for speakers and students. ***