* 9513128
* U.S.-Argentina Collaborative Study:  A Test of Ordovician   Iapetus Paleogeophraphic Models Using K-bentonite           Stratigraphy and Geochemistry
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Stig Bergstrom, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 02/28/1998
* USD 42,154.00

9513128 Huff This U.S.-Argentina collaborative research effort will test two
paleogeographic reconstructions attempting to explain an apparent early
Paleozoic connection between North and South America. The alternatives would
either have Laurentia colliding with western South America during the Middle
Ordovician or a piece of Laurentia breaking off later in Cambrian time and
drifting south, accreting to the western margin of South America. The
collaboration between Warren Huff of the University of Cincinnati, Dennis Kolata
of the Illinois State Geological Survey, Stig Bergstrom of Ohio State
University, and Carlos Cingolani of the Universidad Nacional de la Plata
together with 7 other Argentine investigators will create a team in interrelated
specialties to carry out the test of the two hypotheses. Recent finds of beds of
K-bentonites suggest the possibility of determining the stratigraphic and areal
distribution of Ordovician volcanic ash beds and their ability to resolve the
alternative hypotheses. The proposed research will produce an international
collaboration through field work in Argentina and extensive data analysis
carried out in both the U.S. and Argentina. To assure successful field studies,
Argentine specialists in structure and tectonics, graptolites, petrology and
geochemistry, paleontology, and stratigraphy have been included. One graduate
student will also travel to Argentina to participate in the project. ****