* 9513821
* Comparative Studies of Vocal Learning
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Douglas Nelson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* John A. Byers
* 01/31/2000
* USD 109,909.00

9513821 Nelson Vocal learning in song birds is a complex motor skill in which
young males memorize the songs of adults, and then use their memory to control
their own song output. One consequence of vocal learning in birds is the
formation of vocal dialects in which males at one locality sing similar songs
that differ from those of males at other localities. Until recently, it has been
assumed that a single process is involved in the formation of dialects: the
young bird imitates one or more adults at the time and place the youngster
settles upon a breeding territory. Recent evidence suggests that an independent
process of selective attrition of songs from a large repertoire acquired in
whole or in part at a different time and place can also lead to song sharing
between neighbors. The proposed research will examine the role of song
overproduction and selective attrition in the formation of local song dialects.
The PI will take a comparative approach by studying different subspecies of the
white-crowned sparrow (Zonotrichia leucophrys). Field observations, and
laboratory and field experiments will be conducted to compare processess of
vocal development in one subspecies that does form local dialects (Z. l.
oriantha or Z. l. leucophrys) with another that does not (Z. l. gambelii). In
the field, the PI will observe vocal interactions between males as they settle
upon territories, and determine the sizes of their song production repertoire
early in Spring, and compare whether they selectively retain or reject songs
that match their neighbors. This will test the hypothesis that developmental
pathways are conserved during evolutionary diversification, and that changes
often are made to terminal stages. The PI will then conduct field and laboratory
playback tests contrasting the song matching behavior of males of two
subspecies. These experiments are designed to reveal differences in the
perceptural categorization of songs, and to identify possible genetically-based
differences in song pe rception. The PI will also employ a new method for
measuring song learning that is independent of the production of imitations to
examine how songs are memorized during the sensitive phase and during the
subsequent storage interval. Finally, the PI will conduct a song learning
experiment to assess whether live tutors modiy or extend the early sensitive
phase for song acquisition, as compared with tape tutoring.