* 9513715
* Time-Resolved FTIR System for Biological Applications
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Kenneth Rothschild, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Arthur Kowalsky
* 02/28/1999
* USD 200,000.00

The central goal of this project is the development of advanced time-resolved
FTIR instrumentation which will allow for the first time the investigation of a
wide variety of biological systems at the sub-nanosecond to millisecond range.
The proposed instrument will incorporate novel features which will address the
major short-comings of current time-resolved FTIR instruments. The project will
be supported by the newly formed Center for Photonics Research at Boston
University and Bruker Instruments, Inc., a leader in time-resolved FTIR
instrumentation In recent years it has been demonstrated that Fourier transform
infrared (FTIR) difference spectroscopy can provide detailed information about
dynamic changes in the protonation state, local environment and orientation of
specific amino acid residues in proteins. This ability is enhanced by the recent
development of powerful new methods for band assignments by the introduction of
site-directed isotope labels (SDIL) into proteins. However, the current
generation of FTIR instruments have fallen short of their promise for probing
rapid conformational changes in biomolecular systems. Existing limitations are
related to the lack of sufficiently powerful broad-band infrared sources, the
relatively slow cycle-time or irreversible response of most biological systems
upon activation, the prevalence of biological systems activated by mechanisms
other than light, and the need to simultaneously monitor changes in the infrared
and UV-visible absorption of a sample. We propose to develop a unique step-scan
FTIR system with the ability to record simultaneous sub-nanosecond to
millisecond infrared and W-visible absorption changes in biomolecular systems.
The instrument will be based on recent breakthroughs in technology for ultra-
high intensity broad-band continuous (CW) and pulsed IR sources, rapid sub-
nanosecond transient recorders and infrared detectors and step-scan
interferometers. The development of a novel synchronized sample step translator
(SSST) will make it possible to shorten dramatically measurement times and open
the door to the investigation of dynamic processes in a wide variety of
biomolecular systems under physiological conditions, including systems not
activated by light, systems with very slow cycle times and systems with
irreversible processes. By combining this proposed FTIR instrumentation with the
recently developed method of SDIL and site-directed non-native amino acid
replacement (SNAAR), breakthroughs are expected in the fields of protein
folding, enzyme mechanism, ion transport and signal reception. Transfer of the
developed technology for future commercial use will be facilitated by the close
interaction during the project with Bruker Instruments and through the Center
for Photonics Research