* 9513057
* Controlled Environment Space for Ecological Research
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Stephen Tonsor, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1997
* USD 65,168.00

We propose to establish controlled environment space at the Pymatuning
Laboratory of Ecology, a center for ecological studies administered by the
Department of Biological Sciences of the University of Pittsburgh. With four new
appointments in Ecology, plans for additional appointments in the near future, a
five-year program of research land purchases, the construction of new research
and residential buildings discussions of new programmatic initiatives in
Environmental Science, and generous funding packages for the four new ecology
faculty since 1993, the University has demonstrated a long-term commitment to
building the Pymatuning Laboratory of Ecology into a superb ecological research
and education center. Controlled environment space at the Pymatuning Laboratory
of Ecology will fill a critical need in the growing program. The active and
growing group of scientists and educators at PLE will ensure ample use and
productivity from this investment. The controlled environment space will consist
of three 15 ft2 controlled environment chambers, capable of providing a wide
range of temperatures. light levels and humidifies; a germination/incubation
chamber, and a control system which allows remote monitoring and programming of
the environmental control systems. Matching, funds from the University of
Pittsburgh will provide partial coverage of the cost of chamber purchase.
preparation space. modifications of the building climate control system and
electrical system, purchase of the computer and communications hardware for
interfacing with the remote programming and monitoring system and purchase and
installation of a water purification system. Five user groups propose specific
research for controlled environment space. This research includes 1 Propagation
of distinct allocation genotypes in Plantago ianceolata for examination of the
role of genetic variation in carbon and nitrogen :allocation patterns for
fitness variation under elevated atmospheric carbon concentration . 2 Controlled
matings of field-collected Arabis Ivrata for use in studies of the genetic
architecture of local evolution. 3. Estimates of mating, systems for four
populations of Collinsia verna to determine the evolutionary liability of mating
system parameters in natural populations. 4. Studies of seed bank demography in
natural populations of Collinsia verna to understand the population genetic and
demographic consequences of near-extinction in natural populations. 5.
Manipulation of phenological state in wild-collected Fragaria virginiana plants
to examine genetic variation in gender expression and floral display and its
fitness consequences.. 6. Production and diapause manipulation of phytophagous
insects for dose-response curves of herbivory on competitive ability in field
populations of plants. 7. Clonal propagation of wild-collected genotypes
Solidago altissima differing in allocational patterns for use in field studies
of selection on allocation as a proximal mechanism for selection on competitive
ability. In addition to these major user groups. ;l substantial number of
researchers from small colleges in the surrounding area have a commitment to
work ~ Phymatuning and would make occasional use of controlled environments. The
requested controlled environment space would also be a strong asset to
Phymatuning Laboratory s successful teaching program Tonsor the new director of
the Phymatuning Laboratory of Ecology, will be responsible for the
administration of the controlled environment space. A committee will be
established, initially consisting of the heads of the listed use, groups. to
make policy and space assignment decisions. The cost of maintenance will be
recovered from bench fees charged for use of PLE, laboratory fees for courses
using the space, grant overhead return funds, and new increment to the general
operating budget of the Phymatuning, Laboratory of Ecology.