* 9513896
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Patch-clamp Studies of     Cholinergic Transmission in the Tectum
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Susan Udin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 07/31/1998
* USD 28,110.00

9513896 Udin This award supports collaboration between Dr. Susan Udin, SUNY,
Buffalo, and Dr. Tsai Haojan, Beijing Medical University, China on patch-clamp
studies ofApril 22, 1996 cholinergic transmission in the tectum. The CNS
contains a multiplicity of nicotinic and muscarinic receptor subtypes, but many
gaps remain in the understanding of how these receptors contribute to
physiological response of the cells that receive cholinergic inputs. One way to
begin to assess the contribution of those receptors is to study to the responses
of neurons in the frog optic tectum. The frog tectum is particularly suitable
because it has an unusually restricted population of cholinergic axons, all of
which are derived from the nucleus isthmi. Whole-cell patch clamping will be
used to identify tectal cells that respond to cholinergic agonists. The
distribution and morphology of the cells will be revealed by biocytin filling.
The results will help to clarify the contribution of cholinergic processes in
central nervous system neurons. In addition, these experiments with Rana will
provide data for comparison with results of the similar experiments in Xenopus
frogs; this comparison is of interest because the cholinergic axons that project
to the Xenopus tectum from the contralateral nucleus isthmi display dramatic
plasticity during a critical period of development of the cholinergic axons,
whereas such plasticity is absent in Rana.