* 9513594
* 3D Reconstruction of Icosahedral Viruses from X-ray         Scattering Data
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Peter Doerschuk, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 12/31/1999
* USD 145,238.00

The objective of the proposed research is the development of new methods for
determining the structure of small spherical viruses based on x-ray scattering
measurements. Research in this area is timely because synchrotrons allow the
measurement of qualitatively superior data and new methods are needed in order
to fully exploit the data. For instance, it will be possible to study virus
dynamics, e.g., maturation and disassembly, in solution: the high intensity of
the x-ray beam allows the recording of a solution scattering pattern in roughly
100 ms and the quality of the data, in terms of the ability to make low-angle
scattering measurements and the sensitivity of the detectors, is very high so
that a low-resolution structure can be reconstructed from a single 100 ms snap
shot and therefore the evolution of the structure can be tracked. This is an
interdisciplinary collaboration between the principal investigator, in the
School of Electrical Engineering, and Professor John E. Johnson, in the
Department of Biological Sciences. It combines image processing, applied
mathematical analysis, and numerical computation expertise from the electrical
engineering side with biological, biophysical, and x-ray scattering experimental
expertise from the biological sciences side. The major theme that extends
through all of the proposed work is the need to exploit the icosahedral symmetry
present in small spherical viruses. The principal investigator has new
mathematical results in icosahedral harmonics and methodology based on these
results will allow the development of reconstruction methods which exploit the
symmetry in a much more natural and computationally attractive fashion than has
been possible in the past. Work is proposed in three areas: Reconstruction of 3D
low-resolution viral structure from solution x-ray scattering patterns: A model
of the virus is proposed which exactly exhibits the icosahedral symmetry. An
iterative recon struction algori thm, which is an significant generalization of
the standard electron density modification algorithm, is proposed. Significance:
Successful reconstruction would allow easy low-cost surveys of virus structure
since no crystallization is required; would provide new starting points for
reconstructions of high-resolution structures based on crystal x-ray diffraction
data; and, most importantly, would enable the study of virus maturation and
disassembly in the natural solution environment. Nucleic acid packing and
nucleic acid-protein interactions: Small spherical viruses provide an elegant
and relatively simple model system for studying these problems. However, because
the bulk; of the nucleic acid in a virus does not exhibit icosahedral symmetry,
the protein is visible at atomic resolution in a high-resolution x- ray
diffraction experiment while the nucleic acid is not. Therefore, in order to
extract the maximum amount of information concerning both protein and nucleic
acid from the x-ray diffraction experiment, it is necessary to use different
models for the protein and nucleic acid. Such models and least-squares type
algorithms for estimating the parameters in the models from low-resolution
crystal x-ray diffraction data are proposed. Significance: Successful
reconstruction will validate the low-resolution crystal x-ray diffraction data,
which is difficult to measure, and provide an alternative view of the nucleic
acid distribution and its interaction with the protein capsid based on x-ray
diffraction rather than cryo electron microscopy data. Refinement using
incomplete crystal x-ray diffraction data sets: In many cutting-edge problems
the data set is incomplete due to a limited amount of virus, limited synchrotron
time, or inability to reliably grow high-quality crystals. Because the virus
particle has icosahedral symmetry, it follows that the diffraction data also has
icosahedral symmetry which, in the simplest case, implies that the data is
60-fold redundant. Data that is 5-fold redundant is typically sufficient to
refine a structure. Therefore, large amounts of the data (e.g., 80%) can be
missing and it should still be possible to refine the structure. However,
standard algorithms and software require that a complete set of data be
recorded. Therefore, based on the 60-fold redundancy, the incomplete data set is
interpolated to generate a complete data set. However, the current interpolation
methods do not exploit the icosahedral symmetry of the data and are therefore
inaccurate. We propose to develop and implement more sophisticated interpolation
methods that will exploit the icosahedral symmetry. Significance: Success in
this work will allow the solution of new structures from existing previously
unusable data sets.