* 9513300
* Structure, Function, and Genetics of the E. Coli            Phosphotriesterase Homolog
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Thomas Scanlan, University of California-San Francisco
* Continuing grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 02/28/2001
* USD 450,000.00

Enzymes are natural protein molecules that convert one biological substance
into another. Enzymes often have extraordinary selectivity properties in that
they are able to recognize and convert a specific substrate molecule from a sea
of other molecules. Because enzymes are encoded by genes in living organisms,
their chemical properties of substrate recognition and conversion are optimized
and refined by evolution. This research project is designed to study the
evolutionary optimization of an interesting enzyme from soil bacteria that
mediates the destruction of a family of pesticides and chemical warfare agents
called phosphotriesters. The enzyme, called Phosphotriesterase, is highly
efficient at carrying out this task and this is unusual because it's
phosphotriester substrates are synthetic chemicals that were first prepared
about forty years ago. This suggests that the evolutionary process for
optimizing this enzyme happened at an unprecedented rate. We have discovered an
enzyme from a related bacteria, E. coli, that is highly similar in structure to
the Phosphotriesterase enzyme, and we believe that the E. coli homolog
represents a member of a new family of enzymes from which Phosphotriesterase
arose. Thus, we have the starting point and ending point for a pair of
evolutionarily related enzymes, and we will carry out experiments designed to
provide useful structure-function clues to this evolutionary process. Scanlan,
Thomas S . Research Plan The research plan for this proposal focuses on a newly
identified open reading frame (ORF) from Escherichia coli which appears to have
been a starting point for rapid evolution of a new enzyme. The well-
characterized enzyme Phosphotriesterase from soil bacteria catalyzes the
hydrolytic cleavage of synthetic phosphotriester insecticides and chemical
warfare agents in a hlghly efficient manner. The enzyme-mediated cleavage
reaction occurs at the limit of diffusion control, suggesting that
Phosphotriesterase has reached its evolutionary endpoint in catalytic
optimization. The suggestion that this enzyme has achieved evolutionary
perfection is amazing considering that its phosphotriester substrates were first
synthesized in the 1940's and 50's, thus providing a fifty year time window for
evolution of maximal catalytic power. We have recently discovered that a newly
identified chromosomal ORF in E. coli has high sequence similarity to
Phosphotriesterase, and many of the important active site residues are conserved
between the two enzymes. This E. coli ORF, which we have named
Phosphotriesterase Homolog Protein (PHP), therefore appears to be a member of
the subfamily from which Phosphotriesterase evolved, and provides the basis for
an interesting research project in molecular evolution and protein engineering
that may have practical value in producing new organophosphate detoxification
agents. This research proposal describes our plans to characterize the
biophysical and enzymatic properties of PHP, and elucidate the natural function
that this enzyme performs in E. coli. In addition, we plan structure-guided
mutagenesis studies aimed at retracing Phosphotriesterase's evolutionary path to
catalytic perfection using PHP as a starting point. Finally, laboratory
evolution experiments are described, with the aim of developing new
organophosphate detoxification enzymes using the principles of natural
selection. Teachin~ Plan The teaching plan for this proposal seizes upon the
opportunity of creating a strong graduate education program in bioorganic
chemistry at UCSF. Several important strategies are discussed, including plans
to develop new chemistry-based graduate courses, methods of integrating students
from the various biology-centered departments at UCSF into these courses, and
plans to introduce minority undergraduate students to research opportunities at
the chemistry/biology interface. Teaching responsibilities anticipated during
the award period are discussed, and previous accomplishments and awards in tea
ching excellence are presented. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94) 2