* 9513463
* Molecular Characterization of the Ethylene Receptor         ETRI from Arabidopsis
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Anthony Bleecker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 02/28/1999
* USD 371,067.00

9513463 Bleecker The gaseous hormone ethylene regulates a number of important
developmental processes in higher plants. The initial biochemical events
involved in ethylene perception are being investigated in the plant Arabidopsis
thaliana. The ETR1 gene in the plant codes for a protein with sequence homology
to sensory receptor proteins of bacteria. Mutations in the ETR1 gene confer
dominant insensitivity to ethylene. The role of the protein coded by ETR1 as an
ethylene receptor was confirmed by expressing the ETR1 gene in yeast and finding
that the transformed yeast binds ethylene to the ETR1 protein. Using the yeast
expression system, altered forms of the ETR1 protein will be expressed to
investigate the mechanism of binding and signal transduction. Using in vitro
mutagenesis, effects of specific changes in single amino acid residues of the
protein will be followed by analysis of the ability of the altered protein to
bind ethylene when expressed in transgenic yeast, and to transduce the ethylene
signal transgenic plants. In conjunction with work funded by other sources on
the purification of the ETR1 protein from yeast, the proposed research will be
used to construct a molecular model for the mechanism of action of this plant
hormone receptor. In addition the novel mutant forms of the ETR1 gene identified
in this study will provide biotechnologists with the ability to genetically
engineer alterations in ethylene sensitivity in economically important plant
species. ***