* 9513241
* Determination of the Location and Size of Whistler-Electron Correlated Energetic Electron and Whistler Data
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Henry Voss, Taylor University
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 07/31/1997
* USD 79,936.00

The proposed effort during 1995-1996 is to 1) study the locations and size
distribution of magnetospheric ducts, 2) greatly improve current estimates of
loss rates of radiation belt electrons due to VLF waves from lightning, chorus,
and other coherent waves, 3) clarify the relative roles of ducted and non-ducted
whistler mode waves in the diffusion and precipitation of radiation belt
particles, and 4) study the mechanisms responsible for high latitude
precipitation bursts. This study will be based on precipitating electron records
acquired in 1982 by the SEEP (Stimulated Emission of Energetic Particles)
satellite and by VLF wave receivers on the ground and on satellites. Electron
precipitation by ducted whistlers and by other VLF waves is thought to be the
major loss mechanism for radiation belt electrons. However, the relative
importance of ducted whistlers, unducted whistlers, chorus, and hiss is
controversial. The SEEP satellite with its low altitude orbit, large geometric
factor detectors, and high data collection rates has acquired an unique data set
which can be used to address these issues. In addition, VLF wave data from
ground stations and satellites were obtained during the time interval SEEP was
operating and will be used to associate wave characteristics with the particle
precipitation. This work will improve knowledge of magnetospheric duct
dimensions, will provide quantitative information on the fine structure of
lightning-induced electron precipitation and on the number of electrons
precipited by ducted whistlers, should give information on the precipitation
rates caused by non-ducted whistlers and other VLF emissions. Analysis of the
high resolution electron data should also constrain the possible mechanisms
responsible of the high latitude electron precipitation bursts.