* 9513421
* Structure and Function of Fertilization Proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* C. Stout, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/1999
* USD 315,000.00

9513421 Stout The goal of this project is to apply methods of molecular biology
and x-ray crystallography in concert to understand molecular events controlling
and occurring during fertilization. A dual approach is being taken: to study in
depth structure function relationships in sperm lysin, for which two high
resolution crystal structures, an expression system and a quantitative
biological assay are all available; and to initiate and carry out structure
determinations of three additional sperm and egg proteins. To understand key
steps during fertilization it is necessary to solve the crystal structures of
the molecules involved. The proteins under investigation are involved in
critical steps of fertilization. The only crystal structures of a fertilization
protein available are of the monomer and dimer of sperm lysin. Recently, an
expression system has been developed which yields milligrams of very pure and
biologically active material. An outstanding opportunity now exists to
understand the function of this fertilization protein. These crystallographic
experiments will enable cell biologists to visualize and understand
fertilization at the molecular level. Four proteins are under investigation: 16K
and 18K sperm lysins, ADP-ribosyl cyclase and sperm protein 56 (sp56). sp56
mediates specific sperm-egg interaction in the mouse. Abalone sperm 16K lysin
dissolves a hole in the egg vitelline envelope (VE) permitting the sperm to
penetrate the VE. Fusion of the sperm and egg cytoplasmic membranes is promoted
by 18K lysin. Cyclase from Aplysia ovotestis synthesizes cyclic ADP-ribose
(cADPR) from NAD. cADPR regulates the release of intracellular Ca2+ and
induction of the cortical reaction, resulting in the formation of the
fertilization envelope. A model has been developed for the mechanism of VE
dissolution by lysin. It proposes specific functions for the novel surface
features of the protein both in the monomeric state, as it binds to the VE, and
in t he dimeric state, as it exists in solution and within the acrosomal
granule. All aspects of the hypothesis for the mechanism of VE dissolution can
be tested with site-directed mutagenesis. Mutant proteins will be assayed for
biological activity and their crystal structures solved. These experiments
promise to define for the first time the activity of a fertilization protein at
the level of individual amino acids. Diffraction quality crystals have been
obtained of ADP-ribosyl cyclase. Crystallographic analysis of ADP-ribosyl
cyclase will provide the first insight into cADPR-receptor interaction and
provide a basis for modeling the catalytic mechanism of the enzyme. Crystals
have been obtained of green abalone 18K lysin, and recombinant sp56 will be used
for crystallization experiments. ***