* 9513498
* Identification of Intra-Cellular Enzymes which Contain      Disulfide Bonds in Plants
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Louise Anderson, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 61,014.00

9513498 Anderson This project seeks to identify additional redox-sensitive and
light-modulated enzymes in photosynthetic and chemosynthetic species. A survey
of plant enzymes indicates that a surprising number contain potentially
oxidizable (or oxidized) cysteine residues. The activity of some of these
enzymes is probably regulated by light-dependent reduction. In others,
disulfides may simply act to stabilize structure. Homology modeling will be used
to locate potentially oxidizable or oxidized cysteine residues in the simulated
three-dimensional structures of those plant enzymes for which both sequence
information and a model protein structure is available. The effect of oxidizing
and reducing agents on the activity of the enzymes in crude extracts will be
tested where redox-sensitivity is suggested. Redox-sensitive enzymes in animals
and non-oxygenic microbes are rare, and in fact the plant cytosol appears to be
much more oxidizing (or at least somewhat more oxidizing) than animal or
microbial cytosol. It is expected that these experiments will demonstrate that
disulfides are not unusual in plants and that many of these disulfides are
stabilizing rather than regulatory. %%% Reductive light modulation is important
in plants and cyanobacteria. If plants are to be engineered for the production
of technologically important compounds, more information about their peculiar
redox biochemistry is needed. The proposed experiments aim to identify
potentially oxidizable Cys residues and to test their importance by assaying the
effect of oxidizing and reducing agents on the activity of the respective
enzymes. In some cases introduction of disulfide-forming Cys residues could be
useful either for stabilization or for control (i.e. turning specifia reactions
or pathways off when ATP or NADPH are not being photosynthetically generated).
The proposed experiments will give important insight into enzyme mechanisms, the
action of the enzymes which are subject to light modulation, interdomain
movements in enzyme function, and the potential for the design of light (and
redox) modulatable enzymes for commercial use. ***