* 9513127
* Effects of Manipulating tRNAs on Protein Synthesis in E.    coli
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Emanuel Goldman, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas E. Smith
* 03/31/2000
* USD 334,886.00

9513127 Goldman This research will address the question of what happens at a
"hungry codon" with limiting charged cognate tRNA. The main hypothesis to be
tested is that premature termination of translation occurs at the hungry codon
possibly generating, in some instances, functional products. A combination of
genetic and biochemical approaches utilizing mutant alleles, along with cloned,
regulatable genes, will be employed for in vivo experiments. A key goal will be
to isolate truncated MS2 coat protein in pth mutants which have mutant Trp-tRNA
(with higher Km). Factors governing the accuracy and efficiency of translation
are of fundamental importance, with implications for understanding various
diseases, differentiation, mechanisms of aging, as well as implications for
genetic engineering. This research will contribute to understanding how tRNA
molecules influence efficiency, accuracy, and regulation of translation. %%% The
accurate transfer of genetic information in cells heavily relies upon the
faithful translation of mRNA (which reflects the genetic coding for proteins) by
transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules which serve as the interface between the genetic
code and protein synthesis. It is now apparent that the molecular rules
governing decoding of mRNA by tRNA are complicated and determined in part by
cellular conditions. This research will explore what happens under conditions in
which the appropriate amino acid-bound tRNA (charged cognate tRNA) is limiting.
The hypothesis to be tested is that this condition leads to premature
termination of synthesis at the "hungry codon", giving rise to truncated
proteins. Factors governing protein synthesis are of fundamental importance,
with implications for understanding various diseases, differentiation, perhaps
aging, as well as for genetic engineering. The experiments to be conducted will
contribute to our understanding of the efficiency, accuracy, and regulation of
protein synthesis, and how tRNA molecules influence this processes. *** ??