* 9513481
* Structure, Function, and Regulation of the Carboxysome:     A Prokaryotic Organelle
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Jessup Shively, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 10/31/2000
* USD 320,753.00

Shively 9513481 During carbon limitation, many bacteria are able to enhance CO2
fixation by sequestering ribulose bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO)
into carboxysomes. This research addresses the mechanisms by which the
carboxvsome aids C02 fixation. The research is divided into three areas. The
first area involves the isolation and analysis of genes encoding s1 three
additional carboxysome peptides. Presumably, these genes will be located in the
putative carboxysome operon of Thiobacillus neapolitanus and/or Thiobacillus
intermedius. The putative operon of T. neapolitanus has been totally sequenced
(9.75 kbp). Already identified genes include four shell genes and the genes for
the large and small subunits of RuBisCO. Three other open reading frames are
present in the operon, but are yet to be identified. Also, some peptides appear
to be coded for by over-lapping genes. The additional new genes will be isolated
by the technique of reverse genetics, sequenced, and expressed in Escherichia
coli. Their identity will be confirmed by comparing the amino acid and DNA
sequences. Insertion mutants of the new genes will be created and their
phenotypes (growth, cell structure, RuBisCO activity, proteins, transcription,
etc.) carefully analyzed in comparison to the wild type. The second area will be
the assay for the presence of carbonic anhydrase and the determination of the
specificity factor for RuBisCO in highly purified carboxysomes. Carbonic
anhydrase has been hypothesized to be the component in the carboxysome which is
responsible for the enhancement of CO2 fixation by RuBisCO, however all of the
assays thus far have been accomplished with grossly contaminated cyanobacterial
carboxyxomes. Highly purified carboxysomes of T. neapolitanus will be analyzed
by membrane inlet-mass spectrometry for carbonic anhydrase. The specificity
factor is a measure of the ability of RuBisCO to discriminate between CO2 and O2
It is hypothesized that the carboxysome via some unknown mechanism is able to i
ncrease the specificity factor. The factor will be determined for purified
RuBisCO and for the RuBisCO in the purified carboxysome by simultaneous assay of
both carboxylase and oxygenase activities according to standard procedures. The
third area will be to begin the examination of what role, if any, cbbR, a
transcriptional regulatory gene of the LysR family, might play in the expression
of the putative carboxysome operon. CbbR, a positive transcriptional regulator
has been shown to play a significant role in the expression of Calvin cycle
operons in a variety of bacteria. The organization of the cbbL and cbbS of
RuBisCO with carboxysome genes and the coordinated transcriptional regulation of
RuBisCO and the carboxysome in T. neapolitanus and T. intennedius suggest that
they might be controlled by the same regulatory protein, perhaps CbbR. A cbbR
gene has been detected in both of these thiobacilli by heterologous
hybridization using a cbbR from Thiobacillus denitrificans as the probe. The
gene will be isolated, sequenced, expressed, mutagenized, and the mutants
analyzed phenotypically as accomplished with the carboxysome genes. It is
anticipated that the information gained from this project will contribute
substantially to our knowledge of the carboxysome, the overall process of
bacterial CO2 fixation, and how bacteria can adapt to changing environmental
conditions. ***