* 9513563
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop: Nonparametric Statistical    Methods/Canberra, Australia/June 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Terence Speed, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 02/28/1997
* USD 20,500.00

9513563 Speed This award supports the participation of ten American
mathematicians at a workshop entitles "Nonparametric Statistical Methods: The
Road Ahead" to be held at the Australian National University in Canberra, ACT,
June 30 through July 4, 1996. The American organizer is Prof. Terence Speed from
the Statistics Department of the University of California, Berkeley. The
Australian organizer is Prof. Peter Hall from the School of Mathematical
Sciences, Center for Mathematics and its Applications, at the Australian
National University. The workshop will review achievements and discuss future
research in the area of statistical nonparametrics, that body of adaptive,
empirical and nonparametric techniques which has in recent years come to play a
key role in modern statistical practice. The workshop will consider the
implications, prospects and directions in which this aspect of statistical
science should progress in order to assist in answering the increasingly complex
scientific questions being addressed. In addition to bringing together top
statisticians from both countries, a selected few participants will come from
Canada, Russia, Switzerland and the United Kingdom. Australian support for this
workshop is provided by the Australian Department of Industry, Science and
Technology (DIST) under the U.S.-Australia Cooperative Science Program.