* 9513355
* The Study of Isotropic and Anisotropic Motions in Proteins  involving 13CO and 15ND
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Erik Zuiderweg, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 01/31/2000
* USD 315,000.00

9513355 Zuiderweg Dr. Zuiderweg will develop new NMR spectroscopy methodologies
for the study of dynamics in biological macromolecules by measuring 13 CO and
15ND relaxation in 13C/15N labeled proteins. These experiments will yield
information on the dynamics of the protein backbone and nitrogen-containing
sidechains, complementary to the information obtained from the commonly
performed 15NH NMR relaxation experiments. Efforts will go into extending above
methods to allow the detection of the presence or absence of cross correlation
between relaxation mechanisms. Such measurements will help the development of
models for dynamical phenomena in proteins. The cross correlation (interference)
between the heteronuclear relaxation mechanisms is determined with new two- and
three-dimensional NMR methods. The methods will be mostly developed with the
proteins T4-lysozyme (19 kDa) and Binase (12 kDa), and using a peptide loop on
the protein Hsc70. Preliminary data shows that the extent of relaxation cross
correlation is non-uniform over the backbone of T4-lysozyme, indicating that the
dynamical characteristics measured as such are non-uniform and therefore of high
informational content. The methods will be extended for determining the extent
of motional correlation between relaxation vectors in protein surface loops,
using the Hsc70 protein. These methods will be well-suited to distinguish
between disjointed-chain motions and concerted motions involving only a few
hinge-points. This information should be of importance for the understanding of
the role of those loops and peptides that are involved in intermolecular
interactions. %%% The research is aimed at developing new nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy methodologies for the study of dynamics in
biological macromolecules. The methods will concentrate on the NMR relaxation
behavior of carbonyl moieties and will yield information on the dynamics of the
protein backbone, complementary to the information obtained from the commonly
performed NMR relaxation experiments focusing on amide moieties. The methods
will be mostly developed with the proteins T4-lysozyme and Binase and will be
extended for determining the extent of motional correlation between relaxation
vectors in protein surface loops. This information should be of importance for
the understanding of the dynamical characteristics of loops and peptides that
are involved in intermolecular interactions. ***