* 9513155
* U.S.-Japan Cooperative Science:  In Vitro Reconstruction    of Homologous DNA Recombination
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Stephen Kowalczykowski, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Weber
* 12/31/1999
* USD 6,400.00

9513155 Kowalczykowski This award supports a three year collaborative research
project between Dr. Hideo Shinagawa of Osaka University, Japan and Dr. Stephen
Kowalczykowski, University of California, Davis, USA. The major goal of this
project is to biochemically reconstitute the process of genetic recombination,
using purified protein and DNA components. Genetic recombination is complex
biological process whose mechanism is not understood. Yet, it is this process
that results in the assortment of genes which gives rise to genetic diversity.
Further, if harnessed properly, recombination can be exploited either to repair
defective genes that underlie certain human diseases or to genetically engineer
agriculturally important plants or animals. Genetic recombination underlies one
of the major approaches to gene targeting. The proposal brings together the
efforts of two major laboratories that have constituted different parts of the
process: the Kowalczykowski laboratory, which has reproduced the initial steps
of the recombination in vitro, and the Shinagawa laboratory which has
reconstructed the latter steps. It is anticipated that collaboration of these
two laboratories will achieve the first in vitro reconstitution of genetic
recombination. Furthermore, through the exchange of ideas and technology, this
project will broaden our base of basic knowledge and promote international
understanding and cooperation. ***