* 9513489
* Cytokinesis in Aspergillus Nidulans
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,11/30/1997
* Steven Harris, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 11/30/1997
* USD 99,986.00

Harris 9513489 Cytokinesis is a fundamental cellular process subject to both
spatial and temporal controls. Specifically, a plane of cell division must be
specified and the components necessary for cytokinesis recruited to the
incipient division site. Furthermore, cytokinesis must be temporally co-
ordinated with nuclear division. Progress towards understanding the molecular
mechanisms underlying cytokinesis has been hampered by the lack of a complete
inventory of the components required for the process. The overall goal of our
research is to help rectify this problem by exploiting the genetically tractable
filamentous fungus Aspergillus nidulans to identify and characterize proteins
required for cytokinesis. Two such gene products, sepA and sepB, were identified
as a result of previous genetic screens. Molecular characterization of the genes
encoding these proteins has provided valuable clues about their functional role
in cytokinesis. In particular, the sepB gene product appears to serve as an
upstream component of a regulatory system which maintains the co-ordination of
septum formation and nuclear division, whereas the sepA gene product may be a
component of a cortically localized complex of proteins which directs actin
polymerization at the division site. Our research will address these hypotheses
by using a variety of approaches to determine the sub-cellular location of the
sepA and sepB gene products. In addition, genetic screens will be used to
enhance our understanding of sepA and sepB function by identifying the proteins
with which they interact. A better understanding of the basic mechanisms
controlling cell division will be achieved as a result of this research.
Furthermore, filamentous fungi have a pronounced impact upon human affairs.
Thus, learning how fungal cells grow and divide should have numerous practical
benefits. For example, it will provide information which can be used to combat
fungal infection of plants, animals, and humans. In addition, it will allow fu
ngi to be utilized more efficiently for the production of important food and
industrial compounds.