* 9513012
* Analytical Chemical Analysis in an Ecological Context:      a High Pressure Liquid Chromatography Workstation,          Fluorometer and Spectrometer
* BIO,DBI
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Russell Monson, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 03/31/1998
* USD 28,063.00

A plan is presented to study the mechanistic and ecological aspects of plant
interactions with the abiotic environment; with microbes, including mycorrhizae;
and with herbivorous insects. We request funds for a High Pressure Liquid
Chromatography (HPLC) Workstation (Beckman Instrument Bioseparation Gradient
HPLC "System Gold" (Model 126 Programmable Solvent Module and Model 166
Ultraviolet/Visible Detector) and a Bio-Rad Automatic Sampling System (Model
AS-100) , a fluorometer Perkin Elmer model LS 50B "Luminescence Spectrometer" ,
and a spectrophotometer Hitachi U-1100 Spectrophotometer with sample sipper .
These systems will be used to support research in three laboratories at the
University of Colorado; all of which are involved in the analysis and
quantification of a variety of chemical compounds important in ecological
processes. In the laboratory of Professor Deane Bowers, research is focused on
the analysis of plant and insect primary and secondary compounds that are
important in tritrophic interactions (plants-herbivorous insects-natural
enemies). Research in the laboratory of Professor Steve Schrnidt is in two major
areas. In the first, biodegradation of pentachlorophenol (PCP) by microorganisms
is studied; and the second is a collaborative project with Professor Russell
Monson. This collaborative research studies alpine nutrient cycling at several
levels: the processes and mechanisms of amino acid uptake by alpine plants, and
amino acid uptake in relation to plant-microbe interactions, including
mycorrhizae. The efforts of these three laboratories will be greatly enhanced by
the availability ofthe requested equipment, which is presently unavailable,
unreliable and out-of-date, or heavily used for research in other laboratories.