* 9513573
* Teosinte branched and the evolution of development
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1999
* James Gantt, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1999
* USD 370,213.00

Doebley 9513573 teosinte branchedl (tbl ) is a recessive mutant of maize that
conditions the plant to have long lateral branches tipped by tassels at the
upper nodes and many tillers at the basal nodes. As its name implies, tbl mutant
plants show a striking similarity to teosinte, the wild progenitor of maize.
Recently, my laboratory determined that tbl was involved in the evolution of
maize plant architecture (short lateral branches tipped by ears) from teosinte
plant architecture (long lateral branches tipped by tassels). Our model for tbl
is that it acts as a repressor of axillary branch development such that the
maize allele (Tbl +Maize) engenders strong repression (short branches) and the
teosinte allele (tbl +teosinte) weak repression (normally long branches). This
model further suggests that tbl +teosinte is environmentally regulated so that
the extent of branch elongation in teosinte is a function of the degree of
shading from surrounding vegetation. The evolution of maize would have involved
a change in tbl expression from environmentally regulated expression to
constitutive expression. Recently, my laboratory has molecularly cloned tbl
using the Mutator transposable element system. The proposed research will
utilize this tbl clone to test the proposed model for tbl and to elucidate the
nature of the molecular changes in tbl that were responsible for the evolution
of maize from teosinte. First, the molecular structure of tbl including nucleic
acid sequence, intron-exon borders, and homology to other known genes will be
determined. The sequences of 10 maize and 1() teosinte copies of tbl will also
be determined. Phylogenetic and visual comparison of this sample of maize and
teosinte alleles will allow the identification of sequence motifs that are found
only in maize and not in teosinte. These motifs will be candidates for the
molecular event(s) responsible for the functional difference between Tbl +Maize
and tbl +teosinte. Second, the pattern of expression of Tbl +Maize and tbl
+teosinte will be analyzed to determine if and how the expression of these
alleles differs. Under the proposed model, the expression of tbl +teosinte
should be influenced by the degree of shading, while Tbl +Maize should be
strongly expressed under all environments. Third, the phenotypic effects of the
different tbl alleles will be determined. Tests for epistasis between tbl and
two other loci thought to be involved in the evolution of plant architecture in
maize will be made. The evolution of development has been identified as a focus
for developmental biology over the next decade. The proposed research will make
significant contributions to the understanding of the evolution of development
by assessing how changes in gene structure and expression alter the normal
course of plant development leading to the evolution of new adult forms. The
proposed research will also make contributions to plant developmental biology
and biotechnology. This research will provide for the cloning and structural
characterization of an important gene involved in maize development. The cloning
and characterization of tbl will provide new tools for the analysis of meristem
fate and apical dominance, processes of long-standing interest in plant
development. Finally, since increased apical dominance is a common feature of
plant domestication including all cereals, many tree species and herbs such as
sunflower, the possibility exists that engineering of tbl will enable new
advances in crop or tree improvement. 3