* 9513029
* An Automated DNA Sequencer for Use in Population Biology,   Phylogeny, Neurobiology and Immunology
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* J. Emmett Duffy, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 01/31/1997
* USD 56,383.00

Funding is requested for the purchase of a Li-Cor 4000LS automated
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sequencer. This equipment is to be used by no fewer
than 5 separate project groups involving a diverse range of research disciplines
at the College of William and Mary. Four of five principal investigators are
faculty at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS), the School of Marine
Science campus of the College located in Gloucester Point, VA. Research project
groups at VIMS are conducting studies on 1) the population genetics,
biogeography and taxonomy of selected marine organisms with emphasis on pelagic
fishes, 2) the biology of the phylum Haplosporidia and the phylogenetic
relationship of these protists to other eukaryotes, 3) the phylogenetics and
systematics of the Clitellata including leeches, oligochaetes and
branchiobdellidans, 4) the association of major histocompatibility complex II
gene alleles in trout with immune responsiveness, and 5) the origin and
maintenance of biodiversity in marine invertebrate taxa. In addition to the VIMS
project groups, studies in the Department of Biology of the College involve
screening genes that can be used as dorsal-ventral markers in Xenopus to examine
the tissue interactions leading to the determination of the dorsal-ventral axis
in vertebrates. The collective need for an automated sequencer has been directed
by 3 principal criteria: 1) data throughput and efficiency, 2) radiation safety
and 3) centralization. The purchase of the Li-Cor 4000LS automated sequencer
offers considerable advantages to throughput and efficiency over manual methods
currently available at the College of William and Mary. These advantages include
increased base identification accuracy, increased read-length from a single
primer, and greatly reduced time investment. The use of an automated sequencer
will also eliminate radioactive waste and will reduce the risk of environmental
exposure. Currently, sequencing reactions at the College ar e run in the
presence of 35S labeling. The use of radioactive material entails the risk of
exposure both to the experimenter and to those working in the same facilities
and severely curtails the opportunities for students, especially undergraduates,
to gain experience with DNA sequencing. In addition, waste disposal is a
problem. The single radioactive waste disposal site available for eastern
Virginia will close on December 31, 1995 and a substitute facility is not
scheduled to be available until the year 2000. In the interim, all radioactive
waste generated at the College must be stored on site. The laser-detection of
infrared excitation in an automated sequencer does not involve the use of
radioactive labeling methods and thus circumvents impending limitations imposed
by accumulating radioactive waste and experimenter exposure. Moreover, the non-
radioactive detection method makes the technology freely available and safe for
teaching purposes at any level. Centralization of all sequencing operations will
enhance existing interactions among all project groups.