* 9513578
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop: Selection and Delimitation of Parks and Protected Areas/University of New England,       Armidale, Australia/ January 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 12/15/1995,05/31/1997
* H.Paul Friesema, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 05/31/1997
* USD 45,312.00

9513578 Friesema This award will support the participation of twelve U.S.
investigators to take part in a workshop concerned with the delineation of
appropriate boundaries for parks and nature reserves. The workshop will be held
at the University of New England in Armidale, New South Wales, Australia, in
late January 1996. The American organizers of the workshop are Dr. H. Paul
Friesma, Director of the Environmental Policy Program at Northwestern
University, and Dr. Ronald Sundell, leader of the ecology and natural resources
team of the Argonne National Laboratory Center for Environmental Restoration
Systems. The Australian organizer is Prof. John J. Pigram, Executive Director of
the Center for Water Policy Research at the University of New England. The
workshop is being conducted under the U.S.- Australia Cooperative Science
Program and support in Australia is provided through the Australian Department
of Industry, Science and Technology (DIST). Biophysical, sociocultural and
managerial factors need to be considered in the selection and delineation of
park and natural reserve sites. A key question is the determination of
boundaries which will incorporate appropriate resource attributes and contribute
towards the attainment of the goals and objectives of park management. Park and
reserve boundary delineation issues are receiving increasing attention in both
the U.S. and Australia as parks and reserves come under increasing pressure from
a range of sources. The workshop will consider the assessments of ecological
attributes, biophysical variables, managerial considerations and community
attitudes deemed essential in the establishment and maintenance of parks and
reserves. The workshop provides a timely opportunity to discuss common problems
and concerns in the two countries.