* 9513236
* Characterization of the Genetic Diversity of Cold-Active    Enzymes from Psychrophilic Microorganisms
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1997
* Jean Brenchley, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 04/30/1997
* USD 55,000.00

Brenchley 9513236 More than ninety percent of the Microbial Diversity observed
in nature goes unstudied or used because the organisms can not be isolated or
maintained. Of special value is the study of psychrophilic microorganisms and
their cold-active enzymes that have been overlooked by the emphasis on strains
growing at higher temperatures. A wide assortment of physiologically diverse
psychrophiles exists because cold temperatures dominate the earth and its
oceans. These organisms may make cold-active enzymes with uses in biotechnology
for low-temperature chemical conversion, for food processing at low temperature
to prevent spoilage, for bioremediation in cold climates, for use in cold-water
cleaners, etc. This project is a new approach for gaining access to genetic
diversity and cold-active enzymes while not being able to isolate and maintain
all existing strains. The objective is to establish the basic protocols for
discovering and studying genes encoding novel cold-active enzymes existing
microorganisms that have never been isolated. The specific aim is to develop
methods for extracting DNA directly from combinations of microorganisms or cold-
environment samples that has the size and purity required for recombinant DNA
experiments. The techniques will be tested by cloning genes into expression
vectors and detecting transformants producing model enzyme activities in a new
host. The development of these methods will help investigators discover, study
and use new genes from physiologically diverse microorganisms. Microorganisms
have provided many life-saving antibiotics and useful enzymes. Unfortunately,
full use of these microbial products has gone untapped because the organisms
have never been isolated. This project will help make use of the genetic
potential carried in microorganisms. Since the ideal of isolating all
microorganisms is not possible, then an alternative is to seize the genetic
diversity directly by extracting the DNA from environmental materials. The
extracti on of total DNA would yield genes never seen before because it would
collect DNA from all microorganisms in the community. The DNA could be preserved
as miniature Noah's Arks of psychrophilic genetic diversity ready for cloning of
new genes of future interest. The development of methods for extracting DNA from
soil, water, and other samples would give researchers access to genes encoding
industrially useful enzymes and would provide proteins with unusual features for
comparison with other protein structures. ***