* 9513660
* Photoperception and Chromatic Adaptation in Cyanobacteria
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Michael Schaefer, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Continuing Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 03/31/2000
* USD 306,006.00

9513660 Schaefer Light is a critical environmental factor for photosynthetic
organisms. In addition to driving photosynthesis, it provides the information
necessary for acclimation and development in response to changes in ambient
conditions. Most photosynthetic organisms can modulate their photosynthetic
capacity to accommodate fluctuations in light availability. In many cases, the
genes that encode components of the photosynthetic apparatus are under the
control of wavelength-specific photoreceptors that initiate light-responsive
signal transduction pathways. However, although photoperception and
photoregulation of gene expression are well documented for different prokaryotic
and eukaryotic phototrophs, the molecular mechanisms by which photoreceptors
communicate with the gene regulatory machinery of cells are not. This research
seeks to define a photoregulatory mechanism by focusing on photoperception and
signal transduction involved in complementary chromatic adaptation by the
filamentous cyanobacterium Fremyella diplosiphon. Complementary chromatic
adaptation is the process by which this organism senses changes in light quality
and responds by altering the phycobiliprotein composition of the light-
harvesting phycobilisome. This acclimation response involves a signaling
mechanism that links the activity of a photoreceptor to regulated expression of
specific phycobiliprotein genes. Two molecular genetic approaches are being used
to identify and isolate genes involved in complementary chromatic adaptation.
Both approaches are based on a collection of pigment mutants characterized by
aberrant chromatic adaptation (regulatory mutants) or altered phycobilisome
structure (structural mutants). The first approach involves complementation of
different classes of chromatic adaptation regulatory mutants. A complementation
library of wild-type genomic DNA will be constructed and introduced into mutant
cells by conjugation. For each complemented exconjugant, the complementing
plasmid will be rescued an d analyzed to identify the responsible gene(s). The
second approach is based on a recently developed system for identifying
chromatic adaptation genes by transposon-tagging with endogenous transposon
Tn5469. Select pigment mutants in which replicative transposition of Tn5469 was
the probable mutagenic event have been identified and will be used to isolate
the affected gene. A correlation between Tn5469 transposition and the mutant
phenotype will be confirmed by complementation with a corresponding wild-type
genomic DNA fragment. By characterizing the isolated genes, a molecular
frarnework for the chromatic adaptation photosensory and signaling mechanisms
can be established. This work offers a unique opportunity to dissect the
signaling circuitry by which a photoreceptor communicates with the genes it
regulates and will provide a new window into the molecular basis of biological
phototransduction. *** =?