* 9513068
* The Comparative Experimental Embryology of Brachiopods
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Gary Freeman, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 12/31/1999
* USD 281,818.00

9513068 Freeman One goal of the field of developmental biology is to understand
how and why the utilization of the mechanisms responsible for the spatial
organization of multicellular organisms changes during the course of evolution.
This proposal will study this problem in the Phoronida and the related phylum,
Brachiopoda. The Phoronida are unknown as fossils; however, because of their
shell, brachiopods have an excellent fossil record which has allowed
paleontologists to do a rather convincing job of reconstructing the history of
this phylum. A number of extant brachiopod species are derived from, and closely
resemble, ancestors that represent important nodes in this phylogeny.
Experimental studies will be performed on the embryos of these species in order
to establish when, during development, different parts of the embryo become
specified and to identify the mechanisms that are responsible for regional
specification. These experiments begin with the construction of a fate map for
each embryo indicating the regions of hte larva that develop from specific parts
of the egg and early embryo. Then diffenrent regions of the embryo will be
isolated at various stages of development, and their ability to differentiate
will be compared to that of the same region in a whole embryo as indicated by
the fate map. By isolating parts of eggs and embryos in combination with other
parts and at different developmental stages, one can infer whether the
development of a given region is autonomous or conditional. By comparing the
timing and mode of regional specification during embryogenesis for a series of
species at different nodes in the phyylogeny, one can document the changes in
the utilization of mechanisms for regional specification that accompany
evolutionary change. Some of these species have larvae that are morphologically
similar and have similar life histories although these species are not closely
related, while other species are closely related but have very different larvae
with different life history strategies. Comparisons beteen these species will
allow one to dissect out the role of larval evolution versus the evolution of
adult structures in bringing about developmental changes involving early
embryogenesis. ***