* 9513339
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Use of Self-       Assembled Monolayers to Tailor the Properties of Acoustic   Plate Mode Biosensors
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* George Whitesides, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 03/31/1999
* USD 5,500.00

This award supports research visits by students of Professor George Whitesides
of Harvard University to Heidelberg, Germany, as part of a collaborative
research project between Professor Whitesides and Professor Michael Grunze of
the Department of Physical Chemistry of the University of Heidelberg. The
objective of their research is to develop biosensors and biosensor arrays. The
Grunze group has developed an acoustic plate mode (APM) sensor as a technique to
measure antibody recognition of immobilized antigen. The Harvard group has
developed several model systems of thin organic films involving adsorption of
protein to self-assembled monolayers (SAM's) . SAM's are well defined model
surfaces and offer unprecedented control for tailoring surfaces with a variety
of delicate and complex functions. These systems will be used to test and
optimize the APM sensor. The collaborators will also explore novel processes for
fabricating the interdigitated electrode arrays that comprise the APM device.
Building on the complementary expertise of the participating US and German
research groups, this innovative research will lead to new biosensors that are
robust, discriminating, inexpensive and fast. They could have a variety of
practical applications in medical diagnostics, microlithography and other
fields. On the fundamental level, the research should improve our understanding
of the relation between molecular order and viscoelastic properties of organic
monolayers.