* 9513655
* RUI: An Ultrastructural Analysis of the Development of      Pigment Pattern in Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Randall Morrison, Hood College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 02/28/1999
* USD 183,267.00

*** Morrison IBN 95-13655 This is a proposal to study the development of pigment
pattern in the zebrafish, Danio rerio. The zebrafish skin is an excellent model
system for studying pattern formation. Initially, an embryonic pattern of four
black stripes emerges during early development and over a period of several
weeks the pattern is progressively transformed into the alternating blue-black
and silvery-yellow striped pattern of the adult fish. The pigment pattern is
composed of multiple identifiable types of pigmented cells (chromatophores) that
are arranged very specifically with relation to one another such that particular
tissue colors are expressed in particular areas of the skin. This study will
examine the changes in morphology and migration of the chromatophores identified
in normal fish and in a variety of mutant pigment phenotypes. The PI will also
address the spatial interdependence of chromatophores required to produce
specific pattern elements. This will require a comprehensive analysis of the
movements and relative position of the various chromatophore types (both
vertically and horizontally in the skin). The studies will also address which
chromatophore types or morphologies are derived from common cellular
progenitors. Chromatophores combine their spectral properties to produce
specific tissue colors. The arrangement, movements and the ultrastructure of
these cells will be assessed using several different methodologies. Light
microscopy and spectrophotometry will be used to observe and quantify tissue
colors. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) will be used to qualitatively and
quantitatively determine the distinctive ultrastructure of chromatophores. High
resolution time lapse video will be employed to follow the trajectories of the
chromatophores during pattern formation. In addition, high performance liquid
chromatography techniques will be used to separate, identify, and quantify
pigments extracted from tissues. Together these techniques will provide a
thorough multilevel determination of the cellular and biochemical basis of a
given pattern and the associated tissue color. A comprehensive morphological
framework with which to interpret pattern alterations is not available, despite
the fact that several laboratories around the world are generating pigmentation
mutants. The goal of this application is to provide the fundamental
morphological data required to analyze mutant pigment patterns. This research
program is a part of a balanced approach to an academic career and is also an
integral part of an educational program as well. The project will enhance
opportunities for undergraduates at Hood College, a single-gender woman's
institution, to participate in an active research program. The research plan is
designed so that undergraduate students gain valuable experience by doing
collaborative discovery-based learning. The very nature of determining the
precise stage of embryos, preparing the specimens for light optical analysis,
the acquisition of digital images and their manipulation using computer software
will insure that much of the science effort will be performed by students. This
proposal will also allow zebrafish preparations to be included in cell biology
and developmental biology classes at Hood College. Funding of this proposal will
provide opportunities for women to excel in science. It is also noteworthy that
25% of the enrollment at Hood College are members of under represented
minorities. ***