* 9513457
* Energy and Electron Transfer During Bacterial Photosynthesis
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Aileen Taguchi, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 07/31/1999
* USD 329,800.00

9513457 Woodbury Technical Significance. Despite the availability of structural
information and the extensive use of genetic engineering and ultrafast
spectroscopy, the mechanism of the initial light driven charge separation in
bacterial photosynthesis remains a topic of debate. It is now clear that factors
such as static and/or dynamic heterogeneity of the reaction center population,
vibrationally hot excited states, strong coupling between cofactors and the
involvement of alternate electron transfer pathways or intermediates need to be
evaluated before a consistent picture of the solar energy conversion reactions
can emerge. To investigate heterogeneity, we propose multipulse photoselection
measurements to directly observe changes in the fluorescence yield and in the
rate and yield of charge separation in photoseleted subpopulations of a reaction
center sample. To investigate the possibility of vibrationally hot states and
alternate photochemistry depending on the initial excited state, experiments in
which specific excitation of cofactors other than the initial electron donor of
the reaction center will be performed. Initial excited singlet state properties
and dynamics as well as excited state coupling to other reaction center states
will be investigated using a mutant from James Allen and JoAnn Williams'
laboratory that show a slow excited state evolution apparently involving
increasing chasing charge separated character with time. %%% General
Singificance. One of the most interesting questions in biochemistry concerns how
the protein environment of an enzyme interior mediates the chemistry of the
cofactors it contains and reactants it binds to. Chemical dynamics plays a major
role in these interactions. The problem with studying dynamics in normal
enzymatic systems where the reactants must diffuse through the solvent to find
each other is that there is really no way to look at processes that occur on
timescales faster than that diffusion (microseconds), and even on this timesca
le, it is usually impossible to actually monitor a whole population of molecules
undergoing the same dynamics in phase with each other. We circumvent this
problem by studying an enzyme whose reaction is initiated by the absorption of
light. The photosynthetic reaction center from purple nonsulfur bacteria is a
solar powered enzyme that reduces a quinone molecule. Using femtosecond
resolution spectroscopy, we can initiate and monitor the reactions that occur
upon light absorption on the time scale of the molecular movements that are
actually involved in the chemical reactions. Much of the proposed work involves
looking at the role of dynamics on various different timescales in the solar
energy conversion process. Along these lines, we are asking what happens if we
inject additional vibrational energy into the system. How does this additional
local motion affect the chemistry? Finally, one can change the protein
environment by mutation and test the effects of this on the ability of the
protein environment to guide the reaction. ***