* 9513669
* Structure-Function Relationship of Thermoacidophilic        Archaebacterial Membranes
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Parkson Chong, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 08/31/1999
* USD 287,432.00

9513669 Chong This research is to study physical properties of liposomes
composed of the tetraether polar lipid fraction E (PLFE) isolated from
thermoacidophilic archaebacteria Sulfolobus acidocaldarius. The specific aims
are to determine isothermal compressibility, thermal expansivity, proton
permeability, lipid rotational and lateral diffusion of PLFE liposomes. The
hypotheses are: (i) PLFE liposomes are rigid but loosely packed and (ii) the
sugar moieties at the PLFE polar headgroups play a crucial role for maintaining
a pH gradient across the archaebacterial plasma membrane. Fluorescence probe
techniques as well as chemical modifications and high pressure methodologies
will be employed. %%% The general purpose of this research is to gain a better
understanding of the structure-function relationship of the archaebacterial
membrane. The results obtained in this research will set a solid basis for the
future studies of interactions between Sulfolobus acidocaldarius membrane-bound
proteins and PLFE lipids. Archaebacteria are curios and remarkable organisms.
The native habitat of the thermoacidophilic archaebacterium Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius is hot (65-75 0C) and acidic (pH 2-3) sulfur springs. Besides,
Sulfolobus has found wide use in biotechnology, most notably in the use of its
DNA polymerase and (-galactosidase for molecular biology research. Also,
liposomes made from archaebacteria-type lipids show remarkable thermostability,
which may have potential use in the nanoscale design of artificial ion channels
and membrane receptors. ***