* 9513994
* Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Course on the Early           Development of Xenopus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 08/31/1998
* USD 30,000.00

9513994 Grodzicker Dramatic progress in the field of developmental biology in
recent years has resulted from the application of a number of new approaches to
classical problems, and led to the need for advanced courses to train new
investigators to study those animal models, such as Xenopus, that have been
important in making new discoveries in this field. Funds are being sought to
continue the Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory course on Early Development of
Xenopus laevis, which has now been taught for three years as part of an
integrated set of courses at Cold Spring Harbor in a number of areas of modern
biology. This course provides extensive laboratory exposure to the biology and
manipulation of embryos from the frog Xenopus laevis. Xenopus is a vertebrate
uniquely suited for studies of early development, since large numbers of
embryos, from fertilization onward, can easily be obtained. Development is rapid
and the large size of the embryos facilitates their micromanipulation to allow
analysis of such important issues as embryonic induction that are not feasible
in mama embryos. The course is suited both for those who have a knowledge of
molecular biology and developmental biology, but have had no experience with
Xenopus, as well as those with some Xenopus experience who wish to increase
their repertoire of techniques. The specific areas that will be covered are
listed below: 1. Care and handling of Xenopus adults. Induction of ovulation,
egg collection, testis isolation, and fertilization. 2. Stages of embryonic
development and anatomy. 3. Whole mount in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry. 4. Microinjection of eggs and oocytes with mRNA and DNA
constructs. 5. Micromanipulation of embryos, including induction and
transplantation assays. 6. Preparation and use of cell cycle extracts. It is
anticipated that the basic organization of the course and much of the course
material will remain unchanged during the proposed period of support, though new
issues will be discussed and integrated into the laboratory as the field
progresses. :