* 9513243
* Conference: Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Conference on The Cell Cycle, May, 1996
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1997
* Terri Grodzicker, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Barbara K. Zain
* 04/30/1997
* USD 3,000.00

95-13243 Grodzicker Since 1992, Cold Spring Harbor has held bi-annual meetings
on the Cell Cycle. These meetings have been enormously successful and have
become one of the most important international forums for discussing and
critiquing progress in the cell cycle field. These meetings are timely,
occurring when major advances in the cell cycle field needed to be communicated
to other researchers in this and related fields. For instance, the 1991
Symposium contained reports of the first insights into the relationships between
cell cycle control mechanisms and tumorigenesis, the role of checkpoint pathways
in genomic stability, the interaction between cell cycle proteins and tumor
suppressor proteins; The 1994 meetings contained reports of the importance of
the CdK inhibitory proteins in the cell cycle. Current research in the cell
cycle field is beginning to provide insights into mechanisms that control
cellular differentiation, apoptosis, senescence, tumorigenesis, and
transcription. These advancements as well as other biological processes will be
one focus of the 1996 meeting. Other areas of interest will include cell cycle
initiation, S phase regulation, mitotic control, regulated protein proteolysis,
cell cycle transcription, and cell cycle checkpoints. Platform presentations
will be selected from submitted abstracts, emphasis will be placed on graduate
students and post-doctoral fellows participation. %%% Since 1992, Cold Spring
Harbor has held bi-annual meetings on the Cell Cycle. The meetings have been
enormously successful and have become one of the most important international
forums for discussing and critiquing progress in the cell cycle field. Past
meetings were timely, occurring when major advances in the cell cycle field
needed to be disseminated to other researchers in this and in related fields.
This meeting will be no exception. Topics to be covered include understanding
mechanisms that control cellular differentiation, apoptosis, senescenc e,
tumorigenesis, transcription, cell cycle initiation, S phase regulation, mitotic
control, and other related biological processes. Platform presentations will be
selected entirely from submitted abstracts, and strong emphasis will be placed
upon participation by graduate students and post-doctoral fellows. ***