* 9513672
* "Insulin-Stimulated Protein Phosphorylation"
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Zahi Damuni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Rodewald
* 01/31/2000
* USD 339,374.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o o
l 4 @ , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; Abstract 9513672 Damuni There is considerable evidence that
insulin regulates diverse cellular processes, in part, by causing a marked
increase in the phosphoylation of numerous cellular proteins on serine and
threonine residues. However, despite substantial progress in recent years, the
mechanism underlying this effect of insulin remains unclear. The experiments
described in the proposal are designed to test the hypothesis that the mechanism
by which insulin causes a marked increase in the phsophorylation of cellular
proteins on serines and threonines is mediated in part by: a) the
phosphorylation and activation of a distinct insulin-stimulated protein serine
threonine kinase (cPK) catalyzed by MBPK-1 and MBPK-2, two new members of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) family, b) the phosphorylation and
inactivation of protein phosphatase 2A, a major cytoplasmic protein serine
threonine phosphatase, and c) by the activation of phosphorylation of MBPK-1 and
2 catalyzed by MAPK kinase. The specific questions addressed in this application
are: a) are cPK, PP2A, MBPK-1 and MBPK-2 phos phorylated at regulatory sites in
intact cells in response to insulin, and b) are MBPK-1 and MBPK-2 distinct
members of the MAPK family of enzymes. To address these questions, a combination
of biochemical, immunological and molecular approaches will be employed to
determine the location of residues modified on cPK, PP2A, MBPK-1 and MBPK-2 in
vitro and in vivo. To establish the relationship of MBPK-1 and MBPK-2 to the
MAPK family of enzymes, cDNAs of the former will be isolated, sequenced and
expressed, and the recombinant proteins will be purified and characterized. The
studies in this application will provide important new information on the
mechanism of insulin action. *** ; Oh +' 0 ( L p $ H l NORMAL.DOT Abstract
Barbara Zain Barb S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( + ara Zain @ @ @ @
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 e = e l l l l l l l ^ 1 # @ T 4 ^ l ^ l l l l l l l l Q
Abstract 9513672 Damuni There is considerable evidence that insulin regulates
diverse cellular processes, in part, by causing a marked increase in the
phosphoylation of numerous cellular proteins on serine and threonine residues.
However, despite substantial progress in recent years, the mechanism underlying
this effect of insulin remains unclear. The experiments described in the
proposal are designed to test the hypothesis that the mechanism by which insulin
causes a marked increase in the phsophorylation of cellular proteins on serines
and threonines is mediated in part by: a) the phosphorylation and activation of
a distinct insulin-stimulated protein serine threonine kinase (cPK) catalyzed by
MBPK-1 and MBPK-2, two new members of the mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK) family, b) the phosphorylation and inactivation of protein phosphatase
2A, a major cytoplasmic protein serine threonine phosphatase, and c) by the
activation of phosphorylation of MBPK-1 and 2 catalyzed by MAPK kinase. The
specific questions addressed in this application are: a) are cP