* 9513184
* Dissection of an RNA Protein Interaction Involve in  Repression of Splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Susan White, Bryn Mawr College
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 05/31/2001
* USD 290,850.00

9513184 White Yeast ribosomal protein L32, RPL32, binds to its own transcript
and prevents splicing. The RNA binding target can be reduced to as few at 24
nucleotides folded into a stem-internal loop-stem motif where the loop is
purine-rich and is closed by a potential G:U pair. Previous experiments have
localized the site of protein contact to the loop and some preliminary work to
explore the sequence requirements for protein binding has been completed. The
experiments proposed herein directly address the question of hydrogen bonding
within the internal loop. Chemical modification of the hydrogen bonding faces of
those bases not involved in pairing will be detected by primer extension
methods. NMR spectra will be collected to detect imino protons protected from
exchange with water. Imino and amino resonances which are visible are probably
involved in hydrogen bonds. Probing the protein structure and its interface with
RNA makes up the second part of the proposal. At present, only the primary
structure of the protein in known and there are no obvious regions related to
RNA binding domains of other proteins. At the outset, the purification protocol
will be improved and the purified protein will be subjected to analysis of the
protein, the CD spectrum of the complex will be compared to that of the RNA to
determine whether protein binding changes the helicity of the RNA. To determine
which protein residues contact the RNA, crosslinking experiments will be carried
out using native and modified RNA. As a complement to these experiments, a type
of "footprinting" experiment will be done on the protein to see what portions of
the protein may be protected from hydrolysis on RNA binding. These experiments
will require some work to develop practical, general techniques which work for
all RNA protein complexes. In the third and final portion of the proposal, the
mechanism of repression is examined. Evidence from one laboratory suggests that
the U1 snRNP binds to the L32RNA/RPL32 complex to form a termolecular complex
incapable of splicing. The initial hypothesis is that the U1 RNA strengthens the
binding of L32 RNA to RPL32 and that the dissociation of RPL32 is slowed or
prevented by complexation with the two RNAs. The Education Plan is based on the
first three years of teaching at Bryn Mawr College. The overriding curricular
philosophy is to devise genuine chemistry courses which convey the current
excitement in biochemistry. Every attempt is made to challenge the students to
become active, critical learners who see themselves as participants in the
scientific enterprise. Given Bryn Mawr's mission to educate young women, it is
particularly important to encourage its students to realize their scientific
ambitions. For undergraduates, a full year of research is often the culmination
of their liberal arts education and is frequently their first truly independent
research experience. It is a challenge to design projects where students can do
successful experiments while contributing to the progress of the laboratory.
Problem solving, visualizing molecules, moles, equilibria, and kinetics are
still vital parts of General Chemistry which students must master. The challenge
of teaching at the introductory level is thus to simultaneously hold the
students' interest and insist that they develop the skills needed for future
work in science. %%% This research involves the study of the structure of an RNA
involved in regulating the production of a protein. Unlike DNA, which forms a
symmetric, elongated double helix, RNA forms a complex, convoluted shape. While
all of DNA's bases are involved in either G-C or A-T pairs, in RNA some bases
are paired but others are not. The first portion of the research involves
determining which bases pair. Due to its complicated structure, RNA presents a
variety of features which could be recognized by a protein. In the system under
study, a small protein binds to a portion of an RNA which has both non-standard
base pairs and unpaired bas es. Experiments will be done to define how the RNA
and protein features contribute to this molecular recognition event. When the
protein is bound to the RNA, its biological function is blocked. Model
experiments will be designed to test mechanisms for this repression of protein
production. The teaching of biological chemistry to advanced students and
introductory chemistry is discussed in the education plan. The common theme is
to challenge the students to learn a rigorous experimental science while sharing
in the excitement of current developments in biochemistry. ***