* 9514701
* Development of Selective Connectivity in a Simple Nervous   System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Rodney Murphey, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 02/29/2000
* USD 272,001.00

Murphey 9514701 Nerve cells, or neurons, communicate with each other at
specialized junctions called synapses. At chemical synapses, an active neuron
releases a particular chemical neurotransmitter compound from the presynaptic
side of the terminal to cross the tiny synaptic gap and bind to receptor
molecules on the postsynaptic cell. Binding of the neurotransmitter leads to an
electrophysiological change called the postsynaptic potential. Two sensitive
indicators of transmitter release that can be measured by electrophysiological
recordings are facilitation, which is an increased postsynaptic response, and
depression, which is a decreased postsynaptic response. Some identified single
cells in insects can make two different kinds of synapse on postsynaptic cells,
facilitating at one cell and depressing at the other. The emergence of
facilitation at a synapse has been found to be regulated by the postsynaptic
cell, so the target cell has an effect on the input it receives. This work will
use electrophysiology and pharmacology to examine this retrograde regulation of
transmitter release, using the advantages of invertebrate nervous systems in
having particular identifiable synapses. It may be that a continuous release of
a co-transmitter differentially adjusts the properties of the presynaptic
terminal, or instead that the postsynaptic neurons release a substance that
regulates the function of the presynaptic terminal. Results from this work will
be important to understanding the important issue of how synaptic activity is
regulated, and these results are likely to have a broad impact in both
neurophysiology and developmental neuroscience.