* 9514351
* Integration of Water and Energy Balance in Hummingbirds
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Carol Beuchat, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 03/31/1998
* USD 91,500.00

9514351 Beuchat Hummingbirds have the highest metabolic rate of any vertebrate,
and they fuel this tremendous metabolism almost entirely with the sugar found in
nectar. Supporting a high metabolic rate on liquid diet presents these birds
with some special physiological problems. Most obviously, hummingbirds must
consume tremendous quantities of nectar, up to five times the bird's own body
mass per day! Then, the gastrointestinal tract must be able to extract, with
great efficiency, the sugar and other nutrients in the nectar as it passes
rapidly through the bird. The kidney must also be able to filter and excrete
excess water to avoid dilution of body fluids. Finally, because concentrations
of salts and minerals in nectar are typically low but are needed by the bird,
the amounts excreted in the urine must be minimal. This research investigates
the ways in which hummingbirds deal simultaneously with these extreme
physiological challenges of fluid, electrolyte, and energy balance. The study
focuses not only on understanding fundamental aspects of the physiology of the
kidney and intestinal tract in hummingbirds, but also on how these organ systems
play coordinated roles in the physiological maintenance of energy and osmotic
homeostasis. The work is further extended by considering the integration of
renal and intestinal function with hummingbird biology at the organismal level
in a series of questions that address the interface of physiology with behavior,
morphology, and ecology, and evolution. Much of what comparative physiology has
contributed to our understanding of osmoregulation in terrestrial birds and
mammals has been based upon studies of the ultimate concentrators, the desert
rodents, and only a few species of birds. We know relatively little, by
contrast, about the special osmoregulatory problems faced by birds and mammals
for which the challenge is an exc ess of water rather than desiccation. This
study is unusual in the breadth of its perspective and its simultaneous
consideration of processes from the cellular level to that of the animal in the
field. It is the first study to closely examine the osmoregulatory physiology of
a bird or mammal that is a model organism for the study of diuresis in
vertebrates.