* 9514258
* Symposium on Biological Oxidations at the University of     Michigan to be held June 28-29,1996
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Minor Coon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9514258 Coon The area of biological oxidations, which is of major importance to
modern biochemistry, molecular biology, and biophysics, continues to be one of
vigorous investigation. This special symposium is being held in honor of
Dr.Vincent Massey, a leader in the field of biological oxidations, on his 70th
birthday. The symposium will focus on enzyme- catalyzed oxidations and flavins
and flavoproteins. The speakers will include 10 from the United States and 6
from foreign countries. All have made significant research contributions in the
field of biological oxidation's and many are Dr. Maser's former students and
collaborators. Topics that will be discussed include: oxygenases, hydroxylases,
oxidases, and dehydrogenases in addition to broader topics such as protein
flexibility and biological development of the oxidative proteins. %%% Biological
oxidation includes virtually all of the biochemical processes by which energy is
derived from foods. A large range of enzymes accomplish the various reactions
that are involved. This meeting will bring together investigators who are
working on the broad range of enzymes and related topics that are linked by a
common theme, i.e., biological oxidation. It is expected that information
exchange among these investigators will lead to new insight into this field. ***