* 9514100
* RUI:  Genetic and Functional Analysis of the Nocardia       corallina Polyhydroxyalkanoate Synthase
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Douglas Dennis, James Madison University
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 01/31/2000
* USD 263,032.00

MCB-9514100 Dennis Polyhydroxyalkanoates (PHAs) are energy-reserve polymers that
are accumulated by many bacterial species in times of nutritional stress.
Coincidentally, these polymers may also be utilized as biodegradable plastic.
The physical properties of the plastic are dictated by the length of the carbon
chain in the monomer unit with C4 homopolymers being relatively brittle and C8
homopolymers being elastomeric. Copolymers tend to have physical properties
intermediate between their monomer units. The enzymes that mediate the
polymerization, PHA synthases, are grouped into three distinct categories based
on their substrate specificity and their molecular structure. Type I PHA
synthases have a single polypeptide chain and form predominately C4
(3-hydroxybutyrate; 3HB) monomer units. Type II PHA synthases also have a single
polypeptide chain, but they form C4 to C12 (3-hydroxydodecanoate; 3HDD) monomer
units, with Cg (3-hydroxyoctanoate; 3HO) and C10 (3-hydroxydecanoate; 3HD) being
the preponderant units. Type III PHA synthase are composed of 2 polypeptide
chains and form largely 3HB. However, some members of this class are able to
incorporate mostly 3HV into P(3HB-co-3HV) copolymer. The PHA synthase from N.
corallina (phaCNc), a bacteria which makes a substantial amount of 3-HV from
unrelated carbon sources such as glucose and fructose has been cloned.
Preliminary data suggests that this PHA synthase does not completely meet the
specifications for any of the three classes of synthases. It has a single
polypeptide chain and is genetically most similar to Type II PHA synthases, yet
its substrate specificity appears to be largely in the 3HV and 3HH range, though
its total substrate range is from 3HB to 3HHp (3-hydroxyheptanoate). This is
quite exciting for several reasons. First, phaCNc represents a potentially new
class of PHA synthase. Second, it is a PHA synthase which makes new types of
polyhydroxyalkanoates that have been little-characterized. Third, it is well-
expressed in Pseudomona s putida, reasonably expressed in Alcaligenes eutrophus
and Klebsiella aerogenes, and poorly expressed in Escherichia coli. Fourth, it
is a PHA synthase that may have the capacity to be utilized in plant constructs
because it accesses long- and medium-chain fatty acid metabolism, yet only forms
copolyesters of 3HB and 3HHx (3-hydroxyhexanoate) or 3HV (3-hydroxyvalerate) and
3HHp. This research continues the analysis of phaCNc in two specific areas. In
the first, expression of phaCNc will be analyzed in the four different
recombinant hosts named above. Analyses will be conducted for enzymatic
activity, quantitation of phaCNc transcripts, and quantitation of PhaCNc levels.
This data will be correlated with the levels of expression of polymer in each
recombinant host. In addition, the effect of rare codon usage in each host will
be analyzed by selecting specific codons, genetically altering them to more
prevalent codons, and then examining the result of this alteration on enzymatic
activity, phaCNc transcript levels, protein levels, and polymer levels. Finally,
the effect of placing phaCNc under the control of a strong, regulatable promoter
will be determined. The expected result of this phase of the project is an
understanding of the factors which limit or facilitate phaCNc expression. An
additional result is the construction of phaCNc genes which are well-expressed
in recombinant hosts. In the second phase of the project studies will be
initiated that focus on identifying regions of phaCNc which mediate substrate
specificity. The first strategy used will be to randomly mutagenize phaCNc and
screen for altered substrate specificity of PhaCNc. This will done enzymatically
utilizing a novel screening assay developed in our laboratory. phaCNc genes
which exhibit altered substrate specificity will be analyzed as to the specific
change in their DNA sequence. The second strategy used to to identify regions
that regulate substrate specificity will be to construct chimeras from different
PHA synthase g enes and analyze the construct for enzymatic activity and polymer
composition. Though many (approximately 19) different PHA synthases have been
cloned, only one has been rigorously studied, the Alcaligenes eutrophus PHA
synthase, and these studies did not extend to the level proposed here for
phaCNc- phaCNc has advantages over most other PHA synthase genes in that its
substrate specificity falls into a range that is more likely to be of commercial
interest. Studies proposed here should be applicable not only to phaCNc, but to
other PHA synthase genes as well. %%% This research has application to the
inexpensive production of biodegradable plastics. In addition, it accomplishes
the training of undergraduate students in the techniques of molecular biology
and their applications to problems of both basic and applied interests. ***