* 9514112
* Competence and DNA Processing in Transforming Haemophilus   Influenzae
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Gerard Barcak, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Cone
* 05/31/2001
* USD 392,400.00

Barcak 95-14112 In the Gram-negative bacterium Haemophilus influenzae, DNA
transformation is genetically-encoded process that is temporally and
physiologically regulated. DNA binding to the transformation-competent cell
surface is mediated by a DNA sequence-specific receptor that internalizes and
processes the duplex DNA through the multilayer cell envelope. It is the
objective of this research project to learn more about this DNA receptor-DNA
translocation complex by characterizing a newly discovered putative operon
containing 3 novel genes, of which dprA is competence-inducible and specifically
required for chromosomal DNA processing in the competent cell. We shall
determine the biochemical role of Haemophilus influenzae DprA protein in the
translocation and processing of transforming donor DNA in cells. In order to do
this we will use cellular fractionation, immunocytochemistry and genetic fusion
technology to identify the cellular location of the DprA protein in non-
competent and competent cells. We will follow the fate of specifically labeled
substrate DNA to determine the biochemical role of DprA in DNA translocation and
DNA processing during transformation. A second major objective of this research
is to identify other competence-inducible genes with emphasis on membrane-bound
and periplasmic components of the transformation machinery through the use of
gene fusion technology and a novel screening procedure. Importantly, these
studies will be strongly facilitated by the availability of the complete DNA
sequence of the chromosome of the H. Influenzae strain to be used in these
studies. Significant advances in our knowledge of how cells communicate and how
cells temporally or physiologically activate sets of genes comes from studies of
receptor-ligand interactions and signal transduction pathways (e.g., IR-1
mediated insulin response in eukaryotic cells, chemotaxis in bacterial cells).
In this project we will study a novel process involving a DNA receptor-DNA
translocation compl ex using a newly discovered competence-inducible operon,
dpr, as our toe-hold. This research project will give new information since it
emphasizes an aspect of DNA transformation that may be intrinsically different
between the two major types of bacterial organisms due to cell architecture,
namely components of the membranes and periplasmic space found almost
exclusively in the Gram-negative bacteria such as H. influenzae. Close
examination of the cellular location of dproperon gene products and their
biochemical role in DNA processing coupled with the identification of new
competence-inducible components of the DNA receptor-translocation machinery will
serve to augment and refine the current "transformasome" model proposed by
earlier investigators. This research focuses on a research topic that is gaining
increasing interest every year, namely the transfer of genes between bacteria.
This transfer is important to the evolution of bacterial capabilities and the
interaction of bacteria with their environments. Dr. Barcak's research will
provide insight into the genetics of an important species of bacteria. ***