* 9514279
* Molecular Genetic Studies of Bdelloid Rotifers
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Matthew Meselson, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 12/31/1999
* USD 424,825.00

; R o o t E n t r y F =8 w @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t w O b j e
c t P o o l =8 w =8 w 4 @ ? @ A B C D E F G H F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9514279 Meselson Bdelloid rotifers are common fresh
water invertebrates classified among 4 families, 18 genera, and more than 350
species. Males, hermaphrodites, and meiosis are unknown and eggs are produced
from oocytes by mitosis. The Bdelloidea constitute the only higher level
metazoan taxon that appears to be entirely parthenogenetic, making them the most
favorable group in which to test the possibility that extensive evolution can
occur without sexual reproduction and genetic recombination. The approach being
taken to determine if bdelloids evolved asexually is based on the expectation
that a diploid line that lost sexual reproduction and genetic recombination
millions of years ago will accumulate a large amount of neutral heterozygosity,
greatly reducing the homology of chromosome pairs. Such heterozygosity will be
heritable, so that the ancient origin of its accumulation will be manifested in
the phylogeny of heterozygous nucleotide sites among species of the asexual
group. Tests for hyper heterozygosity are being conducted by determining the
nucleotide sequences of numerous independently is olated copies of specific
genes from rotifer populations grown from single eggs. Gene copies are isolated
by cloning the products of polymerase chain reactions and also by screening
genomic libraries. Results thus far, with the bdelloids Philodina roseola and
Macrotrachela quadricornifera, are consistent with heritable hyper
heterozygosity that began to accumulate long before these two genera diverged.
The generality of this finding is being tested by sequence studies of four
different genes to two different families. genes in bdelloid rotifers of three
different genera belonging to two different families. Tests for chromosome
homology and divergence are being performed by fluorescence in situ
hybridization. If the homology of chromosome pairs has become greatly reduced,
one member of a diverged gene pair will hybridize at high stringency to only one
chromosome-and the other member of the pair will generally hybridize to a
different chromosome. Bdelloid rotifers from two different families are being
tested in this manner, using probes containing the same genes that are being
examined in sequence studies. As controls, the above sequencing and cytogenetic
tests are being performed with rotifers of the Class Monogononta, in which
females are diploids that usually reproduce parthenogenetically but which
occasionally undergo meiosis and reproduce sexually, producing haploid males and
exhibiting Mendelian segregation. %%% Genetic recombination is believed to be
essential for the successful evolution of a species. The bdelloid rotifers, a
common fresh-water invertebrate, produce eggs from oocytes by mitosis and no
indication that sexual reproduction occurs has ever been found. It is now
possible to look, at a molecular level, for any indication of genetic
recombination and to test the possibility that extensive evolution can occur
without sexual reproduction and genetic recombination. *** @ @ Oh +' 0 $ H l S u
m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( &gt; D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT
christine a savoy christine a savoy @ | r @ s @ w @ H' Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e
= e w j j j j j j j 1 % &gt;