* 9514714
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Development and    Application of Methods for Materials Simulation
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Koblar Jackson, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 05/31/2000
* USD 23,080.00

This award supports Professor Koblar Jackson and Adjunct Professor Mark Pederson
of Central Michigan University (CMU), together with a US graduate student and a
US postdoctoral fellow, to collaborate in materials research with Professor
Thomas Frauenheim and others of the Institute of Physics of the Technical
University of Chemnitz, Germany. They share an interest in the application of
advanced simulation methods to study the properties of materials, but they have
expertise in complementary approaches that differ in speed and accuracy. The US
participants have expertise in the more accurate first-principles density-
functional technique while their German partner is more experienced with the
faster density-functional-based tight-binding approach. They propose to apply
both methods in three specific projects: (1) a study of passivation of surfaces
during chemical vapor deposition, (2) measuring the relative stabilities of
defects in crystal lattices and (3) examining the issues related to the
stability and reactivity of silicon clusters. Pursuing these applications will
require them to develop new methods for predicting infrared and Raman
intensities and a new method for calculating surface properties within a first-
principles approach. Results of this research will be of significant interest to
the surface science community and those studying silicon-based materials.