* 9514818
* Women's Economic Activities, Household Decision Making &amp;    Child Welfare in Manabi, Ecuador
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Kathleen DeWalt, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 05/31/1999
* USD 96,678.00

Economic development projects in the underdeveloped world after World War 2
focused on generating income for men, assuming that the men would distribute the
benefits to women and children. After decades of experiences development
specialists realized that the income frequently was not fairly distributed --
the welfare of women and children was often ignored. For the past 20 years
projects have attempted to focus on women as the primary caretakers of children.
This project evaluates one form of development project -- a cooperative food
processing plant -- in its impact on women's abilities to control resources and
improve the well-being of their children. This award to the University 0f
Pittsburgh supports an ethnographic project to study the effects of poor rural
Ecuadorian women's participation in economic development projects on their
household economic and health well-being. The research will take place in four
communities, two which were the sites of cooperative development projects, and
two which were not. The project will document the control of income and other
resources by women, examine household decision making concerning household
resources, and study the impact of participation in income generating activities
on the health and nutritional status of women and children. The hypothesis to be
tested is that activity by women in cooperative projects positively affects the
well-being of their children. Both ethnographic and survey data will be gathered
on a broad range of variables including social participation, community
investment in social welfare and health, individual perceptions of the
importance and social worth of men and women, as well as anthropometric and
nutritional data, to assess the welfare of a sample of households in the study
villages. This research is important because economic development can not be
successful without significant improvement in the welfare of women and children.
New knowledge which assesses the significance of different strategies of
improving welfare will be useful to planners and governments in designing better
ways to improve rural welfare.