* 9514904
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research: Production Mechanism andInternal Structive Studies of Exotic Mesons
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Cheung-Ryong Ji, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 07/31/1999
* USD 14,940.00

9514904 Ji This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research award is to study "Production
Mechanism and Internal Structive Studies of Exotic Mesons" The principal
researchers for the American side are Dr. Chueng-Ryong Ji, Dr. Adam Szczepaniak,
Dr. Stephen R. Cotanch, and Dr. Eric S. Swanson, all of North Carolina State
University. The principal researcher for the Polish side is Dr. Leonard Lesniak
of the Institute of Nuclear Physics in Krakow. The recent advent of CEBAF will
help researchers obtain more accurate information on production mechanisms and
the internal structure of mesons. The planned experiment on p(e,e'f0)p at CEBAF
especially will shed light on present speculations about the exotic internal
structure of scalar mesons. Through this award, the researchers will discuss two
projects for the theoretical investigation of the production mechanism and the
internal structure of mesons: (1) electroproduction and photoproduction of
scalar mesons; (2) improved constituent quark model. The first project will
merge the expertise of the Krakow group on the coupled channel model of scalar
meson production mechanism with the program at North Carolina State University
on the meson photo- and electro-production analyses. They will investigate the
production mechanisms of f0,a0 and mesons using the channel coupling formalism
of and KK developed by the Krakow group. In the second project, they propose to
improve the existing constituent quark models of the ordinary mesons by
including some of important QCD effects, in particular chiral symmetry breaking
and nonvalence degrees of freedom. The aim of this project is to construct a
constituent quark model which can describe both the ordinary mesons and the
suspected exotic mesons such as scalar mesons, glueballs and hybrid mesons.
However, at the minimum, the researchers propose to build the model that would
lead to a spontaneous symmetry breaking and dynamically generated quark and
gluon masses and calculate the s pectra of mesons including some of the
suspected exotic mesons. This research in physics fulfills the program
objectives of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to
combine complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of
benefit. ***