* 9514483
* RUI:  Serotonergic Control of Feeding
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Bruce O'Gara, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 02/29/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9514483 O'Gara The experiments described in this proposal will examine how the
nervous system controls the feeding behavior of the medicinal leech. The
physiological mechanisms used by the leech nervous system to control behavior
are similar to those found in higher animals, including humans. The relative
simplicity of the leech nervous system allows us to examine some of these
physiological mechanisms in ways that are difficult or impossible in higher
animals. An additional justification for studying feeding in the leech is the
re- emergence of the use of leeches following plastic and reconstructive
surgery. When an amputated part of the body (like a finger or an ear) is
reattached, it is relatively easy for the surgeon to reattach the arteries in
the affected body part. However, veins are more delicate and blood is more
likely to clot in them. Because of these problems, blood within the reattached
body part has no way to return to the rest of the body. Pressure builds up in
the reattached part and blood flow stops. Without treatment, the tissue will
die. When these problems occur, the surgeon can restore blood flow to the
affected tissue using leeches. The leech will feed on the congested tissue and
drain it of blood. In addition, the bite mark left by the leech will ooze blood
for a number of hours. These two actions will allow new blood to flow into the
reattached tissue and keep it alive. Efforts to mimic these actions artificially
have been unsuccessful; thus, there is no substitute for the use of leeches in
these situations. A better understanding of how leech feeding is controlled may
allow doctors to more efficiently utilize leeches in this role. Nerve cells
(called neurons) communicate with other neurons and muscle cells by releasing a
chemical called a neurotransmitter. The neurotransmitter changes the behavior of
the recipient neuron or causes a change in tension of a muscle cell. The
neurotransmitter is sens ed by the recipient cell using protein molecules called
receptors. Receptors for a particular neurotransmitter usually come in a number
of varieties. The different receptors can be preferentially activated using
specific drugs that resemble the neurotransmitter. Feeding behavior of the leech
is dependent on the neurotransmitter serotonin. The experiments in this proposal
will examine the effects of serotonin on the nervous system and muscle cells of
the gut. In the first series of experiments, we will examine the effects of
serotonin (and similar acting drugs) on biting behavior and blood consumption.
By the use of specific drugs that activate only certain types of serotonin
receptors, we will examine the role of the various receptors in feeding. We will
also record the electrical activity of the muscles involved in feeding using
very fine wires implanted in these muscles. These experiments will allow us to
examine how serotonin turns on feeding behavior. In a second set of experiments
we will examine the effects of serotonin-like drugs on the contractions of the
leech pharynx after we have removed it from the body. The pharynx is the first
part of the gut and actually generates the suction that draws blood from the
victim. These experiments are designed to allow us to deduce what types of
serotonin receptors are present on the muscles of the pharynx, and the role of
each receptor type in controlling contractions of the pharynx. The last series
of experiments will examine the effects of serotonin-like drugs on individual
pharyngeal muscle cells. Using fine microelectrodes that are inserted into
individual cells, we will examine the effects of these drugs on the muscle cell
membrane. We will examine the effects of serotonin-like drugs on the
permeability of the cell membrane to ions (charged atoms). The movement of ions
across the cell membrane triggers the events that eventually lead to muscle
contraction. These studies will a llow us to examine the role of various
serotonin receptors in regulating muscle contraction at the level of the
individual cell.