* 9514203
* Integrative Functions of Swimming
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,08/31/2001
* James Covell, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 08/31/2001
* USD 250,000.00

9514203 Shadwick The PI proposes that the evolution of animals to maximize
swimming efficiency will produce characteristic body shapes, patterns of muscle
activity and body movement. Among oceanic animals, the tunas represent one
ultimate exploitation of ibis principle. The high-performance swimming of these
fish is associated with a suite of adaptations on many levels of organization -
from biochemical to behavioral. For example, tunas have a highly streamlined
muscular body which is thickened centrally and tapers to a very narrow caudal
region just in front of the stiff, crescent-shaped tail fin. This tail acts as a
hydrofoil as it is swept back and forth through the water, producing nearly all
of the tunas' forward thrust. Unlike other fish, undulations of the body are
restricted to the tail region, giving the tunas' propulsive system a relatively
high mechanical efficiency. For these reasons, the physiological basis for
swimming in tunas is of great interest in the study of aquatic locomotion. The
major objective in the PI's investigation is to analyze biomechanical design
features of tunas and to synthesize a comprehensive physiological model of how
these elite aquatic athletes achieve their high levels of performance.
Specifically, this will involve collecting data on the structure and mechanical
properties of the muscular and skeletal systems, and analyzing the swimming
movements in the context of engineering and fluid mechanics principles. The work
will be framed within three scientific hypotheses, one relating to the manner in
which muscular contractions along the body act to produce movements in the tail,
another relating to the structure and mechanical properties of the connective
tissues that transmit the muscle forces to the backbone and ultimately the tail
fin, and a third which deals with the timing of muscle activation along the body
and how power is generated. These experiments involve studying live fish which
are swimming under controlled conditions by use of an aquatic " treadmill"
instrument. Information on the timing of muscle activation along the body in
relation to the timing and degree of muscle shortening is essential for
calculation of muscle power output in swimming fish. In studies on other fish,
the amount of muscle shortening and its timing relative to activation by the
nervous system has been inferred from shape changes of the body measured by
video imaging techniques. In the PI's estimation this approach is inadequate,
and in the new studies the PI will make direct measurement of local muscle
shortening and activation with ultrasound and electrophysiological methods
previously developed by the PI's group. The PI will also characterize the
contractile properties of muscle tissue from different parts of the fish body
directly, using a oscillatory loading technique that simulates the manner in
which the muscle is used by the fish when it swims. Finally, the PI will examine
the structures responsible for transmission of muscle forces to the tail fin.
These are the connective tissue sheets separating each body segment, the skin
and the tendons that link the muscles to the backbone and tail fin. Analysis of
the mechanical properties of these tissues will be performed with techniques
similar to those used by mechanical engineers to test structural materials.
Completion of the studies described in this proposal will allow for the creation
of an integrated model of how the various mechanical and physiological elements
present in tunas function to provide the high-performance qwimming displayed by
these fish. ***