* 9514557
* Septal Cholinergic/GABAergic Pathways and Memory
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Thomas Walsh, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 03/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

9514557 Walsh An exciting, unresolved question in neuroscience is how animals
acquire and store memories. For mammals there is an identified site, the
hippocampus, at which memory processing appears to occur. The structure and
function of this site is known in some detail, however the nature of the inputs
that control the functioning of hippocampal neurons is largely unknown. One of
the input brain regions, the medial septum, contains neurons that project to and
control the hippocampus. The medial septum appears to integrate subcortical
information about the 'biological significance' of episodes or events and in
turn modulate the responsiveness of the hippocampus to its primary, cortical
input. Septal neurons release two types of neurotransmitter molecules,
acetylcholine and GABA, which modulate the physiology of hippocampal neurons and
hence the memory- related functions of the hippocampus. Studies conducted
through funding by this award examine the neurotransmitters and brain circuits
involved in a specific type of learning related to remembering a position in
space. One set of experiments is designed to examine whether site-specific
manipulations of different molecular receptors (benzodiazepine receptors), in
the medial septum, will alter the activity of septal neurons and of memory
processes. In other experiments, tests are conducted to determine the
physiological mechanisms through which intraseptal injection of a receptor
blocker drug (flumazenil) enhances the activity of neurons that project to the
hippocampus and increases working memory. These studies should provide a better
understanding of specific brain circuits and neurochemical mechanisms that
control memory in mammals. The expectation is that such a detailed understanding
of a specific type of learning at a specific site will contribute importantly to
a general understanding of how animals learn, and remember what they learn.