* 9514196
* In Vitro Studies of Vertebrate Telomere Function
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* John Langmore, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 03/31/1999
* USD 261,987.00

9514196 Langmore Telomeres are the terminal nucleoproteins of all eukaryotic
chromosomes. The definitive function of telomeres is stabilization of the ends
of chromosomes, apparently by protection against non-homologous recombination
and exonucleolytic degradation--well-documented instabilities of non-telomere
ends in cells and cell extracts. Telomeres must maintain this protective
function to prevent degradation, rearrangement, or loss of chromosomes.
Deterioration of telomere function might be involved in some of the chromosomal
instabilities associated with developmental defects and aging. Genetic and
biochemical studies of the highly diverse, short, telomeres in protozoa and
fungi have probed telomere function in unicellular, immortal organisms.
Vertebrates telomeres have a highly conserved repeating sequence (TTAGGG)n of
length 2-100 kb, unusual nucleosome structure, and probably specific non-histone
proteins. The role of these components in the protective function of vertebrate
telomeres is not clear due to the difficulties in doing genetic studies, and the
lack of an vitro model for telomere assembly and behavior. The ideal model
system will permit the protective function of telomeres to be studied
independent of the possible roles of telomeres in the cell cycle, chromosome
segregation, and gene regulation. The aim of this project is to understand how
telomeres are protected, using a reductionist approach of recapitulating and
manipulating telomere structure and function in vitro. Xenopus egg extracts are
used for this task, because they have both the strong non-homologous
recombination activity and specific telomere-protection activity characteristic
of human and other vertebrate somatic cells. The specific goals are to: 1)
Describe model telomere assembly and function in vitro and in vivo; and 2)
Determine the DNA structure requirements for model telomere stability. These
studies will help to understand telomere roles in chromosome and cell behavior.
The in vitro studi es will lead to new hypotheses about the mechanism of
chromosome stability and instability that will be useful in explaining
chromosome behavior, and for suggesting new experiments. The identification and
characterization of the factors that are necessary and sufficient for protection
of telomere ends from recombination will lead to even more detailed mechanistic
and structural studies. ***