* 9514552
* Developmental Plasticity in the Autonomic Nervous System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Susan Birren, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 02/29/2000
* USD 281,375.00

9514552 Birren The mammalian nervous system is made up of an astonishingly large
number different nerve cells (neurons) which interact to permit thought,
movement and the control of bodily functions. The generation of this enormous
cellular diversity is one of the central issues of developmental neurobiology.
We know that the many different classes of neurons arise from a relatively small
number of undifferentiated precursor cells in the mammalian embryo. The goal of
this project is to understand how these precursor cells respond to signals in
their local embryonic environment to develop into the correct type of neuron for
a given area of the embryo. The peripheral nervous system provides an excellent
system for this study. Evidence from other laboratories has suggested that the
enteric neurons that control the function of the mammalian gut are very closely
related to the sympathetic neurons that control involuntary functions such as
heart rate. In fact, it has been suggested that these two neuronal lineages
arise from a common embryonic precursor cell. We plan to directly test the idea
that the precursor cells that normally develop into sympathetic neurons have the
capacity to develop into enteric neurons when provided with the appropriate
embryonic signals. Likewise, we will investigate whether enteric precursor cells
can develop into sympathetic neurons. We will also test the idea that as these
cells respond to signals and follow one of these differentiation pathways that
they lose the ability to respond to signals from the other lineage. This will
permit us to define the developmental time that multipotent precursor cells
become restricted to specific cell lineages. Finally, we will seek to understand
the nature of the signals that direct the precursor down one or the other
neuronal lineage. We will study the distribution of neurotrophin receptors in
the developing sympathetic and enteric nervous system. These receptors comprise
a family of proteins that play a role in the de velopment of many different
types of neurons. We will test the possibility that one of the members of this
receptor family is directly responsible for lineage decisions in the sympathetic
nervous system. We will do this by introducing the expression of this receptor
into enteric and sympathetic precursor cells at early developmental stages and
asking if we can observe alterations in the type of neurons developing from the
precursors. These experiments will provide important information on how the
early embryo controls the development of different cell types from uncommitted
precursor cells. Normal development of the mammalian embryo requires that many
such lineage decisions be carried out in a very precise manner. Our studies will
shed light on the mechanisms that control these developmental patterns.