* 9514090
* Bioenergetics of C4 Photosynthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Gerald Edwards, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 02/29/2000
* USD 22,625.00

This award supports research collaboration between Dr. Gerald Edwards
(Washington State University)and Dr. Boris Ivanon (Russian Academy of Sciences).
During photosynthesis solar energy absorbed by chloroplasts is converted into
assimilatory power (ATP and NADPH) via electron transport, membrane
energization, and phosphorylation with reductive power provided by oxidation of
water and production of oxygen. Debate is ensuing over whether two other forms
of photochemistry, pseudocyclic and/or cyclic electron flow, have a role in
photosynthesis in plants. Pseudocylic electron flow occurs via oxidation of
water with a linear flow of electrons culminating with oxygen, rather than NADP,
as the final electron acceptor. Cyclic electron flow occurs without oxidation of
water and generation of oxygen. The objectives of this project are to establish
whether one or both of these forms of photochemistry function in mesophyll
chloroplasts of the maize under conditions which place varying demands on the
requirement for ATP. Whether the supply of ascorbate in the chloroplasts
regulates the capacity for pseudocyclic electron flow will be investigated.
Methods of analysis will include measurements of membrane energization, quantum
yields of photochemistry and conversions of metabolites in the carbon metabolism
using mesophyll chloroplasts isolated from maize. This research will contribute
to our understanding of the efficiency of the solar energy conversion by
photosynthesis, which is crucial to sustaining life on earth.