* 9514211
* Evolution of Unique Desaturases in Insect Glands
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Wendell Roelofs, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Elvira Doman
* 06/30/1998
* USD 158,692.00

9514211 Roelofs Sex pheromone systems in insects have had considerable attention
because the species-specific attractant chemicals used for attracting mates can
be exploited for monitoring and insect management strategies. Also, the critical
use of these signals in maintaining the integrity of a species supports the idea
that the evolution of the specific signals is directly involved in the
speciation process. Although much is now known about how the chemical signals
are biosynthesized in the pheromone gland of female moths, there remain many
questions about how these chemical communication systems have evolved to use
different blends and chemical compositions in related moth species. The PI has
found that a family of unique enzymes have evolved in the moth pheromone gland
to produce unsaturated compounds possessing double bonds in locations not
normally found in other animals. The PI hypothesizes that these unique
"desaturases" evolved from the common (9 desaturase that is found in all animals
to make compounds such as oleic acid (unsaturation at carbon 9). The
characterization of the genes for some of the unique desaturases would provide
the possibility of conducting a comparison of desaturase genes from primitive
and advanced species to the common (9 desaturase gene to better understand the
speciation process. These novel desaturases also would provide an important
resource of enzymes not available from other sources to study in general how
these desaturases function to produce different compounds with double bonds in
various positions and how they can make specific mixtures of these isomers. An
understanding of the unique desaturases from moth glands and how they insert
double bonds, in addition to its huge contribution to the fundamental knowledge
about these enzymes and to the speciation process, could lead to the development
of commercial processes for producing valuable raw materials for the
pharmaceuticals, food or chemical industries. ***