* 9514289
* Proteins Required for Peroxisome Biogenesis in the Yeast Pichia Pastoris
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* James Cregg, Oregon Graduate Institute of Science & Technology
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 01/31/1998
* USD 220,000.00

9514289 Cregg Peroxisomes are present in the cells of virtually all eukaryotes
and are the subcellular location of important metabolic reactions. Yet
relatively little is known about the basic mechanisms by which cells maintain
and propagate peroxisomes and direct specific sets of newly synthesized proteins
to these organelles (peroxisome biogenesis). Recent studies indicate that
peroxisome biogenesis mechanisms are novel and not simply variations of those in
other organelles. A molecular genetic investigation of peroxisomes has been
initiated using a methanol-utilizing yeast, Pichia pastoris, as a model system.
This yeast was selected because: (1) peroxlsomes are required for its growth on
either methanol or oleic acid, phenotypes that are easily observed, and (2) the
organelles are large and numerous in cells grown on these substrates. In the
previous grant period, a number of peroxisome-deficient (per) mutants of P.
pastoris were isolated, and significant progress was made in the cloning and
characterization of several of the affected PER genes. This proposal is aimed at
elucidating the structure and function of two very interesting P. pastoris PER
gene products, Per3p and Per6p. Per3p is an 81-kDa membrane-associated protein
that appears to be located on the inner surface of the peroxisomal membrane.
Per3p is involved in import of peroxisomal matrix enzymes and may be composed of
multiple domains required for the function of different peroxisomal import
pathways. To test this multi-domain hypothesis and to define the approximate
location of the domains, mutations will be introduced into PER3, and their
effects on the function of specific import pathways will be determined. Per3p is
one of only a few peroxisomal import machinery components that has been
identified. To identify other import components, the two-hybrid protein method
will be used to search for proteins that interact with Per3p. These studies will
provide valuable insights into the role of P er3p in protein import and into the
identity and organization of other components of the import machinery. Per6p is
a 52-kDa peroxisomal integral membrane protein that has similarity to PAFlp, a
protein affected in certain patients with the peroxisomal biogenesis disorder
Zellweger syndrome. Although it is suspected that these proteins are involved in
peroxisomal protein import, direct evidence for this is lacking. To obtain such
evidence for Per6p, temperature-sensitive per6 strains will be shifted to
nonpermissive temperature, and the fate of import of newly synthesized (pulse-
labeled) peroxisomal proteins will be examined. If Per6p is required for the
import, import should rapidly cease after shift. Peroxisomal targeting signals
(PTSs) have been identified for matrix proteins but not for peroxisomal integral
membrane proteins. To identify PTS sequences in Per6p, selected NH2- and COOH-
terminally truncated derivatives of the protein will be synthesized in P.
pastoris and examined for proper targeting. Defining a PTS for membrane proteins
is a critical first step in understanding how cells target and insert this class
of proteins into the peroxisomal membrane. ***