* 9514981
* Workshop in Economic Theory
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Matthew Jackson, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 09/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9514981 Jones This grant renews support for the Northwestern Summer Workshop
Series. It supports conferences at Northwestern University during the summers of
1996, 1997, and 1998. Each consists of two week-long workshops, one
concentrating on theoretical issues in macroeconomics and the other on
microeconomics. The topics for the three years will vary. Areas that look
promising for the 1996 macroeconomics workshop include: fertility and population
growth, institutions for dealing with income and employment risk, and
theoretical and computational methods for studying models with heterogeneous
agents. Areas that look promising for the 1996 microeconomics workshop are:
interactive learning in economics and game theory, rational learning in repeated
and recurring environments, evolutionary learning by boundedly rational agents,
and the applications of learning models to industries, auctions, etc. The topics
for the second and third years of the macroeconomics workshop and the second
year of the microeconomics workshop will be decided at a later date. On the
macro side, areas likely to be included are: acquired comparative advantage and
the dynamics of international trade, the long-run distribution of income and
wealth, technological change and diffusion, monetary and fiscal policy in
growing economies, human capital accumulation and labor market dynamics, and the
computation of equilibria for dynamic models. On the micro side, areas that look
promising are: the role of information in auctions and asset pricing, contracts
and the internal organization of firms, and the empirical implications of
industrial organization models. The political economy workshop is planned for
1998. Topics include formal political theory and the formation of political
institutions.