* 9514846
* U.S.-China Cooperation: Proton-Conducting Ceramic           Membrane Reactor for Methane Coupling Conversion
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Jerry Y.S. Lin, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 05/31/2000
* USD 24,862.00

9514846 Lin International corporation is proposed on a research project aimed at
developing a novel ceramic membrane reactor for efficient conversion of methane
to ethylene. The membrane reactor uses a proton-conducting ceramic membrane with
a surface which is catalytically active for methane coupling. The research
project consists of membrane synthesis by various methods, membrane
characterization, and hydrogen permeation/methane conversion reaction on the
membrane reactor. The project is of multi-disciplinary nature, involving solid
state ionics, chemical vapor deposition, catalysis and reaction engineering.
Collaborative research is proposed with a Chinese laboratory which has
demonstrated a long term research experience in solid state ionics and chemical
vapor deposition. Collaborative research activities include (1) Metal-organic
chemical vapor deposition synthesis and electrochemical characterization of the
ceramic membranes at the Chinese laboratory and (2) Electrical conductivity
measurements of thin ceramic membranes and hydrogen permeation/methane
conversion reaction on membrane reactors in the PI's laboratory. The
collaboration will result in fast development of the novel ceramic membrane
reactor for effective conversion of methane in an environmentally benign manner.
Experience gained through the collaboration will help establish facilities for
electrochemical characterization of high temperature ceramics and metal-organic
chemical vapor deposition of thin ceramic films in the PI's laboratory.