* 9514114
* International Workshop on Power Systems Distribution,       Planning and Operation, July, 1996, at Abidjan, Ivory       Coast
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Peter Bofah, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Jones Tsuchitani
* 02/28/1997
* USD 50,000.00

This workshop, organized by Dr. James Momoh, Professor of Electrical
Engineering at Howard University, in cooperation with Dr. D. M. Kroko, President
and Director-General of Energie Electrique de la Cote d'Ivoire, the national
utility company, will be held in Abidjan, Ivory Coast, in July 1996. Researchers
from Anglophone and Francophone Africa, (Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon, Cote
d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Senegal, Zambia, and South Africa), and across the US,
working on electric power distribution, will identify technology issues and
economical/technical benefits of effective distribution technology. Little
research has been done in Africa on distribution systems, whereas, in the US,
research in these areas is becoming a priority. This workshop will give the
African participants first hand information on available tools and technology
for efficient power system distribution. It will help African engineers to solve
the perennial distribution system problems in their countries; the resulting
increase in reliability would bring economic benefits. The interchange will help
US researchers and engineers understand the needs of the African countries and
the methodologies they are using to solve the power system problems. Previous
workshops on related topics have stimulated a significant volume of follow-on
collaborative activities among the US and African participants.