* 9514213
* Biomechanical Models of the Mandible: An Experimental       Verification
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,10/25/1999
* David Daegling, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/25/1999
* USD 101,690.00

Research on jaw biomechanics has operated under the assumption that mandibular
morphology is a reflection of the stresses encountered during chewing behaviors.
These chewing stresses have been inferred using simple engineering models,
despite claims that the structural and material complexity of the mandible
compromises the explanatory utility of such simple models. By contrast,
computer-driven mathematical models of the jaw's behavior are capable of making
very precise predictions about the stress environment. Application of such
techniques, however, is problematic because they require knowledge of certain
variables (muscular forces, tissue interactions under load, etc.) for which
reliable measurement is not currently possible. Improvements on both techniques
can be realized through documentation of stress and strain distributions under
controlled experimental conditions. The proposed research will sample mandibular
bone strain simultaneously from multiple locations in preserved primate jaws
under a variety of controlled loading conditions. The profiles of recorded
strain will be used to evaluate the accuracy and reliability of alternative
structural models of the mandible. This research will allow the central issue in
jaw biomechanics to be addressed; specifically, the experiments performed under
this proposal will provide a much clearer understanding of the relationship of
variation in mandibular form to differences in feeding behavior among the
primates.