* 9514583
* Interactions Between a Parasitic Wasp and its Insect Host:  A Molecular Study of Wasp Virus, Parasite Protein and       Host Hemocytes
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Pauline Lawrence, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2001
* USD 325,000.00

9514583 Lawrence When females of the parasitic wasp Diachasmimorpha longicaudata
lay their eggs in larvae of the Caribbean fruit fly, Anastrepha suspense (host)
they also introduce a virus into the blood of the host. In addition, a new
protein appears in the blood of the parasitized larvae within 2 days after
parasitization but is absent from unparasitized individuals. The PI has shown
that the level of this protein increases in the host's blood at the same time as
the virus begins to infect new host cells. In addition, infected host cells
round up and do not form protective defense capsules as do cells from
unparasitized fruit flies. Consequently, the parasite eggs and larvae escape
encapsulation by the host and the parasite develops at the expense of the fruit
fly. Thus, this parasite is an excellent biological control agent. The PI
proposes to determine whether the protein is a gene product of the virus and
whether it enhances virus infectivity. The PI will also identify the effects of
both protein and virus on the cellular communication and defense system of the
host. Since the Caribbean fruit fly and its close relatives like the
Mediterranean fruit fly are major pests of citrus and other agricultural crops,
the PI's basic studies will provide significant insights into the potential of
protein and/or virus as tools in fruit fly developmental disruption and control.
Additionally, the PI's findings will shed light on whether membrane
carbohydrates (sugars) are important in cell-cell recognition and defense. The
findings will also help to identify possible factors (sugars) that enhance
and/or suppress cell aggregation (tumor formation). ***