* 9514266
* Optical Analysis of Synaptic Integration in Cerebellar      Purkinje Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* William Ross, New York Medical College
* Continuing Grant
* Diane M. Witt
* 02/28/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9514266 Ross The central nervous system often appears like a dense, bewildering
array of neurons and of neuronal synaptic interactions. Part of the problem is
that the functional significance of specific locations at which synapses occur
on cells is largely unknown. The focus of research funded by this grant is on
determining the significance of the spatial arrangement of synapses on Purkinje
cells, which are the largest neurons in the cerebellum and which provide the
only output to other parts of the brain. This focus relates to the complex
problem of how voltage-dependent membrane conductances in Purkinje cell input
regions, the dendrites, and the architecture of these neurons influence the
integration process. Experiments are designed to determine the functional
significance of the spatial patterns of these synaptic inputs. The primary
technique is optical recording of calcium concentrations through the use of
indicator dyes in slices of brain tissue. Calcium concentrations, when combined
with an electrical recording, are good indicators of changes in intracellular
potentials throughout neurons and hence of local neuronal activity. The
relatively stereotyped circuitry of the cerebellar cortex provides a favorable
model system for studying the functional significance of cell geometry and
synaptic interactions in detail. These studies should provide much needed,
detailed descriptions of synaptic interactions in critically important
cerebellar neurons. Such descriptions will greatly enhance knowledge of
information processing in mammalian neurons at the single cell level.