* 9514463
* CAREER:  Neurosteriod Effects on Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Cheryl Frye, Connecticut College
* Continuing grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 308,125.00

9514463 Frye The classical mechanism of action of steroid hormones is for the
hormone to diffuse through the plasma membrane, bind to a cytosolic receptor
which is translocated to the nucleus of the cell, where the receptor/ligand
complex induces changes in gene transcription, and subsequently protein
production. However, it has been observed that some behavioral effects of these
hormones take place quite rapidly when compared to the hours required to change
protein synthesis in a cell. As a result, the current theory of steroid action
includes the ability of these hormones to exert rapid, non-genomic effects,
possibly involving receptors imbedded in the plasma membrane. The investigations
of Dr. Frye focus on the non-genomic behavioral effects of steroid hormones. A
study of the ability of steroid hormones to modulate classical gamma-
aminobutyric acid receptors and reproductive behavior is an integral part of
this project. In addition, the behavioral effects of steroid hormones produced
by the brain, will be undertaken. The notion that non-genomic effects of
steroids complement genomic effects of these hormones to initiate and terminate
reproductive behavior is unique and will provide essential new information in
the study of the brain communication mechanisms. Additionally, the evidence
supporting novel, non-classical effects of steroid hormones will be important
for biologists investigating the neurobiology and physiology of this essential
class of molecules that are used by organisms in many ways. In addition to the
novel research to be undertaken during this research, Dr. Frye will also engage
in novel educational activities crucial to the development of new programs at
Connecticut College. The development of a new curriculum in neuroscience and
biopsychology incorporating novel research experiences for undergraduate
students is a centerpiece of Dr. Frye's activities, as well as developing new
outreach activities. Support for this research an d education program will have
great importance on the development of future generations of
neuroendocrinologists and neuroscientists from both an educational and research
perspective.