* 9514061
* The Mechanism and Magnitude of the Direct Effect of CO2 on  Apparent Leaf Respiration in Diverse Plant Species
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1998
* George Koch, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 12/31/1998
* USD 128,000.00

As a result of human activities including fossil fuel combination and forest
burning, the concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) is currently
higher than in recorded history and it is rising at an unprecedented rate. CO2
is one of the several `greenhouse gases` and the rapid increase in its
concentration may lead to global climatic warming. Vegetation plays a large role
in the global CO2 cycle-it removes CO2 from the atmosphere in the process of
photosynthesis and releases CO2 to the atmosphere in the process of respiration.
Any changes in global photosynthesis or respiration will affect the rate of
change of atmospheric CO2 concentration. Recent studies indicate that plant
respiration may be inhibited in the short-term by increased CO2 concentration,
yet virtually nothing is known of the underlying physiological mechanism(s), the
duration of the response, or how widespread this phenomenon is in nature. The
proposed research initiates an examination of the biochemical and physiological
basis of the direct effect of CO2 on respiration using a combination of novel
experimental approaches in both laboratory and natural settings. The research
should significantly advance knowledge of the regulation of plant respiration by
CO2. In turn, this will improve our understanding of the role of vegetation in
regulating atmospheric CO2 concentration and, thus, the potential for global
climate change.