* 9514495
* Gender Differences in Infants' and Parents' Social Interaction
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Edward Tronick, Children's Hospital Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 07/31/1999
* USD 262,540.00

Early gender differences in infants' social emotional behavior during mother-
infant and father-infant interactions will be evaluated longitudinally at 3 and
6 months of infant age. 96 infants (48 boys, 48 girls) and their mothers and
fathers will participate in the study. At each age, infants will be videotaped
during a 3-minute face-to-face social interaction with each parent. Parents will
also provide demographic information and independently complete self-report
instruments that assess their emotional state, perceptions of infant
temperament, parenting goals, adaptation to parenthood, social support, marital
adjustment, and involvement in infant caretaking. The videotapes of the
infants', mothers', and fathers' behavior and facial expressions will be scored
microanalytically using the Infant Regulatory Scoring System (IRSS), the Adult
Interactant Regulatory Scoring System (AIRSS), and Izard's AFFEX system. Gender-
related differences in maternal and paternal social emotional behavior as well
as dyadic features of infant-parent interactions will be assessed. Specific
hypotheses guided by the Mutual Regulation Model and prior research are
proposed. It is hypothesized that infant boys are less able than infant girls to
regulate their affective states during parent-infant interaction. Moreover,
fathers are hypothesized to be more likely than mothers to have an arousing
interactive style. Behavioral and affective differences among cross-gender pairs
of infants and parents are also hypothesized as are the effects of contextual
variables such as marital adjustment. Fathers and mothers play different roles
in the development of infant affect regulation. Children may also develop
different behavior patterns from each parent, and these different dyadic
experiences may have ramifications for their socio-personality development.
However, it remains unclear how the characteristics of mother-infant and father-
infant interactions affect the development of socio-emotional and regulatory
behavior in male and female infants and the ontogenesis of gender-related
differences in later psychological functioning. Thus, the proposed project will
add significantly to the extant literature on gender differences in early
infancy, extend theories of normal social development, and guide future
research. %%% Early gender differences in infants' social emotional behavior
during mother-infant and father-infant interactions will be evaluated at 3 and 6
months of infant age. At each age, 96 infants (48 boys, 48 girls) will be
videotaped during social interaction with their mother and their father. In
addition, each parent's emotional state, perceptions of infant temperament,
parenting goals, adaptation to parenthood, social support, marital adjustment,
and involvement in infant caretaking will be assessed. This project is unique in
evaluating gender differences in the social emotional interactive behavior of
infants under one year of age with their mothers and, in particular, their
fathers. The study will examine whether and how infants develop different
behavior patterns from each parent and whether this influences their social and
personality development. The study will also evaluate the different roles
fathers and mothers play in the development of infants' ability to control
impulses, anger, and aggression. A focus on these issues is of critical
importance and will significantly add to our understanding of the origin of
gender-related differences in later psychological functioning (such as higher
rates of aggressive behavior in male children). The American family is changing
and an increasing number of children are growing up without a father at home.
This project, by evaluating the role fathers and mothers play in the social and
emotional development of their sons and daughters, will begin to address this
important issue.