* 9514001
* Communication and Behavior of Baboons
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Robert Seyfarth, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Michael D. Greenfield
* 02/28/2001
* USD 234,000.00

Abstract 9514001 Cheney The goal of this research is a better understanding of
the vocal communication and social behavior of freeranging nonhuman primates.
Focus will be on vocal communication for a variety of reasons: first, because of
its potential relation to studies of language and cognition in humans; second,
because vocalizations lend themselves to quantitative signal analysis and to
experimental tests of specific hypotheses. Finally, prior research has shown
that playback experiments can be used to test hypotheses not only about vocal
communication per se but also about the cognitive mechanisms that underlie
complex social interactions. Subjects are free-ranging baboons (Papio
cynocephalus ursinus) living in the Okavango Delta, Botswana. Animals in the
study population are fully habituated to human observers, are recognized as
individuals, and have known reproductive histories. The proposal has five inter-
related components. The first component of this proposal focuses on the use of
vocalizations in reconciliation. After aggression, female baboons sometimes
'reconcile' by grunting to their lower-ranking opponents. Previous experiments
have shown that these grunts function at least in part to reduce former victims'
anxiety. A second component focuses on the acoustic structure and possible
semantic content of grunts. Baboons appear to use acoustically different grunts
in different social situations. The PIs plan a series of observations and
experiments are planned to determine whether acoustically different grunt types
designate specifically different information to baboons. A third component
focuses on contact barks that appear to be exchanged between mothers and infants
when they become separated in wooded areas. If these experiments indicate that
mothers give contact barks primarily with respect to their own (rather than
their infants') location, then they will add to a growing body of evidence
suggesting that nonhuman primates do not call with the intent of providing
inform ation to others. A fourth component focuses on the view that pair bonds
are formed in response to the threat of infanticide by recent immigrant males.
These experiments, however, are incomplete, largely because they must be
conducted opportunistically during the weeks after a new, potentially
infanticidal male has joined the group. A fourth goal of the research will be to
complete these experiments. The final component focuses on the perception of
cause-effect relations by nonhuman primates. Humans readily distinguish between
two events that occur together because one caused the other and two events that
occur together purely by association. Most research conducted to date suggests
that monkeys do not apply causal reasoning when manipulating tools, though
language-trained apes perform markedly better on similar experiments. Previous
experiments conducted with this group of baboons, however, suggest that monkeys'
ability to perceive cause-effect relations in the domain of social interactions
may be quite well developed. Female baboons respond significantly more strongly
to playbacks of vocal sequences that are causally anomalous than to those that
are not. To investigate this question further, a series of experiments is
proposed that make explicit predictions about both the strength and the timing
of subjects' responses to particular call sequences. ***