* 9514780
* Online Ethics Codes Project
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Vivian Weil, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 05/31/1999
* USD 67,227.00

This is a project that will put approximately eight hundred and fifty codes of
ethics held in paper form by the library of the Center for the Study of Ethics
in the Professions on the World-Wide Web (WWW), along with keyword searchable
indexes and guidelines for use. The codes will be indexed by subject and by
issuing agency, and will include a keyword search engine which will allow users
to retrieve the documents by entering any keyword they wish. Hypertext links
will be provided to issuing agencies, to other on-line ethics resources, and to
an instructional overview introducing the codes and providing guidance about how
best to use them. The codes are useful in themselves and are valuable documents
for teaching, research, and professional development. Researchers can study the
history of a profession by studying different versions of codes; students can
often find a good toehold for research into professional ethics by analyzing a
code of ethics; and professional engineers, scientists, and others who are
trying to create or improve a code of ethics for their own field often need
examples of other codes to learn from and build on. The project leader will
write an introductory essay and a User Guide explaining how codes can be used
for teaching, research, and professional development. If the originating agency
of a code of ethics has a WWW page, or a gopher, hypertext links will be created
which connect the code to its originating agency. This will allow professionals
and students alike to learn more about the professional association and its
membership. Such web pages and gophers usually have e-mail addresses and phone
numbers for significant committee members. Thus communication among students,
researchers and members of the profession will be facilitated, and opportunities
for professional development will be created.