* 9514267
* Residential Compound Excavation at Copan
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* David Webster, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 17,559.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr David Webster will conduct one
season of archeological field research at Copan Honduras. This large Mayan site
has been the focus of extensive excavation, much of it by Dr. Webster and his
colleagues, and the basic history and settlement pattern are well known. The
site is large, contains both massive stone architecture as well as many small
associated settlements and house mounds. It was occupied over much of Mayan
prehistory and thus documents both the rise and subsequent decline of this
society. In previous work Dr. Webster located a compound which appears to have
been the residence of an elite group. With National Science Foundation support
he will extend his survey and excavation in this area. He will clear the
vegetation, re-establish a grid and map in all ancillary structures. At least
one 2x2 meter trench will then be excavated adjacent to each such structure down
to sterile soil. A large shallow trench will also be cut down to the latest
living surface in front of one set of structures to search for signs of
residential activities such as cooking. Finally a long trench will be excavated
to tie this area in with other regions of the site. Trash middens and burials,
usually found at the rears of such buildings will provide materials for absolute
date determinations. With relatively simple technology Mayan peoples developed
large city-like settlements with monumental architecture which indicates the
ability to mobilize and control large numbers of people and to bind them
together into functioning social units. Based on differences in the size of
residence compounds and differences in relative wealth of grave goods it is
clear that society was organized in a hierarchical fashion and that developed
religious, economic and political systems supported this differentiation.
However surprising little is known about elites themselves and how they lived
and exercised control. It is unclear whether the concept of `elite` is useful or
not since archaeologists do not know how much variation exists within and
between Mayan sites. This project will help to yield an answer since it will
provide systematic information about one such group. Based on research to date
this residence appears to span the period which includes both Classic and
Postclassic periods and thus records both the apex and decline of the site. Thus
it may be possible to determine how elite roles changed over time. This research
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed light into
how social differentiation emerges and is maintained and how the Mayan
civilization functioned at the height of its development.