* 9514777
* Calcium Signaling in the Brain of Behaving Zebrafish
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Donald O'Malley, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel K. Hartline
* 02/28/1998
* USD 120,000.00

9514777 O'Malley Calcium is a key signaling molecule in the nervous system of
all animals. In vertebrate animals, calcium levels inside nerve cells increase
when the cells are stimulated. Increased calcium levels have many different
actions inside nerve cells, ranging from the immediate regulation of the
electrical excitability of the cell to very long term changes in the cell's
behavior, which may be mediated through alterations of gene expression. Recently
a technique was developed that allows the imaging of calcium activity in nerve
cells in the brain of intact zebrafish. This allows measurement of cellular
calcium activity in response to a variety of sensory stimuli and also allows the
investigation of any correlations between these calcium signals and the behavior
of the fish. This approach demonstrated that calcium signals in one particular
identified nerve cell in the hindbrain of the zebrafish, the Mauthner cell, were
dramatically enhanced after repetitive sensory stimulation. One principal aim of
this proposal is to determine the conditions required to produce this novel form
of enhancement. This will be accomplished by varying the timing, intensity and
modality of sensory stimulation. A second major aim is to understand the
cellular mechanisms underlying these large calcium signals. A third aim takes
advantage of the fact that the Mauthner cell is a behavioral command neuron,
which triggers the animal's escape behavior. This cutting-edge project will
demonstrate the molecular basis for a behavior in a living animal. The potential
implications are enormous, both for the understanding of the molecular basis of
animal behavior and for the development of non-invasive measuring techniques in
living animals.