* 9514142
* Ecological Factors and Behavioral Mechanisms Underlying  Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Andrew Sih, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jerry  O. Wolff
* 03/31/2001
* USD 177,365.00

Abstract Sih 9514142 A blend of field surveys and experiments in semi-natural
conditions will be used to examine the ecological determinants and selective
consequences of mating behavior in a system with male-female sexual conflict.
The focal system studied is a semi-aquatic insect, the stream water strider,
Aquarius remigis. This species shows very clear male-female conflict: males
continually attempt to mate with females, while females almost always resist
male mating attempts. Previous experimental work showed that various biotic,
ecological factors (predation risk, food availability, density, sex ratio) have
major impacts on mating patterns (mating activity, mating frequency, mating
duration, non-random mating by size) and that these effects depend largely on
the influence of these factors on patterns of female resistance to male mating
attempts (i.e., on female behavior in the male-female conflict). The proposed
studies expand on current knowledge in three ways: 1. This study will move us
significantly closer to a full understanding of how spatial and temporal
variation in ecological conditions (both biotic and abiotic) influence both
variation in mating dynamics and overall patterns of sexual selection. 2. This
study will provide a rare instance of an experimental test of predictions on
variation in sexual selection based on known behavioral mechanisms (in this
case, male-female conflict) and the effects of ecological conditions on these
behaviors. 3. Studies of selection in nature will provide a bridge between
mechanistic experimental studies of behavior in semi- natural conditions and
effects of these behavioral mechanisms in nature. In sum, 1) patterns of sexual
selection (as quantified by modern statistical methods) will be explained
mechanistically by using information on behaviors (male- female conflict) that
underlie sexual selection, and 2) male and female behavior a(and thus patterns
of sexual selection), in turn, will be understood as flexible responses to
variation in both biotic and abiotic, ecological conditions. Overall, the
integration of concepts and information from three exciting fields (male-female
conflict, quantitative studies of sexual and natural selection, and ecology of
mating systems) should add significant insights to our knowledge in all three
fields and thus add to our general understanding of reproductive behavior.