* 9514992
* Social Pathways to Competence Among Children at Risk
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Joan Vondra, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 02/28/1999
* USD 181,224.00

9514992 Vondra This study examines the role of selected social relationships at
home and school in forecasting early school competence among children at risk
for problems and failure in school. The study will test the importance of the
teacher-child relationship, peer relations, and linkages between home and school
as mediators between experiences in the home and competence in school for
children from socioeconomically disadvantaged families with varying degrees of
social/parenting risk. The proposed investigation involves up to three waves of
school-based data collection and concurrent observation and/or interview of a
sample of 192 children and their urban, low-income families who were observed
and assessed during infancy and early childhood. Data will include: (1) annual
teacher ratings and school records for children in kindergarten through second
grade, (2) annual phone interviews with a second parent figure, (3) home visits
at 5-5.5 and 7-7.5 years, and (4) phone interviews with mothers in years when a
home visit has not taken place. The cross-sectional and longitudinal data will
be used to test hypotheses about: (1) the predictive importance of the teacher-
child relationship, peer relations, and home-school links for classroom
motivation and competence, (2) developmental and familial antecedents of these
critical social relations, and (3) the specific role of child sociability and
verbal competence, close relationships with parent figures, and child social
status among siblings as protective factorq for early school success among
children from higher-risk families. %%% This study examines the role of social
relationships at home and at school in promoting early school success among
children who are at risk for problems and failure in school. The relationships
of importance in this study are those between the child and his or her mother, a
second "parent figure," the child's teacher, and other children in the classr
oom. Each will be tested as an important link between the child's experiences
growing up in an urban, low-income family with some degree of social problems
and his or her competence in the school setting. Data will be collected in
schools, and the children and their families will be observed and interviewed in
their homes. The same children were previously observed and assessed during
infancy and early childhood. The data will be used to test the importance of the
teacher-child relationship, peer relations, and home-school links for predicting
classroom motivation and competence, and to identify protective factors for
early school success among children from higher- risk families. ***