* 9514787
* Control of Cellular Differentiation in Symbiotically  Competent Cyanobacteria
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,07/31/2000
* John Meeks, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Judith Plesset
* 07/31/2000
* USD 350,000.00

*** 9514787 Meeks The long-term goal of this program is to identify,
characterize and manipulate genes involved in cellular differentiation in the
cyanobacterium Nostoc sp. strain ATCC 29133, a strain that can differentiate
motile hormogonial filaments, akinetes (spores) and heterocysts, which are the
sites of N2 fixation. Nostoc 29133 is also a facultative heterotroph that can
establish a symbiotic association, via hormogonia, with the bryophyte Anthoceros
punctatus. Anthoceros produces extracellular metabolites that sequentially
stimulate hormogonia and heterocyst differentiation of Nostoc spp. to 10-fold or
higher levels than those seen in its absence. The physiological and molecular
genetic techniques developed in the prior grant and the transposon mutants
currently in hand form the methodological and biological foundation of this
proposal. Specific objectives are proposed in the following two areas. I .
Heterocyst maturation is dependent on a signal cascade regulatory system.
Analysis of Nostoc 29133: :Tn5-1063 strain UCD 311 (Fox~Sym+) with an insertion
devR, encoding a receiver-domain-only response regulator protein. Biochemical
and genetic assays to identify potential phosphodonors and phosphoreceivers of
DevR. This project will identify members of a two component regulatory system
involved in heterocyst development. 2. Hormogonia differentiation is a
consequence of differential gene expression. Establishment and analysis of a
hormogonia-specific subtractive cDNA library; generation by transposition of
mutants of Nostoc 29133 altered in hormogonia formation; genetic
characterization of such mutants and of cosmic clones from cDNA analysis. This
project is the initial effort in understanding how cells divide uncoupled from
DNA replication and biomass increase to form hormogonia and then return to the
vegetative growth state in completing a cellular life cycle. ***