* 9514329
* FASEB Conference: Virus Assembly Being Held at Vermont      Academy, Saxton River, Vermont, June 22-27, 1996
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Roger Hendrix, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 3,000.00

9514329 Hendrix Partical support is requested for a conference entitled "Virus
Assembly" to be held under the auspices of the Federation of American Societies
of Experimental Biology (FASEB) from June 22 to June 27, 1996, at theVermont
Academy, Saxtons River, Vermont. The purpose of the conference is to bring
together scientists working on all aspects of virus assembly and structure
(including the initial disassembly steps associated with viral entry into cells)
for bacterial, plant, animal and human viruses. The intention is to encourage
communication of ideas and hypotheses about virus assembly and structure, across
the usual taxonomic barriers, and to promote dissemination of results obtained
with a variety of different viruses using a variety of different experimental
approaches, including biochemical and genetic methods as well as X-ray
crystallography, electron microscopy and image reconstruction. There are no
other confereces devoted entirely to problems of virus assembly and structure,
across the viral taxonomic groups, except the previous two FASEB conferences on
this topic held in 1990, 1992 and 1994. The previous conferences in this series
were enormously successful and achieved the kind of communication desired. It
seems likely, given the current rate of progress in this field, that the FASEB
conference of 1996 will be the fourth in an ongoing series of conferences on the
topic of virus assembly and structure. %%% The assembly of component parts into
complete viruses is an area of intensive current study. Many aspects of this
work involve both structural and biological features, and the
disassembly/reassembly processes that occur when viruses enter cells. In order
to bring together the latest results in these areas this conference will include
most of the scientists actively engaged in this research. The conference will
lead to greater understanding of the processes of viral assembly. ***