* 9514177
* Isoprenoid Pathway Partitioning: HMGR Isoforms and Sterol   vs. Phytoalexin Synthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Carole Cramer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 06/30/2000
* USD 310,000.00

9514177 Cramer Plants produce a vast array of isoprenoid compounds (&gt;10,000)
that function in growth and development, electron transport, photosynthesis,
anti-oxidant protection, reproduction, and disease resistance. The appropriate
spatial and temporal production of specific isoprenoid endproducts from common
central-pathway intermediates poses a significant regulatory challenge. The
proposed reserch will address whether the plant isoprenoid pathway is organized
in distinct metabolic units or "metabolons" as a mechanism to direct pathway
flux into specific endproducts. In Solanaceous plants, the HMG1 isoform of
3-hydroxy-3methylglutaryl CoA reductase (HMGR, the rate-limiting enzyme
producing mevalonic acid) and squalene synthetase (the key branch enzyme
committing farnesyl intermediates to sterol synthesis) are coordinately
regulated in association with sterol biosynthesis. Data from a variety of
experimental approaches suggest that, in addition to differential regulation at
the gene level, protein-protein interaction and/or subcellular localization of
specific HMGRs may be important in partitioning intermediates into production of
specific isoprenoids. In this project, the hypothesis that tomato HMG1 and HMG2
function in physiologically distinct pathways or metabolons leading to
production of phytosterols or phytoalexins, respectively, will be tested. HMGR
isozyme levels will be altered by introducing hmg1 or hmg2 sequences regulated
by either constitutive or defense-inducible promoters. The HMG1 and HMG2
transgene projects will be differentially tagged to facilitate
immunolocalization studies and assessment of protein stability. Many
plantspecific isoprenoids have significant value for agricultural, industrial,
and pharmaceutical applications (e.g., natural pesticides, rubber, and taxol).
The proposed experiments will provide significant new information critical for
understanding the complex biochemical and cellular mechanisms involved in
isoprenoid biosynthesis.