* 9514280
* Intramembrane Determinants of Membrane Protein              Oligomerization
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Mark Krebs, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 05/31/2000
* USD 325,265.00

9514280 Krebs The structure of membrane proteins that span the lipid bilayer is
thought to be determined by protein-protein interactions in the aqueous
environment and by protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions within the
bilayer. The nature and strength of interactions that occur in the aqueous
environment can be understood from the perspective of water-soluble protein
folding and oligomerization, but little is known about those that occur within
the lipid bilayer. In the experiments proposed here, intramembrane interactions
will be analyzed by studying the effect of amino acid substitutions on the
oligomerization of bacteriorhodopsin (BR) in Halobacterium salinarium. In this
organism, BR and associated lipids form two-dimensional crystalline lattice
known as the purple membrane. This system is attractive because a structural
mode of BR in the purple membrane has been derived from diffraction studies, and
because genetic methods have been developed to produce BR mutants in H.
salinarium. Protein-protein and protein-lipid interactions in the purple
membrane will be probed by mutational analysis of lattice stability. BR mutants
will be prepared initially by targeted mutagenesis at sites identified from the
structural model, and subsequently by random mutagenesis and screening. Amino
acid substitutions will be chosen to minimize disruption of protein tertiary
structure, which will be analyzed by spectroscopic and diffraction methods. The
targeted approach will be used to test predictions about the role of specific
amino acid residues in lattice stability, and will provide mutant proteins for
developing in vivo and in vitro stability assays. Preliminary studies have
identified several substitutions that appear to disrupt lattice stability
without affecting the tertiary structure of the protein, and have provided
evidence for a model of BR self-assembly that will be used to evaluate the
thermodynamic effects of mutations. Random mutagenesis will be used to test
additional subst itutions at sites identified by the targeted approach and at
potentially interacting residues. BR mutants obtained by this method will be
screened with a rapid assay developed to measure lattice accumulation in vivo.
The proposed experiments will address the following questions: (i) which amino
acid contacts within the lipid bilayer are most important for lattice stability?
(ii) do intramembrane protein-lipid interactions play a significant role in
lattice stability? and (iii) what is the strength of protein-protein and
protein-lipid interactions within the lipid bilayer? These studies will provide
fundamental insights into the nature of non-covalent interactions that determine
membrane protein tertiary and quaternary structure. ***