* 9514398
* Social Identity and Self Concept
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Marilynn Brewer, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2000
* USD 182,933.00

9514398 Brewer Social identities are those aspects of an individual's self
concept that derive from his or her membership in emotionally significant social
groups. Optimal distinctiveness theory is an extension of self- categorization
theory, developed by the PI to account for why individuals seek identification
with social groups and to explain the role of social identities in achieving and
maintaining a stable self-concept. The theory is based on the thesis that
distinctiveness per se is a factor underlying the selection and strength of
social identities, independent of the positive evaluation associated with
membership in particular social categories. It is proposed that social
identities are selected and activated to the extent that they help the
individual to achieve a balance between feelings of inclusion and feelings of
distinctiveness in a given social context. The purpose of the proposed program
of research is to explore the implications of optimal distinctiveness theory for
psychological processes at the individual level. Nine sets of experiments are
proposed that are designed to test the consequences of seeking and maintaining
optimal group identification for (a) self evaluation, (b) self stereotyping and
the content of the self concept, (c) presentation of the self to others, and (d)
protection of ingroup identity through differentiation from outgroups. Together
these experiments will serve to test the validity of the fundamental assumptions
about social motivation underlying optimal distinctiveness theory. %%% The
purpose of this program of research is to investigate the consequences of group
membership for the formation, maintenance, and change of a person's self-concept
and sense of self-worth. It is designed to test the theory that opposing needs
for belonging (similarity to others) and distinctiveness (differentiation from
others) shape individual identity and attitudes toward their own and other socia
l groups. An adaptive self-concept satisfies both needs simultaneously. Failure
to meet either produces anxiety and instability of the self-concept
(disequilibrium). A series of experiments is proposed, designed to assess the
effects of such disequilibrium on individual self-esteem and prejudice toward
members of other social groups. ***