* 9514831
* Sociolinguistic Survey of Cajun French
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Sylvie Dubois, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/2000
* USD 226,000.00

This project is an extensive sociolinguistic investigation of Cajun French. The
study will use a scientific methodology based on a large and diverse enough
sample of speakers to enable researchers to access the range of variability of
the Cajun speech community. The results will provide the basis for answers about
the real usage of, the linguistic attitudes toward, and the structure of this
variety, and, consequently, its degree of assimilation. The goal is to determine
what Cajun French is in Louisiana today, who uses it, when, with whom and to
what end. Two major objectives will be achieved by this project. The first is
the delimitation and definition of four Cajun communities (Thibodaux, Abbeville,
Eunice and Marksville), as well as the linguistic attitudes of the inhabitants.
To achieve this, a stratified sample of 1200 individuals representing these four
communities will be constructed which will allow access to socio- economic and
geographic diversity, and a sociological questionnaire will be distributed to
specific categories of respondents. This will allow researchers to examine
linguistic attitudes about identity and belonging. By assessing four
sociolinguistic indices (linguistic competence in Cajun, Cajun ancestry, network
of Cajun use, and use of standard French), they will also evaluate the
sociolinguistic stability of Cajun French. The second objective is the analysis
of the Cajun language spoken by native or near-native members of the four
communities. To highlight its specific nature, several linguistic forms which
are strongly stigmatized or otherwise marked will be studied. The tokens will be
drawn from a spoken Cajun French database designed to allow statistically valid
results representative of the four linguistic communities. By accounting for the
social and cultural aspects of the sociolinguistic situation of Cajun French the
results will help investigators understand the evolution and maintenance of this
non-standard variety, which is confronted with both the school-taught standard
French held up as a linguistic model and with cultural and linguistic
encroachments by the majority Anglophone society. The proposed study will have a
significant impact by providing both documentation and interpretation of an
extensive linguistic corpus and of statements by Louisiana French speakers
concerning their cultural/linguistic experience. Finally, the results of this
comprehensive analysis will contribute to debates on norms, on language planning
and on the standardization of non-standard varieties.