* 9514898
* CISE Research Instrumentation: ATM Testbed for Multimedia   and Distributed Computing
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Raj Jain, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 175,300.00

CDA 9514898 Jain, Raj Panda, Dhabaleswar Arora, Anish Page, Thomas, W. The Ohio
State University Columbus, Ohio ATM Testbed for Multimedia and Distributed
Computing This research proposes to establish an ATM Networking Testbed. The
testbed is targeted to provide networking research infrastructure to enable
experimental research in the areas of ATM networking, ATM switch testing,
parallel computing, distributed computing, and multimedia. Specifically, the
testbed will be used for the following four research projects: a) Development of
performance metrics and benchmarks for various components involved in ATM
networked systems including switches, network interface cards, end-system
hardware, and operating systems; b) Development of new mechanisms and primitives
for communication and synchronization over networks of workstations (NOWs)
connected with ATM interconnection; c) Development of an environment for
simulation and implementation of computer protocols that are subject to faults,
security attacks, and real- time constraints; and d) Reinventing of the familiar
spreadsheet paradigm to enable transparent parallel computation and distributed
sharing, circumscribed by the simple yet powerful programming and modeling
paradigm. The National ATM Performance Test Lab established by this proposal
will provide impartial performance measurements using standard benchmarks for
equipment from different vendors. This will also allow the creation of a
vigorous center for experimental research in high-speed multimedia networking
and parallel processing over ATM-connected networks.