* 9514544
* Critical Transitions in Posture and Locomotor Control
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Marjorie Woollacott, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 01/31/2000
* USD 185,000.00

9514544 Woollacott In everyday living, infants and children are continually
confronted with potential threats to balance. We need a better understanding of
the conditions that make balance difficult, how children respond when balanced
is threatened, and how those responses change as children grow and gain
experience. By artificially creating a threat to balance, we can observe these
different balance recovery patterns and understand the conditions associated
with balance control. A second question is how balance recovery strategies
change during early childhood and at what stage children benefit from practicing
balance skills. To answer these two questions we will create a disturbance of
balance by unexpectedly moving the surface on which a child stands. We will
record the movement patterns used to recover balance and measure the muscle
responses that underlie the recovery movements. The results of the proposed
research will contribute to our understanding of normal motor development, and
will be particularly useful in clinical settings where the evaluation of balance
function of children with motor disabilities such as cerebral palsy is required.
These data will serve as a basis for determining the time frame of the emergence
of normal balance control and the ability to adapt balance adjustments to
changing conditions, so that the performance of children with delays and
abnormalities in development can be compared to this norm.