* 9514375
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research to Enhance the            Performance of the Model Elimination Proof Procedure
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Owen Astrachan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 13,080.00

This award supports Professor Donald Loveland and Assistant Professor Owen
Astrachan of Duke University to collaborate in computer science research with
Professor Eike Jessen and others of the Computer Architecture Department of the
Technical University of Munich (TUM), Germany. They are studying the Model
Elimination proof procedure, a general-purpose theorem-proving technique of
interest to both research groups. The procedure is derived from the logic
programming language Prolog, and can use the sophisticated implementation
architecture developed for Prolog. There is a significant amoung of research
being performed on Model Elimination in Germany as part of a five year multi-
university research program on deduction that is lead by the TUM group. A
fundamental issue being studied by both the German and US groups is the
intelligent use of lemmas that are automatically generated by the Model
Elimination system for use in accelerating the subsequent proof finding.
Significant theorems have been proven using this technique enhanced with the
lemma device where no solutions would have been possible without the lemma
device. Therefore the development of good lemma selection techniques would be
particularly valuable in this area of computer science. The collaborating Duke
and TUM research groups have experience respectively with global and local lemma
techniques. These are quite different approaches, and combining them is expected
to lead to enhancements of the lemma techniques which will expand the usefulness
of the Model Elimination procedure for proving more complex theorems such as
those in the `grand challenge` class. The U.S. group will also benefit from
interactions with other participants in the German national program from the
University of Koblenz and the Humboldt University in Berlin.