* 9514966
* Generalizability & Mediation of the Videotaped-Confession Bias
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* G. Daniel Lassiter, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1999
* USD 169,903.00

9514966 Lassiter Within the criminal justice system, there is a growing trend
toward utilizing videotape technology to record and to present confession
evidence. However, despite the seeming objectivity associated with the making
and subsequent evaluation of a videotaped interrogation and confession, the
literature on salience effects in causal attribution suggests that certain
aspects of this process could inadvertently bias or prejudice judgments of
voluntariness and guilt. Consistent with this literature, our preliminary
studies show that, relative to other confession-presentation formats (e. g.,
audiotapes and transcripts), videotapes that are recorded with the focus on the
confessor tend to produce judgments of greater voluntariness and guilt. These
findings have important legal implications. This research will build on our
preliminary results in two ways. The first line of investigation will focus on
determining whether the previously observed videotaped-confession bias can be
eliminated or attenuated by certain standard criminal justice practices or by
other factors that would likely come into play in real courts of law. The second
line of investigation will focus on identifying the process or processes that
underlie or mediate the videotaped-confession bias. The proposed research has
considerable theoretical and applied significance because only when the limits
of the videotaped-confession bias are clearly established and an adequate
explanation for its occurrence is identified can appropriate decisions be made
as to how to utilize videotaped confessions to the best benefit of the criminal
justice system. %%%% Within the criminal justice system, there is a growing
trend toward utilizing videotape technology to record and to present confession
evidence. However, despite the seeming objectivity associated with the making
and subsequent evaluation of a videotaped interrogation and confession, the
literature on salience effects in causal attribution suggests that certain
aspects of this process could inadvertently bias or prejudice judgments of
voluntariness and guilt. Consistent with this literature, our preliminary
studies show that, relative to other confession-presentation formats (e. g.,
audiotapes and transcripts), videotapes that are recorded with the focus on the
confessor tend to produce judgments of greater voluntariness and guilt. These
findings have important legal implications. This research will build on our
preliminary results in two ways. The first line of investigation will focus on
determining whether the previously observed videotaped-confession bias can be
eliminated or attenuated by certain standard criminal justice practices or by
other factors that would likely come into play in real courts of law. The second
line of investigation will focus on identifying the process or processes that
underlie or mediate the videotaped-confession bias. The proposed research has
considerable theoretical and applied significance because only when the limits
of the videotaped-confession bias are clearly established and an adequate
explanation for its occurrence is identified can appropriate decisions be made
as to how to utilize videotaped confessions to the best benefit of the criminal
justice system.