* 9514126
* Hydrogen Tunneling in Enzyme Reactions
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Judith Klinman, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 02/28/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9507018 Klinman The original observations of room-temperature hydrogen tunneling
in enzyme reactions occured in the yeast alcohol dehydrogenase and the bovine
serum amine oxidase reactions. In recent years, evidence for tunneling has been
exteneded to include horse liver alcohol dehudrogenase, monoamine oxidase, and
very likely soybean lipoxygenase and glucose oxidase. When conditions are
optimized to allow the monitoring of the hydrogen transfer step itself, it
appears that the phenomenon of tunneling can be readily detected, although the
exact nature of tunneling varies from one system to another. Our findings
suggest that, in conjuction with the more classical sources of catalytic rate
enhancement, the structures at enzyme active sites have been optimized to make
catalytic use of quantum effects. One of the most extreme types of behavior has
been seen in the soybean lipoxgenase reaction, which is postulated to catalyze
substrate oxidation by close to full quantum event. Future studies with this
enzyme will focus on (i) the use of stopped flow kinetics to monitor the
H-transfer step directly as function of temperature; (ii) the kinetic
characterization of D/T and H/T labeled substrates as probes of tunneling.
Premiliary studies of D/T and H/T isotope effects with two forms of glucose
oxidase, which differ ca. two-fold in mass (due solely to differences in
patterns of glycosylation),suggest different degrees of tunneling. These
proteins will be deglycosylated and recharacterized to test the hypothesis that
overall protein mass (and possibly mobility) can influence tnneling. The horse
liver alcohol dehydrogenase offers a superb opportunity to examine the role of
specific active site side chains in optimizing tunneling. A systematic study of
residues contacting the bound cofactor is planned by site specific mutagenesis.
In order or pursue the question of a possible link between protein dynamics and
efficient hydrogen tunneling, two experimental routes wi ll be taken. These
involve (I) the study of horse liver alcohol dehydrogenase at low temperature in
cryosolvent using a photodisociable, substrate precursor and (ii) the study of
D/T and H/T isotope effects as a function of temperture (between ca. 25 and
90oC) using thermophilic forms of alcohol dehydrogenase. Brief Description (200
words) of Project The accepted paradigm for the enormous rate accelerations
brought about by protein catalysts (enzymes) has been a reduction in the height
of the energy barrier for the conversion of reactant to product. Quantum
mechanics provides a more fundamental and general way of formalizing reaction
dyamics. However, with the exception of electron transfer reactions, it has
generally been assumed that proteins, because of their large size, catalyze
reactions classically. In fact, we have recently shown that under physiologic
conditions, quantum effects contribute significantly to the tate accelerations
brought about by many enzymes. We are now trying to understand the specific ways
in which enzymes take advantage of quantum mechanics to enhance their catalytic
effects. Three areas are under investigation: these include roles of specific
amino acid side chain interactions, overall protein size, and protein dynamics
in the manifestation of catalysis through quantum effects.