* 9514880
* Neural Systems Analysis of Experience-Dependent Navigation
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Sheri Mizumori, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Sonya K. Sobrian
* 03/31/2000
* USD 200,789.00

9514880 Mizumori To study the process by which sensory-based, organism- centered
spatial information is transformed into an allocentric coordinate system, we
will examine the relative sensory and mnemonic contributions within individual
tectolimbic structures to accurate navigation. This first step is essential in
order to define target structures within the neural system of interest. The
original specific aims also proposed to test the functional connectivity between
the target brain structures so that we could begin to evaluate the dynamical
interactions between structures. However, the latter specific aim has been
eliminated. To facilitate comparisons between structures, these experiments will
focus on one well studied form of navigational learning, visual spatial learning
by rats on a radial maze. Comparison of the response properties of information
representation in a variety of brain structures during a single behavior will
allow future studies to begin to postulate the sort of dynamical interactions
that must exist between brain areas if adaptive consequences of spatial
processing are to be realized. In order to understand how organisms utilize the
tectolimbic circuit in a behaviorally meaningful way, it is essential that we
determine how this system affects the ongoing behavior of the animal. We
hypothesize that striatal structures such as the nucleus accumbens and caudate
nucleus serve to integrate hippocampal spatial information with nonspatial
reward-related information to direct the initiation of voluntary behavior via
efferents to the ventral pallidum, a critical structure for the direct control
of voluntary behaviors. Together, the results of this neural system analysis
will not only provide new and important insight into how multiple brain areas
might act in concert during navigation, but our findings should also afford new
opportunities to learn about neuroplastic mechanisms that might be available
during normal spatia l learning. Single unit responses of the same 12 brain
structures listed in the original proposal will be recorded as rats perform a
nonspatial and spatial learning task on the radial maze. The structures selected
comprise the tectolimbic and limbic striatal systems. Preliminary data show that
it is possible to classify these various cell types as spatial or nonspatial,
and that we can determine the relative mnemonic and sensory contribution of
these cells to navigation. A memory function will be suggested if 1) there is
protracted shaping of the correlate during acquisition of a spatial task, 2) if
there is evidence for contextual dependency of the representation, and/or 3) if
there is short term persistence of the representation in the absence of
environmental (visual) cues. Exps. 1-3 will test these possibilities. Exp. 4 and
5 will evaluate the sensory-dependence of the representation by observing cell
responses immediately after the removal of visual cues, and after scrambling of
the cues. Vestibular sensory contributions will be assessed by rotating the
center portion of the radial maze, then observing unit and behavioral responses
(Exp. 6). Intramaze olfactory sensory influences on the spatial representations
will be tested by observing unit responses to rotation of the entire maze (Exp.
7). Exp. 8 will investigate the role of voluntary movement to spatial
representations. Finally, since accumbens cells are sensitive to differences in
reward magnitude, Exps. 1-8 will take place using rewards of different
magnitude.