* 9514336
* Collaborative Research: Biosynthesis of                     Dimethylsulforiopropionate and its Precursor in Relation to Sulfur Emission from Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Andrew Hanson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 01/31/2000
* USD 228,000.00

The two major dimethylsulfonium compounds known in higher plants and marine
algae are S-methylmethionine (SMM) and 3-dimethylsulfoniopropionate (DMSP). SMM
is widely distributed in higher plants and algae, typically at moderate levels;
it is not clear whether SMM has any physiological funtion. DMSP occurs only in
certain higher plants and marine algae, but can reach very high levels,
particularly in conditions of high salinity and low nitrogen. DMSP is a sulfur
analog of a betaine and, like betaines, functions as an osmoprotectant. Both SMM
and DMSP are known to be precursors of dimethylsulfide (DMS) gas, which is the
predominant biological source of atmospheric sulfur. SMM is probably the
principal precursor of terrestial DMS emissions, whereas DMSP is the main DMS
preursor in the oceans and coastal environments. Both compounds are therefore
central to biogenic sulfur emission. Despite the pivotal roles of SMM and DMSP
in the natural sulfur cycle, until recently little was known about their
biosynthesis except that both are derived from methionine. The overall aims of
this research are to elucidate the steps in DMSP biosynthesis in marine algae as
well as in higher plants, to understand the enzymes that produce and cleave SMM
and how these are kept apart, and to seek the enzymes that convert SMM to DMSP.
The results would provide biochemical insight into the origin of the world's
most abundant biogenic sources of atmospheric sulfur. This is a collaborative
project with Dr. Gage's laboratory at Michigan State University.