* 9514306
* Function of Auxin-Binding Protein 1
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Alan Jones, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 03/31/1997
* USD 29,688.00

9514306 Jones This is a supplemental award to continue work on projects which
address the function of the auxin receptor (Auxin-Binding Protein 1, ABP1) in
growth control. This is an unusual growth hormone receptor that does not fit any
hormone receptor paradigm. It also has unusual cell biology in that it is found
predominantly in the endoplasmic reticulum lumen but has its site of action on
the extracytoplasmic side of the plasma membrane. The proposed work will utilize
transformed cells, plants, and DNA constructs prepared during the prior funding
period of the grant. It also incorporates mutant plants that recently became
available. The three projects are: 1. The cDNA for the Arabidopsis ABP1 will be
used for trangenic plant expression studies. For several reasons, constitutive
overexpression of this receptor is not possible; therefore, the auxin receptor
cDNA was placed under the control of two inducible promoters (tet inducible and
salicylic acid inducible). production of transgenic tobacco and Arabidopsis
plants are just now being made. T2 plants will be characterized before and after
the ABP cDNA is inducibly expressed to determine the effect of overexpression of
this hormone receptor on plant growth and development. 2. In collaboration with
CIBA-Geigy, maize cells were transformed with the maize auxin receptor cDNA
driven by a constitutive promoter. One cell line expressing the auxin receptor
at high levels was found. These cells had an unusual wall morphology that
phenocopied transfer cells, a highly differentiated plant cell type that is
involved in rapid movement of solutes. This cell line is a valuable tool to
study the properties of this important cell type and the function of the auxin
receptor. It is the first time a homogeneous population of transfer cells has
been obtained. These cells, despite having a drastically different morphology
(numerous finger projections), appear to have the same cell wall polymer
composition. Studies are underway to determine how different wall morphology can
be generated and if ABP1 has a role in this transfer cell wall form. 3. In
collaboration with Pioneer seeds, mutant alleles of the maize ABP gene were
found by a reverse genetics approach based on Mutator transposable element
insertions. Some of the alleles were sequenced and shown to be in 4 different
ABP genes. These mutants will be characterized to determine if the mutation in
the ABP gene affects plant growth. Mutants have been planted and will be
backcrossed to determine if the phenotype correlates with the mutant allele. To
date, cell biological and biochemical approaches have been used to study the
function of the auxin receptor without molecular genetic tools such as the
transgenic and mutant plants described above. While this has been productive for
a while, new understanding can not be advanced without molecular genetic tools.
Perturbations on the function of the auxin receptor in the mutant and transgenic
plants, observed using cell biological techniques, will elucidate the mechanism
of this unusual hormone receptor in controlling plant cell growth and
morphology. ***