* 9514117
* Molecular Origins of Specificity in Protein-Nucleic         Acid Interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 06/30/1999
* USD 213,000.00

9514117 Carey The goal of this work on protein-nucleic acid interactions is to
understand the molecular origins of specificity in the recognition process. How
does a protein identify its target site among all available nucleic acid sites?
Interest in the underlying principles of recognition motivate comparative study
of different systems in order to distill out the molecular generalities that may
be common among them. This work combines methods of biochemistry, biophysics,
and molecular biology, with the goal of integrating structural and thermodynamic
aspects of each system trying eventually to relate these aspects to the
physiological role of the interaction. This proposal aims to examine molecular
features responsible for specificity in two protein-nucleic acid interactions,
those of bacterial arginine repressor (ArgR) and eukaryotic transcription factor
IIIA (TFIIIA). These two systems share many features that recommend them as
excellent examples for our studies, including the probable ability to bind both
RNA and DNA and to package nucleic acids. In the case of the hexameric ArgR,
important open questions concern the functional definition of the operator
sequence, and the range of tolerance toward variations in both protein and DNA
sequence. These issues will be approached by biochemical studies of binding to a
natural operator with an extended tripartite structure, using functionally
homologous but very divergent arginine repressors from E. coli and B. subtilis.
Interactions of wildtype and site-directed mutant operators with each protein
will be characterized by determining affinity, specificity, stoichiometry,
cooperativity, and details of the DNA contacts using quantitative gel
retardation and footprinting. A second aim with ArgR is to investigate a
possible general regulatory role for the protein implied by some of its
biochemical and physiological properties. This will be tested by using in vitro
selection for ArgR-binding sequences from an E. coli genomic library. A thir d
aim is to characterize a putative RNA-binding function observed in our purified
samples of ArgR. To confirm that the RNA-binding moiety is ArgR, we will conduct
quantitative biochemical studies of the ArgR-RNA interactions by using gel
retardation and footprinting to determine affinity, specificity, stoichiometry,
cooperativity, and details of the RNA contacts. In the case of TFIIIA,
conflicting data in the literature indicate a need for quantitative biochemical
approaches that can probe the origins of specificity in RNA binding. One
hypothesis is that specificity is determined in a rapid binding equilibrium
which must be studied kinetically to resolve it from subsequent particle
formation. To approach this problem requires using purified recombinant
components and isolated natural particles, and quantitative gel retardation and
footprinting to determine the affinity, specificity, stoichiometry,
cooperativity, and details of the RNA contacts in the various complexes that
form during the time course of association, dissociation, competition, and
exchange reaction. ***