* 9514259
* Glycolytic Enzyme Dynamics in Living Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Leonard Pagliaro, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9514259 Pagliaro Biochemical and ultrastructural studies have been essential for
elucidating the microanatomy and biochemical logic of cells and their
organelles, but the spatial and temporal dynamics of many cellular processes
remain poorly understood. In large part, this is due to the spatial averaging
inherent in many biochemical approaches and the loss of temporal resolution in
ultrastructural studies requiring chemical fixation. Fluorescent probe and
optical microscope techniques developed over the past decade have made it
possible to study an increasing number of molecular and biochemical processes in
living cells. We are using these techniques to characterize the organization of
glycolysis in living cells. The glycolytic enzymes aldolase, phosphofructokinase
(PFK), glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH), and triose phosphate
isomerase (TPI) have been shown to interact with each other and/or structural
proteins in vitro, and a variety of specif1c reagents can now be used to study
their behavior in vivo. We are studying the intracellular distribution and
mobility of each of these enzymes, and the interactions among these enzymes in
vitro and in vivo will be characterized extensively. We have also found that the
glycolytic enzyme enolase lacks specific interactions in vitro and in vivo, and
we will use enolase as a reference molecule in our experiments. Aldolase is
concentrated in a microdomain around F-actin stress fibers in fibroblasts, and a
fraction of the enzyme is bound in vivo as measured with fluorescence
photobleaching (FRAP). This finding is inconsistent with the textbook
description of glycolysis occurring as a series of fully solvated, diffusion
limited reactions in cytoplasm, and consistent with a growing number of models
for organized glycolytic metabolism. Recent work from several laboratories has
led to the identification of an actinbinding domain on the aldolase molecule,
based on biochemical and molecular genetic studies of aldolase interactions in
vitro. We ar e using site-directed mutants of rabbit muscle aldolase to study
the effect of specific mutations on aldolase dynamics in vivo; both catalytic
activity and actin-binding activity mutants have been obtained and
characterized. There is also evidence that PFK and GAPDH bind to F-actin and may
interact with aldolase in vitro. We will map the distribution and mobility of
these enzymes in vivo, and we will use a panel of site-specific monoclonal
antibodies and synthetic peptides corresponding to putative catalytic and actin
interaction sites on PFK and GAPDH to study the effects of these sites on
intracellular organization of the enzymes. Similar reagents for aldolase are
currently under development. Finally, we will use fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) to ask whether or not indirect "piggyback" binding of TPI to
F-actin occurs in vivo, consistent with solution biochemical evidence, and to
evaluate interactions between/among all four enzymes. We will use an
interdisciplinary approach, with biochemical characterization of reagents prior
to their use in vivo; electron microscopy, falling ball viscometry, fluorescence
photobleaching, and FRET measurements to quantify enzyme/actin interactions in
vitro; and microinjection, fluorescence imaging, fluorescence photobleaching,
and fluorescence energy transfer experiments in vivo. Characterization of the
dynamics of glycolysis will improve our understanding of cytoplasm, and of the
ways in which biochemical reactions are organized and regulated in vivo. The
long term goal of this research is to improve our ability to mimic cytoplasmic
functions in advanced biomaterials, and to provide intelligent structural and
metabolic support for nanotransport and nanofabrication molecular machinery. %%%
Much modern biology is based on the study of fixed specimens and dilute
biochemical reactions. While this approach has been very valuable, it has limits
as we probe the molecular nature of living cells ever more closely. For example,
many biochemical and bio physical techniques are optimized for studying strong
interactions between molecules, but weak molecular interactions are extremely
important biochemically, though inherently more difficult to study. New
technology has enabled the development of techniques to study some aspects of
biochemical pathways directly in living cells. While technologically difficult,
this approach has the important benefit of allowing us to begin to ask questions
about the elegant and precise way in which cells orchestrate biochemical
reactions. The goal of this project is to study the organization and behavior of
several glycolytic enzymes in living cells. These enzymes are generally believed
to exist as molecules freely dissolved in cytoplasm, but much recent evidence
has suggested that they may exist partially in the solid state. The possibility
that this basic and ubiquitous biochemical pathway may exist in an unusual state
warrant direct investigation in living cells. We will microinject tracer
quantities of active enzymes labeled with specific dyes that can be used to
trace their location and movement in living cells. Digital imaging technology
will be coupled to advanced light microscope techniques to map the organization
and mobility of these molecules in a variety of metabolic states. The
significance of this work is three-fold. First, it is clear that much
biochemistry generally treated as occurring in solution may have more complex
organization, perhaps including a degree of solid state basis. Characterizing
and understanding the molecular organization of these reactions is one of the
important challenges remaining for many biochemical pathways. Second, molecular
organization of biochemical pathways may provide a link between biochemical
logic and three-dimensional cytoplasmic organization. Documenting structural
roles for enzymes in living cells, in addition to catalytic roles, will enhance
our understanding of cytoplasmic organization, and shed new light on processes
as basic as cell motility. Third, the rules by which nature has optimized
biochemical function are clearly very elegant and sophisticated relative to the
crude biochemical machinery we are capable of reconstituting today. Identifying
these rules may allow us to incorporate more sophisticated design features into
molecular machinery designed to mimic natural systems. This will ultimately lead
to the development of advanced biomaterials, and perhaps new applications for
nanotransport/nanofabrication molecular machinery. ***