* 9514848
* U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research: Computational             Magnetohydrodynamics (MHD)
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Terry Kammash, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 04/30/2000
* USD 27,000.00

Description: This award is to support collaborative research by Dr. Terry
Kammash, Department of Nuclear Engineering, and Dr. Phillip Roe, Department of
Aerospace Engineering at the University of Michigan and Dr. Necdat Aslan,
Department of Physics at Marmara University in Istanbul, Turkey. The thrust of
the research is to produce a generalized computer code that solves the
magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) equations in two dimensions on the structured or
unstructured quadrilateral grids using a higher order Godunov type scheme. The
code is to be developed so that it will accept different initial and boundary
conditions to model different physical problems of interest to plasma physics
and controlled fusion as well as to astrophysical problems. Scope: This award is
to fund visits by the two U.S. P.I.'s, as well as one of their graduate students
at the U. of Michigan, to Marmara University, and the visit of the Turkish
scientist and a graduate student to the University of Michigan. The project
brings these very experienced scientists in the fields of MHD, fusion and
computational fluid dynamics to collaborate on developing a new powerful two-
dimensional computer code to solve MHD problems in various physical
applications. The project also allows for the initiation of a long-term
collaboration between the two teams at the two schools in the United States and
Turkey. It also provides an international experience for a U.S. graduate
student, by working at a dynamic foreign institute in Istanbul. Partial funding
of this project is being provided by the Division of Mathematical Sciences. The
project fits well with the objectives of the Division of International Programs.