* 9514718
* Comparative Phonology of Ivoirian Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1998
* William Leben, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 09/30/1998
* USD 113,000.00

The core of the present project is a focused, in-depth comparative study of tone
and associated prosodic phenomena in a number of Kwa languages of Ivory Coast,
with Baule at the center of the investigation. In joint work on Baule over the
past year, the investigators have uncovered new evidence for two prosodic
constituents that have already received much attention in the literature, the
prosodic word and the phonological phrase. Several tonal puzzles were solved by
positing prosodic domains that were independently justified on the basis of a
variety of other facts in the language. The resulting framework provides a much
better motivated analysis than other devices that are commonly used. The project
directors expect that the effects of the project will extend to the following
areas: Prosodic Phonology The comprehensive coverage of eight related languages
promises to provide clear, empirically motivated definitions of the prosodic
domains. Comparative Kwa The data, because they will be gathered in a well
coordinated fashion from several dozen dialects of the eight languages to be
studied, promise to be of great use to comparativists. Methodology The project
is expected to demonstrate the benefits of cross-dialect and cross-language
study for synchronic analysis. Typology of tonal systems The languages to be
studied are full tone languages, with between two and four phonological tones
and complex tonal rules. They are likely to shed further light on a variety of
questions in the theory of tone that previous investigations in West African
languages have asked. Training of graduate students A key component of the
project is the training of linguists to carry out research in their native
language and related dialects and languages. Documentation of Ivoirian languages
The project will help to assure the continued survival of the languages to be
studied by creating a body of material that can be drawn on in literacy-related
and literary-related work.