* 9514918
* Independence and the Taste-Homogeneity of Optimal           Jurisdictions in a Tiebaut Economy with Endogenous          Differentiated Crowding Effects
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* John Conley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/28/1998
* USD 74,275.00

It has been argued that competition between jurisdictions for citizens would
lead to efficient provision of public goods on the local level. One of the
persistent questions in the subsequent literature concerns the properties of
these efficient juris- dictions. In particular, it has been shown that if agents
care only about the number of citizens in a jurisdiction and not about their
types, then efficient jurisdictions will be taste-homogeneous in the sense that
agents will choose jurisdictions containing only agents whose tastes agree with
their own. An example of this type of nondifferentiated crowding is a swimming
pool in which only the total number of bodies in the pool affect an agent's
enjoyment of the facility. When crowding is differentiated, on the other hand,
mixing of different types may be optimal. Differentiated crowding means that
agents care not only about the number of agents with whom they share, but also
about their types. For example, the utility an agent gets from attending a dance
depends on both the ratio of men to women, and the total number of people in
attendance. The question of whether or not optimal jurisdictions are taste-
homogeneous has important policy implications. It tells us, for example, if we
should have suburbs with only one type of house, or schools that cater only to a
particular type of student. The purpose of this research is to study this
questiol in the context of the "crowding types" model of local public goods. The
crowding types model is a generalization of the differentiated crowding model in
which a distinction is made between the crowding effects and the tastes of an
agent. This innovation allows many new results to be obtained. This study
focuses on three points. First to show that when crowding and taste types have
values which are "independent" in the sense that the utility wages an agent
receives in the core can be hedonically decomposed into separate wages for each
of these traits, the core will be taste-homogeneous. Second, to show that
"independence" is nongeneric in a mathematical sense. Finally, to show that when
agents can choose their own crowding type (choosing their profession, for
example), market interactions will nevertheless guarantee that independence is
satisfied, and efficient jurisdictions will therefore be taste-homogeneous.