* 9514245
* Polyandry and Male Variability in a Heterogeneous           Environment
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* David Zeh, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 03/31/1999
* USD 86,264.00

Abstract Zeh 9514245 Theoretical models generally portray sexual selection as a
constant, undirectional force, driving a population towards a single, optimal
male phenotype. Species are assumed to occupy homogeneous environments and to
experience selection either through male competition or through mate choice by
monogamous females. This view fails to explain why sexually-selected male
characters are often precisely those which exhibit the greatest variability,
perhaps because the models do not reflect the complexity of factors influencing
trait evolution in nature. Many species, particularly those that exploit
ephemeral resources, are subject to fluctuating environmental conditions. In
addition, DNA fingerprinting has revealed that multiple paternity, and hence
polyandry, is far more common than previously assumed. The research proposed
here will test the hypothesis that sperm storage by polyandrous females,
superimposed on male competition in a heterogeneous environment, can contribute
to the maintenance of variability in male sexually-selected characters by
carrying genotypes through episodes of unfavorable selection. The development of
single-locus minisatellite DNA probes for a species whose natural history and
reproductive biology are highly amenable to experimentation makes the
neotropical pseudoscorpion, Cordylochernes scorpioides, a model system for
testing this hypothesis. As an essential first step in carrying out a rigorous
test of the sperm-storing females as carriers of male genetic variability
hypothesis, the proposed research will determine whether all the elements of
this model are present in the C. scorpioides system. First, to assess whether
sexual selection favors a significantly smaller male phenotype within trees than
on beetles, DNA fingerprinting will be used to quantify the relationship between
male size and reproductive success in experimental tree populations. Second, to
assess the ca pacity of females to act as carriers of male variability, DNA
fingerprinting will be used to compare levels of multiple paternity in the
broods of females captured in the act of boarding and of disembarking from
beetles. In addition, sperm utilization patterns will be investigated in a semi-
natural experimental simulation of a dispersal episode. Finally, to assess the
potential for exaggerated male traits to respond to selection in the two
environments, the design of the within-tree sexual selection experiment will
provide field estimates of heritability based on paternity assignment and
son/sire regression involving field-caught males (sires)and their male offspring
recaptured after release and development to maturity in the field. Assuming that
all the elements necessary for the model are found to exist in this
pseudoscorpion system, the development of quantitative simulation models to
investigate how selection in the two environments may be balanced will be the
focus of future research.