* 9514271
* Collaborative Project:  Identification of a Common Coat     Protein Domain in the Ilarvirus RNAs
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Lee Gehrke, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Susan Porter Ridley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 90,000.00

9514271 Gehrke The long-range goals of this project are to understand how
specific ribonucleoprotein complexes form; to define their structure, and most
importantly, to understand their biological significance. The immediate
experimental goals of this work will be accomplished by studying a model virus
system that has been developed collaboratively in two laboratories. Although the
coat proteins of alfalfa mosaic virus and the ilarviruses are both unrelated at
the primary amino acid level and serologically distinct, they are functionally
interchangeable in their capacity to bind different viral RNAs and to activate
virus replication. These investigations will biochemically identify common
nucleotide determinants in alfalfa mosaic virus and ilarvirus RNAs that are
bound specifically by the viral coat proteins. The biochemical data will then be
extended by evaluating RNA and/or protein sequence mutations in the context of
functional virus replication and assembly. Two experimental approaches will be
followed to identify the nucleotide sequences and structures required for coat
protein binding. First, electrophoretic mobility bandshift analysis, hydroxyl
radical footprinting, and chemical modification interference analysis will be
used to analyze the binding of citrus variegation virus (CVV) coat protein and
citrus leaf rugose virus (CiLRV) coat protein to the 3' untranslated region of
AlMV RNA (170 nucleotides) and to a 3'-terminal 39-nucleotide minimal coat
protein binding site that has been described previously. These experiments will
permit comparison of the binding determinants recognized by the cognate (AlMV)
and heterologous (CVV/CiLRV) coat proteins. Second, in vitro selection of RNA
ligands from a pool of random or semi-random oligoribonucleotides will be used
to identify 1) sequences and/or structures in the RNA determinant that are
essential for binding AlMV, CVV, or CiLRV coat proteins, and 2) new RNA
sequences and/or structures that display enhanced binding affinity for AlMV and
il arvirus coat proteins. The biological significance of the identified RNA-
protein interactions will be evaluated using two distinct assay systems: 1) a
virus replication assay in tobacco protoplasts, in which the ability of the
small selected RNAs to inhibit virus production will be analyzed and 2) an assay
to evaluate AIMV RNA 3 replication and assembly in cells or protoplasts that
transiently or constitutively express AIMV replicase proteins. The work has
significance for greater understanding of RNA-protein interactions and the life
cycle of viruses that infect a wide range of plants. ***