* 9514383
* Scaling of the Mechanics and Energetics of Mammalian Muscle Fibers with Body Size
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Lawrence Rome, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Michael Mishkind
* 04/30/2001
* USD 232,558.00

9514383 Rome It has been empirically shown that small animals (e.g. mice and
rats) move their limbs at higher frequencies than large animals (man or horses)
and that it costs more energy per gram for a small animal to move a given
distance than for a large one. In this proposal, the principal investigator (PI)
will ask "how is the muscular system designed to permit much faster movements in
small animals and why does it cost much more energy for small animals to run
than large ones?" It has been hypothesized that the difference lies in the
properties of the muscle fibers. The muscle fibers of the small animals are
thought to be much faster--a necessity for the high frequencies at which these
animals run. But there is a price: very fast muscle fibers use far more energy
to generate force, thus potentially explaining why it is more costly for small
animals to run. The PI will test the above hypothesis by measuring how speed and
the energetic cost of generating force of different fiber types scales with body
size in animals ranging from rats to horses. The long-term goal of the PI's
research is to understand the design of muscular systems. This involves
performing specific experiments that facilitate the integration of information
from molecular, cellular and whole animal studies. This approach is crucial
because there are large gaps in our knowledge of the principles by which animals
use their muscles. Further, elucidation of the principles of how healthy motor
systems work may have far-reaching application in terms of health and athletic
performance of humans and other animals. For instance, the information obtained
from these studies may be useful in 1) understanding disease/injuries of the
motor/cardiovascular systems; 2) designing computer systems for aiding movement
in the handicapped; 3) designing pharmacological and genetic interventions for
muscle disease states; 4) understanding the functional basis of
training/rehabilitation; and 5) choosing appropriate skeletal muscle fo r heart
pumping assist. With recent attempts to use tissue from non-human species in
man, these studies would be particularly important as they will provide a data
base of muscle speeds from which physicians might be able to choose a good match
for a particular function in humans. This information will also be important for
veterinary medicine. ***