* 9514338
* U.S.-Argentina Planning Visit:  A Comparative Study of      Breeding Birds of North Temperate and Subtropical/South     Temperate Forests
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 04/30/1996
* USD 5,378.00

9514388 Martin The long-range goal of the research is to provide new insights
into well-known but poorly understood, broad patterns of nesting and foraging
patterns of birds across the Americas. To add to 10 years of data collected on
clutch sizes, nest predation rates, and food delivery rates for ground-nesting
warblers and shrub-nesting thrushes in the north temperate forests, it is
intended to study birds of the same genus or subfamily in the tropics,
subtropics, and south temperate forests. This U.S.- Argentina Planning Grant
will permit a planning visit to Argentina to establish a collaborative effort
with Alejandro Brown of Universidad Nacional de Tucuman and to visit possible
study sites. A critical first step is identification of a proper forest system
where phylogenetically-related species are abundant and elevational segregation
of species pairs is common. The work of Thomas Martin is well respected for its
rigor and insight into nesting patterns, while the Argentine collaborator,
Alejandro Brown, is an experienced field biologist in studies of foraging
patterns. Both the potential for new insights through comparisons of closely
related species in differing environments and the robustness added through the
collaborative effort are benefits to be expected from research stemming from the
planning visit. Results have potential for impact on wildlife management and,
more broadly, on our understanding of ecological systems. Additionally, Martin
will take a graduate student with him on the visit, providing valuable field
work and international experience for a young scientist. ***