* 9514803
* Molecular Genetics of Proteus Mirabilis Pattern-Determining Genes
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* M. Robert Belas, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Philip Harriman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 233,620.00

9514803 Belas Proteus mirabilis exhibits the unique ability to undergo a
morphological and physiological differentiation to form a swarmer cell in
response to growth on surfaces or in viscous fluids. Maintenance of the
differentiated cell requires constant contact with the inducing environment and
is mediated through conditions that inhibit rotation of the flagella. A second
signal, the amino acid glutamine, is also critical for induction of
differentiation. Moreover, swarmer cells respond specifically to glutamine
concentration gradients, while undifferentiated swimmer cells do not. While
differentiation into a swarmer cell occurs at the level of the individual cell,
swarming motility and behavior are characteristics associated with the
coordinated movement of groups of swarmer cells. This behavior is cyclic in
nature, so that the movement of the swarming mass is punctuated by periodic
episodes during which the bacteria cease movement and dedifferentiate from the
swarmer cell back to the swimmer cell in a process called consolidation. The
cycles of swarming and consolidation are then repeated several times until the
agar surface is covered by concentric rings giving rise to the characteristic
"bull's-eye" appearance of P. mirabilis colonies. TnS mutagenesis has produced
two general categories of mutants defective in swarming: null mutants (Swr-) in
which swarming does not occur and mutants that show aberrant swarming behavior
(Swrcr). Swrcr mutants do not produce "bull's-eye" consolidation patterns.
Instead, many of these mutants are altered in their ability to form discrete
consolidation zones of uniform size and are called pattern-determining mutants.
We have developed two hypotheses to explain the control of pattern formation,
each having a different set of predictions and anticipated genes. The first
hypothesis argues that the cycles are generated by an internal 'clock' where the
increase or decrease of some intracellular component is crucial in determining
when consolidation occurs. In contrast to the 'clock' model, the second
hypothesis suggests that the cycles of consolidation are generated by an
extracellular system of molecules, i.e., extracellular concentration gradients
control the cycles. These two possibilities are not mutually exclusive (and are
not the only models that one can develop), but are useful for making
predictions. Moreover, the 'clock' model suggests a temporal control of pattern
formation while an extracellular concentration gradient hypothesis implicates a
spatial control mechanism. This framework lends itself to the development tests
to prove the efficacy of each model and predicts the involvement of certain gene
products. This research will test the hypothesis that these pattern-determining
mutants have arisen from mutations affecting the spatial or temporal
coordination of multicellular migration and consolidation. The research seeks to
gain insights into the mechanisms of pattern determination by: a) Identifying
swarming-pattern-determining genes and their functions through nucleotide and
deduced amino acid sequence analysis and b) Determining the differential
expression of pattern-determining genes at discrete time points during swarming
behavior. To accomplish these goals known, previously constructed Tn5 mutants
defective in multicellular migration and pattern formation will be used. The
disrupted genes will be cloned from each mutant, the nucleotide sequence
analyzed, and the putative function of the encoded protein determined by
homology to known genes in the database. P. mirabilis merodiploids will be
constructed to produce transcriptional fusions with bacterial luciferase
(luxCDABE), to measure temporal control mechanisms, while translational fusions
with (-galactosidase (lacZ) will measure spatial control during pattern
formation. The completion of these objectives will provide knowledge of
fundamental importance to molecular biologists, and may offer insight into how
multicellular movement is regulated during both prokaryotic and eukary otic
development. ***