* 9514675
* CAREER:  mRNA and Protein Turnover During Mammalian         Hibernation:  A Potential Stimulus for Arousals?
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2002
* Bert Boyer, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jack Hayes
* 01/31/2002
* USD 311,884.00

9514675 Boyer Hibernation is an extreme adaptation involving the coordination of
multiple organs in lowering whole body temperature to conserve energy for an
extended time. The PI's study hibernating ground squirrels which lower their
body temperature for periods of up to three weeks before they spontaneously
rewarm to normal summer body temperatures for a short period (&lt; 24 hours).
Following this brief rewarming period, hibernators return to another three week
period of reduced body temperature. This repetitive pattern of cooling and
rewarming might seem paradoxical, since it requires the burning of a significant
amount of stored calories throughout the hibernation season, unless the pattern
meets a critical physiological need. The proposed research addresses this
phenomenon and represents the first comprehensive analysis of the temperature
sensitivity of gene expression in a hibernating mammal. The PI's major
objectives are to (1) identify potential messenger RNAs (mRNAs) that become
limiting during low body temperature; (2) determine the turnover of these mRNAs
by measuring their rate of synthesis and degradation as a function of
temperature; and (3) determine the effect of reduced mRNA concentration on
protein synthesis rate as a function of temperature. Comparison of the relative
rates of mRNA synthesis and degradation during warm and low body temperatures
will result in a considerable advancement in our understanding of biological
adaptations to low temperature. This award also includes a teaching component.
Most students are unskilled with the process of scientific inquiry including
observation, inference, hypothesis formation, experimental design, data
collection, analysis and interpretation. To explain biological concepts and
understand the nature of biology, students must learn how to think c ritically,
reason logically and evaluate technological information effectively by being
introduced to the methods, values and process of conducting scientific
investigations. The educational plan provides this for students by giving them
the opportunity to contribute to an ongoing research project focusing on
molecular and metabolic adaptations to hibernation. Students willing to produce
and follow an organized research plan should develop a deeper understanding of
natural phenomena surrounding them and an appreciation for the tools of
scientific inquiry and the expansion of biological knowledge. Concurrent with
the proposed undergraduate educational training, excellent teaching assistant
opportunities will foster the academic growth of graduate students by
integrating education and research into their professional development.
Additionally, critical thinking skills will also be introduced into the
classroom through an inquiry-based teaching approach. Students will participate
in problem solving activities, debate, hands-on demonstrations and writing
exercises involving local examples of scientific interest. Finally, cooperative
research and teaching interactions with rural high school teachers are proposed
and include sharing ideas and experiences gained from inquiry-based teaching,
and development of investigative laboratory experiences. These collaborative
interactions will foster the establishment of valuable linkages with rural
teachers and increase the representation of Native Alaskans and other
underrepresented minorities in the biological sciences.