* 9514449
* Emotion and Perceptual Processes
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Joseph Steinmetz, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 06/30/2000
* USD 242,532.00

In previous research, the PI found evidence that emotions mediate early
perception. Specifically, emotions appear to increase a person's perceptual
sensitivity to emotion-congruent information in the visual world. The past
results indicate that emotions have very specific effects on perception such
that happy people are particularly efficient at processing information related
to happiness (but not all positive events) and that sad people are particularly
efficient at processing information related to sadness (but not all negative
events). These past findings will now be extended in several ways: In one series
of experiments, the emotion-congruence effect will be explored in the domain of
face processing. These experiments will examine the hypotheses that (1) emotions
increase the efficiency of perception of emotion-congruent faces, and (2)
emotions mediate the perception of the boundaries of facial expression
categories such that emotional perceivers can detect the offset of emotion-
congruent expressions with greater expertise than can other perceivers. Another
series of experiments will explore the roles of emotional feelings and of
emotional language in perceptual processes. These experiments will investigate
the hypothesis that emotional feelings per se mediate emotion congruence
effects. The results from this research can provide the basis for a more precise
account of the cognitive representation and processing of emotion. %%% In
previous research, the PI found that a person's emotional state can influence
very basic perceptual and cognitive processes. The past results indicate that
happy people do indeed see the world through rose-colored glasses and that sad
people see the dark side of life. In addition, the past results suggest that
emotions have very specific effects: happy people are especially good at
understanding information related to happiness (but not all positive events) and
that sad people are especially good at understanding information related to
sadness (but not all negative events). These past findings will now be extended
in several ways: One series of experiments will examine the effects of emotion
on the accuracy and efficiency of interpreting another person's facial
expressions. Another set of experiments will examine whether emotional
experience itself influences a person's perceptions of others, or whether
emotional language is the more important determinant. The results from this
research can provide the basis for a more precise and complete understanding of
the cognitive representation and processing of emotion.