* 9514886
* Systems Engineering/Management
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Patrick Harker, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Mariann Jelinek
* 03/31/2001
* USD 296,770.00

The financial services sector comprises over 4% of the Gross Domestic Product in
the United States, and employs more than 5.4 million people (more than the
combined total of the manufacturing employment in apparel, automobiles,
computers, pharmaceuticals, and steel). In addition, this sector plays a major
role in the economy, providing payment services and financial products that
literally fuel modern capitalist society. Despite its size and importance, there
are few rigorous studies of quality management in this industry. The proposed
research addresses this problem by investigating three sets of questions: 1)
What are the key measures of quality as measured by the customer and how do they
link to human resource practices, information technology (IT) and process
management? 2) When these quality measures are incorporated, do Tayloristic work
practices and associated IT investments still create efficient service delivery
processes? Do these results hold up when sales efficiency is considered? 3) Do
the management practices that create high-performing service delivery vary
significantly when one switches channels through which services are delivered?
Do the practices vary between branch and phone operations, and what are their
impacts on the key measures of service quality, sales and efficiency? These
questions will be investigated through field research conducted in one Bank
Holding Company, comprised of several semi-autonomous banks.