* 9514137
* RUI: Foraging Behavior and the Role of Social Transmission
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Jennifer Clarke, University of Northern Colorado
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 02/28/1998
* USD 48,187.00

Abstract Clarke 9514117 Obtaining food is one of the most critical problems
faced by young animals, particularly precocial young that must seek out the
correct foods to eat soon after birth. The development of feeding behavior is a
critical area of study considering the high mortality rate of juvenile birds
attributable to starvation and predation due to inept foraging behaviors. These
high mortality rates indicate that selective pressures must be intense for the
rapid development of foraging skills. Three factors may contribute to food
recognition in gallinaceous species: a) innate pecking preferences, b) taste and
nutritional factors, and c)social transmission. It is likely that all three
factors operate together to enhance and expedite food recognition and the
development of foraging behavior. This study proposes to investigate the
development of foraging behavior in an alpine grouse, the White-tailed
Ptarmigan, whose precocial chicks must identify food species in the wide array
of items presented in the alpine tundra soon after hatching. The
interrelationship of social and nutritional factors influencing food choice will
be the study's primary focus. Preliminary data indicate that the hens emit
unique vocalizations (food calls) when specific items are located. Chicks
respond to the food calls by approaching the hen's bill and feeding on the same
species she is eating. Further, the plant species that elicit hen food calls
become the major items in the chick's diets. The foods eliciting food calls also
may differ from other foods eaten by the hen that do not elicit food calls in
their nutritional content (e.g. prmtein). Thus the question arises: Do the hens'
food calls function to focus the chicks' feeding choices through socially
transmitted food recognition? The first hypothesis that will be investigated is
that chicks will forage more often on those foods to which elicit hen food calls
than they will on foods which do not elicit food calls because the call
represents a form of soc ial transmission that enhances the chicks' recognition
of specific foods. White-tailed Ptarmigan provide an ideal species for field
studies of the ontogeny of foraging behaviors because hens with chicks
accommodate to human observers, are reluctant to fly, have high site fidelity,
and forage in the alpine where the vegetation is low in stature and relatively
low in diversity all of which facilitates foraging observations. Also, the
foraging selections of the adult ptarmigan are documented as are their
nutritional profiles. Experimental manipulations would be advantageous in
testing the hypotheses but are not possible for a variety of reasons. However,
the hypotheses can be thoroughly investigated by exploiting natural variations
within the population regarding food calling. The hens within the population
vary in food calling frequency, ranging from hens that emit food calls during
nearly every feeding bout to hens that were never heard to emit a food call.
Thus, in lieu of direct manipulations, comparisons will be made between broods
of hens that exhibit variations in food calling regarding diet shifting. This
research represents one of the first studies to address directly the function of
social transmission conducted with wild animals in their natural habitat. ***