* 9514417
* The Effect of "Exciting" Shared Activities on Relationship  Satisfaction
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Arthur Aron, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 220,863.00

The proposed research examines the motivational and cognitive mechanisms
underlying excitement and boredom in long-term relationships, focusing
specifically on the apparent beneficial effect of joint participation in
`exciting` activities. Although several processes are probably involved
(misattribution of arousal, positive affect from success, conformance with
romantic ideals, cooperation, etc.), the proposed research focuses on
motivational processes associated with novelty, efficacy, exploration,
curiosity, and optimal level of arousal, as integrated and extended to
relationship issues by a relatively new theoretical approach, the self-expansion
model. Hypotheses include the prediction that participating together in novel,
arousing activities increases relationship satisfaction, and that this effect is
moderated by length of relationship, individual differences, and saliency of the
partner at the time of the activities and is mediated by increased perceived
self-efficacy; that there is a positive effect of participants' believing that
such activities enhance competence; that there is an influence of self-expansion
processes over and above various other potential mechanisms; and that some of
these other potential mechanisms also have an effect, over and above self-
expansion processes. Six laboratory experiments test these hypotheses by
randomly assigning volunteer couples to participate in activities structured by
the researchers and assessing change in relationship satisfaction using self-
report, systematic observation, and other measurement procedures. %%% Marital
satisfaction impacts all areas of life--overall life satisfaction, mental
health, physical health, and job performance--as well as the stability of
families and the attendant effects on children. Unfortunately, there is a well-
documented decline in satisfaction after the early relationship years, but
scientific research on marriage provides little precise understanding of that
decline, or of the general role of boredom in day-to-day relationship life. One
way of understanding relationships proposes that the high satisfaction in early
years is due to each member of a relationship feeling expanded and enhanced by
the other, and holds that these feelings fade because partners get used to each
other. But if the couple at this point can engage, together, in activities that
are enhancing to both, the satisfaction from such activities will be linked with
the relationship--and preliminary studies support this prediction. The proposed
experiments study these ideas while carefully sorting out the other ways of
understanding boredom in relationships and the effect on it of participating
together in various kinds of activities. These experiments will first assess
relationship satisfaction of volunteer married couples using established
measures. Couples will then participate together in an activity and have their
satisfaction assessed again. The activity will differ, varying in ways that
real-life activities might, such as the activity being very novel versus
commonplace or involving a lot or a little cooperation. Predictions are tested
by comparing change in couples' marital satisfaction from before to after the
different activities. This research is designed to lead to direct practical
applications in marital counseling and family education.