* 9514325
* Dissertation Research:  Self and Social Construction of     Identity Among U. S. Foster Mothers
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* W. Penn Handwerker, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 12,000.00

This project funds the dissertatin research of a student from the University of
Connecticut. The project tests the hypothesis that, irrespective of race,
ethnicity, age, or social class, women who participate in Connecticut state-
sponsored fostering programs create an identity of `mother` to the children in
their care. This entails incorporating foster children into their family based
on affective bonds, rather than biology or law. The student will select a sample
of 120 individuals (60 couples) for extensive ethnographic interviews on their
experiences as foster parents. Based on this knowledge the student will
construct and adminster cultural tests of meaning to a total of 360 women in the
3 primary ethnic groups in the region (Euro-American, African-American, and West
Indian), subdivided into novice and experienced foster parents and private or
state-sponsored programs. By examining if, how, and why, in the face of child
welfare policies premised on legal or biological definitions of `family,` women
create and maintain a sense of themselves as `mothers` rather than `foster
mothers` and `children` rather than `foster children,` the project will clarify
the circumstances that lead to foster parent disillusionment, fatigue and,
finally, drop-out. The knowledge created by project will contribute to the
formation of more effective child welfare policy and practice.