* 9514410
* Functional Characterization of the Sucrose Binding Protein
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,12/31/2001
* Howard Grimes, Washington State University
* Continuing grant
* Sharman D. O'Neill
* 12/31/2001
* USD 488,370.00

*** 9514410 Grimes The processes that regulate carbon allocation to various
organs and the developing seed directly impact plant growth, development, and
productivity. In nearly all plants, the most important translocated nutrient is
sucrose and, thus, understanding the molecular biology, biochemistry, and
physiology of sucrose transport is a central problem in plant biology. Sucrose,
a chemically inert carbohydrate, is synthesized in the cytosol of
photosynthetically active leaves and, in a process termed "phloem loading," is
actively loaded into the phloem against a concentration gradient for long
distance transport. After transport to sink tissues, such as the developing
seed, sucrose is unloaded from the phloem into the apoplastic space and, in many
plant species, transported across the plasma membrane into the sink tissue
cells. It has been known that sucrose movement across the plasm membrane is a
well regulated process and begins with uptake of sucrose by the sink tissue
cells. With funding from the NSF, Dr. Grimes and his colleagues have
demonstrated that this uptake of sucrose may be mediated by the sucrose binding
protein (SBP). The intent of this research is to elucidate the basic
biochemistry of sucrose transport in plants and define the mechanistic role of
the SBP in sucrose uptake. This work is significant in that it will provide
insight into a novel membrane transport process, and contribute to our
understanding of how plants make use of photosynthetic products for their growth
and development. ***