* 9514563
* Family Relationships, Social Ecologies, and Daily Life      Events as Supports for Social Competence in Preschool Age   Children
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Brian Vaughn, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2000
* USD 356,753.00

9514563 Vaughn This project is an investigation of individual, relational, and
socio-ecological factors supporting children's social competence among peers in
a sample of 3-4-year-old children in center-based child care settings. Data
gathered with reference to child- caregiver attachment, child temperament,
features of the social support network, life events/daily hassles, and
attributes of the peer setting itself are used to test a formal model of
supports for children's social competence in a sample broadly representative of
working and middle class families across a range of ethnic groups in the State
of Alabama. Latent variables in the formal model are derived from multiple,
independent variables assessed concretely. The model posits both direct and
indirect pathways of influence from family relationships to peer social
competence. Data gathered will afford opportunities to explore emerging
structural and supportive properties of young children's social networks from
both mother and child perspectives and explorations of the mothers' networks as
influences on children's networks. Also examined will be influences of parent-
child attachment and child temperament on children's social competence with
peers. Finally, the data will provide opportunities to evaluate effects of life
events stress and daily hassles on attributes of the social network and on
social competence. Because samples will be drawn across a broad range of socio-
demographic parameters, it will also be possible to test influences on social
competence from levels of social organization such as "classroom,"
"neighborhood," and socioeconomic status position. %%% This 3-year project
investigates individual, relational, and socio-ecological factors supporting
children's social competence among peers in a sample of 3-4-year-old children in
center-based child care settings. A sample of families will be recruited in each
project year that covers the spectrum of ethnicity an d income levels targeted
in the study, in approximate proportion to the population of the State of
Alabama. Approximately 25% of the sample in each project year will come from
African-American background and approximately 50% of the sample in each project
year will have family incomes below the median income level in Alabama.
Information gathered in the course of the project will test a formal model that
hypothesizes direct and indirect influences of family relationships and child
temperament on peer social competence and on attributes of children's social
networks. Peer competence is assessed in the context of child care classrooms.
Home visits are used to observe parent-child interactions relevant to the
quality of their relationships. Social networks and life events stresses are
evaluated from interviews with both the parent and child. The data collection
plan and analytic strategies afford opportunities to assess the influences of
the classroom, the neighborhood, and various socioeconomic indicators on both
the social support networks and peer social competence. Results from this study
may be used to inform policy concerning optimal timing of group care experiences
for preschool children, and will also be relevant to evaluating the relative
influences of families, classroom social and physical environments, and informal
social support networks on children's sense of well-being. ***