* 9514681
* Reflections of Mesoamerican Expansionary Dynamics at        La Quemada, Zacatecas, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* David Browman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2000
* USD 121,081.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Charles Trombold will conduct one
season of archaeological fieldwork at the site of La Quemada which is located in
the Zacatecas region of Mexico. La Quemada represents one of the northernmost
manifestations of mesoamerican culture and dates between ca. 500 and 800 AD. The
site itself - also termed the `citadel` - is a massively fortified
civic/ceremonial center that occupies about 1.5 square kilometers on a
mountaintop. Its intermediate hinterland covers at least 200 square kilometers
of surrounding territory and contains an aggregated pattern of over 226
individual satellite settlements with associated terracing systems and
fortifications. Many of these features are linked to the citadel by a network of
wide causeways. The citadel and its satellite settlements appear to represent a
unique island of sedentary mesoamerican high culture. Dr. Trombold will work not
at the citadel itself but at one of the associated settlements ca. .3 km.
distant. The site, MV-263 includes a series of sunken plazas with house mounds
associated with each. Dr. Trombold and his team will clear large areas to expose
plazas and associated domestic structures. Through analysis of ceramics and
other cultural materials he will reconstruct the social, political and economic
organization of the site and determine the extent to which production activities
are centrally organized. On this basis it is possible to determine the degree of
political centralization. La Quemada is interesting because it is clearly
associated with mesoamerican culture but is spatially separated from the great
central Mexican cultures and sites. It therefore lies on an extreme periphery
and provides an excellent situation in which to study periphery-core
interactions. Archaeologists wish to look beyond individual sites and cultures.
They try to place such units within larger social contexts and look at patterns
on an interregional scale. Some have argued that cultural development in core
and peripheral areas vary directly with each other. That peripheral areas are
dependent on the cultural core and that when one thrives, the other does as
well. Other researchers posit an inverse relationship. They believe that the
core dominates and holds peripheral peoples down and only when the core is weak
do peripheral societies flourish. Much is known about the core, which in this
case lies in Central Mexico and periods of core strength and weakness are well
delineated. Much less is understood about peripheral areas such as La Quemada
and through the examination of changes here in social organization over time,
the interaction can be examined in detail. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will also increase our understanding of how regional interaction occurs in
simple level societies.