* 9514331
* Perceptual and Decisional Processes in Identification and   Categorization
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* W Todd Maddox, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jasmine Young
* 03/31/1998
* USD 129,075.00

9514331 MADDOX The long-term objective of this research is to better understand
the perceptual and cognitive processes involved when a person identifies or
categorizes objects. This research will investigate the complex interplay
between perceptual and decisional processes within the theoretical framework of
General Recognition theory which is a multivariate generalization of Signal
Detection Theory. This research will investigate several important aspects of
human behavior. First, this research will investigate the optimality of human
categorization performance when category baserates and category payoffs are
unequal. This is an important issue, because baserate and payoff differences are
ubiquitous in nature; for example, disease categories often differ in their
frequency and in the costs and benefits associated with various diagnoses. Since
the goal of the physician is to diagnose a patient accurately, efficient use of
baserate and payoff information is extremely important. This research will not
only allow one to determine the optimality of human performance, but will assist
in identifying the locus of any potential suboptimalities. Second, this research
will examine the time it takes an individual to arrive at an identification or
categorization decision. The focus will be on identifying the environmental
factors that influence response time, such as whether the components of the
object can be attended selectively, or whether the identification or
categorization problem is complex, etc. A major goal will be to test several
extant theories of response time, including the response time predictions from
General Recognition Theory. This work complements the baserate and payoff
analyses because not only does the physician want to make an accurate diagnosis,
but in many cases the physician is under severe time pressure. Third, this
research will investigate the relationship between the identification and
categorization of objects. The focus will be on understanding how perceptual and
decisional processes differ across tasks. The results of this research will
allow us to better understand human identification and categorization behavior,
and ultimately influence these behaviors in a productive and useful manner. ***