* 9514911
* Power in Negotiated and Nonnegotiated Exchange
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Linda Molm, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 08/31/1999
* USD 121,766.00

This is an experimental study of power in negotiated and non-negotiated
exchange. It develops and tests a theory of how the form of social exchange
affects the distribution of power in exchange networks. These two forms of
exchange create different relations between actors' behaviors and their
outcomes, and they provide actors with different amounts of information about
their potential outcomes from exchange. In the absence of negotiation, exchange
partners perform individual acts that provide benefits for one another, without
knowing what, if anything, they will receive in return. But when exchanges are
negotiated, actors engage in joint action (negotiating the terms of an
agreement) that provides benefits for both. Whether equal or unequal, these
benefits are known and agreed upon in advance. The theory argues that these
differences affect the mechanisms that underlie the use of power and the
development of inequality in exchange networks. Consequently, structural
variations in the availability and number of alternatives will have very
different effects on power use in negotiated and reciprocal exchange, and
information that reduces uncertainty about outcomes will have stronger effects
on power use in reciprocal than negotiated exchange. Three laboratory
experiments will be carried out to test the predicted effects of network
structure and information on power use for the two forms of exchange. %%% This
project is the first systematic comparison of these basic forms of direct
exchange. While the classical exchange theories (e.g. Peter Blau and George
Homans) excluded bargaining and negotiated exchange from the scope of their
theories, most contemporary theorists have done the opposite, concentrating
exclusively on negotiated exchanges with strictly binding agreements. The
prevalence of both forms of exchange in social life requires research of this
kind to compare them.