* 9514866
* Common Agency in Political Economy
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Avinash Dixit, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 05/31/1999
* USD 79,082.00

The political process by which economic policy is made and implemented involves
several principal-agent relationships. One participant (a political party,
legislature, or a bureaucratic agency) takes some action that affects another
(voters, special, or interest groups). The latter (the principal) can devise a
contract or an incentive scheme to influence the actions of the former (the
agent). The incentives take different forms. In the relationship between
lobbyists and political parties, these can be cash payments. When groups of
voters are the principals and politicians the agents, the incentives take the
form of promises of votes. When the Congress is a principal for a bureaucratic
regulatory agency, the incentives can consist of funding or threats of
micromanagement. Observers of political agency relationships have noted an
important special feature of these, namely the existence of multiple principals
who simultaneously attempt to affect the actions of the agent. In the U.S., each
bureaucracy is constantly under pressure from the Congress, the courts, the
media, and lobbyists. In Europe, several sovereign nations attempt to influence
the decisions of the European Union's central decision-makers. In such common
agencies, the incentive schemes offered by the various principals jointly affect
the action of the agent, and therefore the return to each principal. The
equilibrium of this interaction among the principals ultimately determines the
agent's incentives. The aim of this project is to construct theoretical models
to examine the interaction in several such "common agencies," and characterize
their outcomes. A general methodology is developed, which can help construct
tractable models involving several principals and several dimensions of the
agent's choice. The value of the approach is demonstrated using two solved
examples, and then several further proposed applications constitute the research
agenda.