* 9514974
* The Political Economy of International Trade Relations      (Accomplishment-Based Renewal)
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Elhanan Helpman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/2000
* USD 292,391.00

9514974 Grossman This Accomplishment-Based Renewal of the NSF grant entitled
"the Political Economy of International Trade Relations" continues the study of
the formation of policies that affect international trade. The analytic approach
involves formal modeling of the incentives facing politically motivated elected
representatives, and the actions taken by special interest groups in pursuit of
particularlistic benefits. The ongoing research concentrates in three main
areas. First, it examines the dynamics of trade policy in response to a one-shot
change in the terms of trade and to recurring shifts in comparative advantage.
The analysis incorporates politicians who have short-time horizons and who
cannot commit the future course of trade policy. Second, it studies the design
of political rules and institutions, both domestic and international, that can
promote more efficient trade policy outcomes. Finally, it integrates this work
and related research on the political economy of trade policy, in the form of an
integrative monograph covering a range of topics and approaches. Recent public
debate over trade policy has pitted environmentalists against free trade
interests. The previous work by the investigators demonstrated that there is no
presumption that trade liberalization will be harmful to the environment. In
this project the investigators examine the political economy of the interaction
between different policy issues. Suppose that environmentalists expect that
environmental standards at home will be looser if trade is freer than if trade
barriers protect special interests in the import-competing industries. Then the
environmentalists might support protection in order to secure stricter standards
and prevent "downward harmonization," even if trade protection is not directly
in their own interest.