* 9514365
* Discrimination of Complex Mixtures Involved in Olfactory    Signaling
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Charles Linn, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 03/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

Chemical compounds used by animals for communication signals are called
pheromones. Much of the early work on pheromones was done using the extremely
sensitive antennae of moths, and their role in mate attraction. Females of many
insect species produce blends of chemicals that are released into the air, and
males that are downwind perceive these pheromones and fly upwind along the odor
plume to the female. An important area of research includes the parameters that
control response specificity in the males. Receptor cells in the antennae are
specific for particular compounds, and the antennal nerve carries this
information to the brain. It remains unclear how information is processed from
the periphery to the central nervous system, leading to recognition of the
mixture of compounds. This project uses an agriculturally important insect, the
European corn borer moth, that has hybrid races which exhibit different levels
of specificity for ratios of components that comprise their pheromones. A novel
technique of transplanting the embryonic cells that form antennae will be used
to grow the antennae of one hybrid on the body of another hybrid form. The
behavioral sensitivity will demonstrate whether the specificity to a particular
blend depends more on the antennal receptors or on the brain processing of the
integrated inputs. Results from this work will provide important insight on the
relative role of central and peripheral processing of pheromones, and will lead
to advances in understanding other chemosensory systems as well as pheromone-
mediated behavior. The impact also will extend beyond neuroscience to
agriculture, in the strategies for control of pest and beneficial insect
species.