* 9514096
* Regulation of Lateral Root Development in Arabidopsis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* John Celenza, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 03/31/2001
* USD 310,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F r C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l k k 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; AM1200PM 14199401261994012813001700Study of State Curriculum
FrameworkMeeting of expert panel to discuss design and anal /Lb~j8? /O!l AT` ART
ARX ARq AR AR AR% AR AR AQp AR AQ ARr A> /@ /BP /Kc j8@ /K j8K {j8K@ j8Bz /L j8A
/B0 /A /K j8Kj j8K j8K zj8K j8K j8@ /@ /@X /C /C /C Ã• /K j8K j8K j8K` j8L
|j8La{j8K zj8Rp AQ APk 9514096 Celenza The primary way in which plants increase
the size of their root system is by lateral, or secondary, root formation. This
developmental process involves the coordination of both differentiation and cell
division. Exogenous application of the plant growth hormone indole-3 acetic acid
(IAA) induces cell division in the cells that give rise to lateral roots and
therefore increases the number of lateral roots. The long term goal of this work
is to define the developmental pathway or lateral root formation and understand
how IAA regulates that pathway. Previously, three Arabiodopsis mutations were
discovered that cause aberrant lateral root formation (alf). Briefly, the alf1-1
mutation causes a hyperproliferation of lateral roots presumably due to excess
IAA, the alf4-1 mutation fails to make lateral roots and is insensitive to IAA,
and the alf3-1 mutant initiates lateral roots but the lateral roots fail to
mature and die. Surprisingly, IAA rescues the alf3-1 mutant. The first objective
of this proposal is directed at cloning and characterizing the ALF4 gene
product. The ALF4 gene will be cloned using a map based approach as well as a
transposon tagging scheme. The gene has been mapped in relation to the
Arabidopsis physical map and flanking markers have been identified. in addition,
DS elements capable of excision and reinsertion have been mapped to locations
near the genes. Once the gene is cloned, its predicted protein sequence will be
compared to sequence databases. From this information experiments will be
designed to determine the biochemical function of the gene product. These
experiment will include analysis of the temporal and spatial expression patterns
of the gene, determination of the intracellular location of the protein, and
expression in heterologous systems directed at assaying biochemical function.
New mutants defective in lateral root formation will also be isolated as well as
the identification of new mutant alleles of ALF3 and ALF4. Mutants will be
screened for in populations mutagenized with different mutagens and derived from
different ecotypes. *** ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 0 Oh +' 0 $ H l
D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9514096 eozsaruh eozsaruh @ ?W @ @ ?W @ F #
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e J J j j j j j j j N 1 0 T + N j N j j j j ~ j j j j
H 9514096 Celenza The primary way in which plants increase the size of their
root system is by lateral, or secondary, root formation. This developmental
process involves the coordination of both differentiation and cell division.
Exogenous application of the plant growth hormone indole-3 acetic acid (IAA)
induces cell division in the cells that give rise to lateral roots and therefore
increases the number of lateral roots. The long term goal of this work is to
define the developmental pathway or lateral root formation and understand how
IAA regulates that pathway. P