* 9514205
* Experimental Tests of Developmental and Cross-Generational  Effects of Temperature
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Raymond Huey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 03/31/2000
* USD 220,000.00

9514205 Huey Conditions experienced by a developing insect often influence its
size and performance as an adult. For example, food levels and crowding have
profound effects on size and reproduction of adult insects. Consequently, a
consideration of the importance of these "developmental effects" is crucial to
understanding the ecology of insects in nature. Moreover, knowledge of these
developmental effects can be used effectively in designing protocols for optimal
mass-rearing of insects, as is often done in biocontrol programs. This project
will explore the effect of developmental temperature on adult fruit flies
(Drosophila melanogaster). The temperature experienced during development
(larval and pupal stages) is known to influence many aspects of an adult
insect's biology, but the actual impact may depend as well on the temperatures
experienced as an adult. This project uses a complex experimental design that
independently manipulates temperatures of both developing and adult flies, and
then tests several competing hypotheses. An adult insect is influenced not only
by temperatures experienced during its own development, but sometimes also by
temperatures experienced by its parents. This project will similarly determine
the significance of such "cross-generational" effects on offspring. The results
of this project will elucidate a basic issue in entomology - namely, to what
extent is the performance of an insect sensitive to conditions experienced by
itself at earlier developmental stages and by its parents. Moreover, information
derived from this study will indicate whether quality control programs used in
mass-rearing of insects should incorporate temperature as a dynamic variable for
study.