* 9514491
* Cognition in Informal Reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Lance Rips, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodney R. Cocking
* 07/31/2000
* USD 238,946.00

9514491 RIPS This project will examine the way people understand and judge
informal arguments. Informal arguments take place when individuals exchange
views on belief about an assertion or a possible action. For example, debates
between friends or family members, classroom sparring about an idea, scientific
exchanges about empirical results or theories, and negotiations in business are
all informal arguments. This research will develop a theory of these arguments
in terms of the conversational moves that participants can make within them, for
example, asking for a justification, giving a reason, offering an objection, or
conceding a point. This theory will determine to which of the argument's claims
each participant is committed publicly at any stage of the argument and will
identify changes in commitment as the argument unfolds. Three groups of
experiments will assess and refine the theory. The first group will test
predictions about people's memory for arguments and understanding of them. In
these experiments, people will read a series of naturalistic dialogues between
two characters and will then judge which of the dialogues' claims each of the
characters accepts. The theory's predictions about changes in the characters'
commitments as the dialogue proceeds will be compared to the people's judgments.
The theory also predicts that arguments vary in the demands they make on
participants' and overhearers' memory, since some arguments require participants
to keep track of claims in order to return to them later. The second set of
experiments will examine people's judgments about burden of proof. In this
context, burden of proof is the responsibility a participant has to support his
or her case. The theory predicts that which participant has the greater burden
of proof depends, among other factors, on the number of claims that are
currently under dispute and the strength of support for these claims. The
experiments will evaluate the theory's predi ctions about shifts in burden of
proof as currently disputed claims become settled. They will also investigate
the effects on burden of proof of making an argument's first or last claim. The
final group of experiments will investigate circular reasoning or question-
begging in arguments. The fallacy of begging the question occurs when
participants presuppose the conclusion of an argument in trying to justify one
of its premises. In the context of most arguments, however, the points that a
participant argues for (the conclusions) and the points argued from (the
premises) emerge as the argument unfolds and depend on which points other
participants accept. Thus, in some circumstances, but not in others, repetitions
of a conclusion can beg the question. The experiments will examine conditions
under which subjects recognize instances of question begging. ***