* 9514024
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Research on the Interaction of     Dynamics and Control Parameters in Mechanical Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Ahmed Shabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Mark A. Suskin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 16,200.00

This award supports Professor Ahmed Shabana and a graduate student of the
University of Illinois at Chicago to collaborate in engineering research with
Dr. Richard Schwertassek and others of the Institute of Robotics and System
Dynamics of the German Aerospace Research Establishment (DLR.) This German
organization is widely recognized as one of the premier aerospace research
institutions in Europe if not the world, and the participating institute is very
highly regarded for its state-of-the-art research. The US and German partners in
this project are interested in computational aspects of the mechanics,
mechatronics and control of constrained deformable bodies such as large scale
structures intended for orbit around the earth. The goal of their research is to
develop more efficient and robust methods for the dynamic analysis and control
of large scale flexible systems. More specifically, they plan to develop new
computer and numerical algorithms for the efficient solution of constrained
deformable body dynamic equations, by taking into account the effects of
mechatronics and control parameters. They intend to evaluate the effects of
different linearization schemes on control system performance and develop
guidelines which can be applied to identify the most useful dynamics and control
methodology for a particular application. This collaboration benefits from the
complementary expertise of the US group in computational mechanics and the
German group in the experimental control and mechatronics of flexible systems.