* 9514243
* Investigation of the Inquisitorial and Adversarial Legal    Modes of Adjudication on Scientific/Technological Testimony
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Joel Cooper, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 10/31/1997
* USD 82,473.00

The accurate perception of scientific and technological testimony in courts of
law is often crucial to protect the interests of individuals and corporations.
In the civil justice system, significant monetary decisions hinge upon jurors or
judges accurately perceiving the S/T testimony of scientists and engineers.
Technological and scientific innovations that are supported by reliable S/T data
may not be fairly adjudicated if those data are not processed accurately by the
judge or jurors making the decision. In previous work in our laboratory, some of
the difficulties jurors have processing complex S/T testimony in civil liability
cases were examined. In this study, we will examine the locus of the
investigator role in the adversarial and inquisitorial systems. We hypothesize
that participants who adopt the inquisitorial role of investigator for the court
will gain a more accurate and complete understanding of the S/T evidence than
will participants who are asked to take the adversarial position. Moreover, it
is hypothesized that inquisitorial participants will bring a more representative
distribution of evidence to the attention of decision makers than will the
combination of the defense and plaintiff advocates in the adversarial system. In
our society, the legal system is where many decisions that affect the
implementation of science and technology arise. The current proposal seeks to
provide information on the impact of important elements of the current
adversarial system on the accurate perception of S/T evidence in civil
proceedings.