* 9514384
* A Dictionary of Iban Ritual Languages
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,11/30/1998
* Vinson Sutlive, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1998
* USD 119,984.00

The project is the editing and publication of a dictionary of the ritual
languages of the Iban of Borneo. The dictionary will contain approximately
20,000 entries. No dictionary for any of the ritual languages of Borneo
currently exists. The Iban are the politically dominant and most numerous
indigenous society on Borneo, the third largest island in the world. Iban are
found in all parts of the island, and in many other countries in Southeast Asia.
Iban speakers number approximately 1,100,000, and Iban is the second language to
another 500,000 people. The dictionary will provide a permanent record of the
survivals, archaisms, and other esoteric terms that receive little attention in
most dictionaries. The dictionary will make available to linguists,
anthropologists, and other social scientists the extensive lexicons and imagery
of Iban bards and shaman, as well as the oral traditions of the Iban. The
lexicon of ritual terms will be valuable to historical linguists for the study
of relationships between vernacular and ritual languages of Austronesian-
speaking communities. It will provide data essential to the analysis of the
evolution of such specialized vocabularies. In light of rapid social and
cultural changes, it seems likely that unless the dictionary is produced before
the end of this decade, its production will be impossible.