* 9514819
* Development of X-PLOR, a System for X-ray                   Crystallography and NMR
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Axel Brunger, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregory K. Farber
* 01/31/1999
* USD 575,000.00

X-ray crystallography and solution nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy of
biological macromolecules have become important tools for understanding
biological phenomena at the atomic level. The number of structures solved
continues to increase rapidly due to advances in techniques such as molecular
cloning, crystallization screening, data collection, and data analysis. Despite
these successes, fundamental questions remain about the solution of difficult
structures and about the adequate description of thermal motion and solvation of
macromolecules. After data acquisition and reduction, a large variety of
computational procedures are required to solve and refine a crystal or solution
NMR structure. In the previous grant period we have extended the X-PLOR program
by incorporating most aspects of phasing and phase improvement in X-ray
crystallography. New refinement techniques were developed for both crystal and
solution structures. Some of these developments were implemented by design of a
high-level computer language. This high-level language allows one to easily
modify existing algorithms and to even design new ones without an intervening
programming step. It is proposed to pursue the following specific aims: 1.
Continue the software development in order to make X-PLOR a nearly complete
package for structure determination. My laboratory has recently undertaken
several experimental crystallographic projects. This involvement in structure
solution will enable us to test and to further develop X-PLOR by application to
real problems. 2. Collect highly accurate phases for selected cases obtained by
multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction and develop improved models of solvation
and conformational variability. 3. Develop protocols for crystallographic
refinements at low to medium resolution using all available experimental
information in a reduced-variable conformational space. 4. Continue development
of molecular replacement methods in the case of flexible molecules. 5 . Develop
improved methods for heavy atom searches for multiple isomorphous replacement
and multi-wavelength anomalous diffraction. 6. Develop improved protocols for
structure determination of RNA molecules by solution NMR.