* 9514381
* Kuykendall Brake:  Biocultural Continuity and the End of    Prehistory in Central Arkansas
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* John House, Arkansas Archeological Survey
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1997
* USD 5,460.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. John House and his colleagues will
analyze archaeological materials collected at the site of Kuykendall Brake which
is located in central Arkansas. Excavations conducted between 1990-1994 revealed
a large buried structure which lacked habitational debris. This suggests it
served a religious rather than domestic function. It appears to have been
deliberately burned and contained a burial feature with an estimated 17
individuals, a large deposit of charred beans and maize, ceramic vessels and
other objects. Preliminary analysis indicates that it dates to approximately
1500 AD. With NSF funds, the research team will analyze the additional botanical
remains which were widespread in the soil matrix, obtain radiocarbon dates from
the charred beams and analyze the skeletal material. This will allow careful
dating of the site and reconstruction of both diet and environment. The skeletal
analysis will provide information on the health and nutritional status of the
inhabitants. Scientists wish to understand the impact which European
colonization had on the aboriginal inhabitants of the New World. It is both
interesting and vexing that the data collected by archaeologists does not match
will with the descriptions of early explorers and other ethnographic data. This
suggests that extremely rapid and major change occurred early in the contact
period. Anthropologists wish to understand the processes involved in culture
change and the early contact period provides an excellent context for such
studies. The Kuykendall Brake site it important because it dates to just prior
to the earliest contact and has the potential to shed light on a little
understood aspect of cultural adaptation.