* 9514225
* 12th International Symposium on Flavins and Flavoproteins tobe held June 30 - July 6, 1996 at the University of Calgary,Calgary, Canada
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Marilyn Jorns, Allegheny University of Health Science, Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 05/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9514225 Jorns The area of flavins and flavoproteins is a broad, but clearly and
simply defined one. It covers all aspects of work pertaining to the chemistry
and biology of compounds based on the isoalloxazine nucleus and on very closely
related structures. Because of the extraordinary versatility of flavin as a
prosthetic group and its involvement in a variety of important biological
oxidation and reduction processes, this area continues to expand rapidly.
Interest in flavins ranges from theoretical chemistry to medical aspects. The
12th International Symposium on flavins and Flavoproteins is to be held at the
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada, June 30-July 6, 1996, as one of
a series which has been organized at 3-year intervals since 1965, The last
symposium was held in Nagoya, Japan in 1993. Because of the continued and
increasing pace of research in this area, it is important that regularly
scheduled meetings be held. Review lectures will cover the entire field and the
meeting should bring together scientists from all over the world from a wide
variety of disciplines, and promote valuable discussion and exchange of
information. In addition, it should serve the purposes of keeping existing
workers fully up to date with all aspects of the subject and of initiating young
investigators into this important area of research.