* 9514492
* The Physics of Chemoreception:  Interactions of Fluid Flow  and Chemosensory Morphology
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Paul Moore, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Avijit Chaudhuri
* 02/29/2000
* USD 227,416.00

Sensory reception of a stimulus often involves structures or processes called
"perireceptor" features that affect the sensory signal before it gets access to
the receptor cells. Examples include the lens of the eye or the eardrum of the
ear. In chemoreceptor systems for taste and smell, there is a new interest in
how solubility, microscale fluid mechanics, diffusion, and chemical reactivity
affect responses to chemical stimuli. The lobster antennule is a good example of
a chemoreceptor working in a fluid; this organ, like a small antenna, is covered
with fine bristles and chemoreceptors to sample, in time and space, odor plumes
that come by in the water. The lobster "flicks" the antennule as an analogy to
"sniffing" with a nose, as the physical flick displaces the water mass trapped
around the bristles with a new sample water mass. This project uses
sophisticated stimulus delivery techniques, 3-D video analysis, and novel sensor
electrodes, working with this different appendages in the lobster as a model
system, to provide novel quantitative data on temporal and spatial features in
the microscale environment around the receptor cells. Boundary layer and
physical transport processes interact with the detailed structure of the
receptor organ to provide "filtering" of the input signals, and it is this
filtering that helps extract information from the environment in a way adaptive
for the animal. The morphology and sampling behavior of different chemosensory
appendages will be analyzed to see what role the differences play in determining
the spatial and temporal analysis of chemical signals. Results from this work
will lead to new understanding of how specialized chemoreceptors detect patterns
of stimuli, and how such chemosensory organs have evolved to detect particular
kinds of environmental signals. The impact will extend beyond chemosensory
neuroscience to behavioral science, evolutionary biology, fluid mechanics, and
possibly also on marine aquaculture.