* 9514188
* Sieve Tube Unloading: Control Point for Assimilate          Partitioning?
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Donald Fisher, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 08/31/1999
* USD 260,000.00

Despite the central role of sinks in determining photosynthetic assimilate
partitioning in plant growth, very little is known about the control of
assimilate import into a sink tissue. The overal goal of this research is to
understand how import by a sink is controlled. Because the developing wheat
grain offers significant experimental advantages, Dr. Fisher's work has focused
on that system. However, findings from this research have important implications
for all sinks in which unloading of the sieve element/companion cell complex
follows a symplastic pathway. All of the transport steps, from within the sieve
tubes to the endosperm cavity, are passive, reversible and relatively
nonspecific. Assimilate movement out of the grain phloem into surrounding
parenchyma cells is accompanied by the largest turgor and concentration
differences over any step of the source-to-sink pathway. Because solute movement
out of the sieve tubes occurs via pressure-driven flow, while grain growth rate
is constant, flow rate must be inversely related to the pressure and
concentration gradients across this part of the pathway. This, and the high
resistance involved, implicate this step as an important control point for
assimilate import into the grain. This research will focus more closely on this
step of assimilate import. Important questions remain to be addressed in
developing wheat grains, and they will continue to be the main object of the
work. However, to test whether import might be controlled at this step in other
sinks, some work with growing root tips will also be initiated. The main
questions to be addressed in growing roots are whether sieve tube unloadiong is
reversible, the pressure and concentraiton gradients involved, and their
relationship to root growth rate.