* 9514860
* Group Formation and Commitment in Multi-Person Productive Exchange
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Edward Lawler, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/1999
* USD 95,773.00

This is an experimental study of group formation in multi-person productive
exchange. It extends the theory of relational cohesion, which was developed in
studies of two-person exchange, involving three or more people and incorporating
the uncertainty-reduction effects of repetitive exchange. The theoretical
argument is that when three or more people negotiate jointly-beneficial
collaborative efforts and do so repeatedly, individuals sense a cohesive group
above and beyond person-to-person ties, and this cognitive or psychological
group formation produces greater commitment to the group. This group formation
process takes place ostensibly because frequent exchange among the same people
produces positive feelings and reduces uncertainty about each other. Multi-
person exchange makes the group a unifying force, because subtle "two against
one" pressures are likely to constrain opportunism or malfeasance and make
negotiations more routine over time. %%% The theory will be tested in an
experimental setting in which three people can negotiate a joint venture that
provides payoffs to each that they cannot produce alone or in dyadic
transactions. Each person's profit is contingent on the group, and the group
effort requires the assent of each person. This is a form of productive
exchange, where the joint good produced is divisible, and each person has an
incentive to claim as much of this good as possible. The project calls for two
experiments, manipulating the average dependence of the individuals on the group
(person-to-person dependence) and whether there is a difference between
individuals' dependence on the group (equality or inequality of person-to-group
dependence). The major theoretical propositions are that greater average (total)
dependence on the group and more equal person-to-group dependencies produce more
negotiated agreements which then unleash an endogenous group-formation process.
Positive emotions and reduced uncertainty are key moments in this endogenous
process, because these should enhance perceptions of group cohesion which, in
turn, generate commitment behavior. %%% Each experiment examines a different
form of commitment behavior. The first examines symbolic (token) gift giving
among members. Stronger commitment is indicated by greater propensities for all
members of the group to give token gifts to all others. The second experiment
examines whether members will contribute to a new joint venture in which each
has an incentive for opportunism or malfeasance. In sum, the theory predicts
that certain power-dependence conditions will affect, indirectly rather than
directly, the degree that members give each other gifts and the degree that they
trust each other enough to contribute in an N-person social dilemma. %%% This
project has broader implications for collaborative efforts of multiple entities,
whether these are individuals, groups, organizations, or societies. Under
favorable relative and mutual dependencies, people exchange repeatedly, come to
define themselves as a group, ascribe value to the group itself, and become more
inclined to do things for the group and its members. The commitment process
involves movement from instrumental toward expressive person-to-group relations.
One result is an incipient normative order manifest in mutual expectations of
cooperation. Overall, this project suggests a fundamental way that small-scale
social order comes about and is maintained in multi-person exchanges.