* 9514246
* Specification of Morphogenetic Pathways Through Differential Regulation of Deformed Target Genes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Stephanie Curtis, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 01/31/2001
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9514246 Mahaffey, James The long term goal of this project is to understand
how certain genes specify regional development in the fruit fly, Drosophila. In
particular the specification of anterior-posterior body pattern will be studied.
The families of genes to be studies are the homeotic and related hox complex,
which specify segment identity in the fly. Though the genetics of this process
has been studied extensively, there is very little known about how a specific
homeobox gene product (protein) directs the development of a particular
segmental morphology. The studies described here will address how differential
gene expression and segment identity are specified by the product of the
Deformed homeotic gene during maxillary segment development. The studies are
designed to elucidate how the Deformed homeoprotein can, in different maxillary
cells, specify different genetic pathways determining distinct cell fates. These
experiments 1) examine the role of the Deformed homeoprotein and other factors
in activating expression of Deformed specific target genes by comparing the
regulation of maxillary enhancers from two known target genes and 2)
characterize a newly identified gene whose product is necessary, along with
Deformed, to activate certain target genes and thereby influence the
morphogenetic pathway maxillary cells follow. To examine target gene activation,
the role of various factors including the Deformed homeoprotein will be examined
by altering the structure of the enhancer region of specific target genes and by
analyzing the activity of chimeric enhancers. Further, it is known that two
maxillary gene enhancers have differing requirements for a newly identified
factor. Genetic analysis indicates that this factor behaves as a cofactor with
one gene allowing selective activation of certain target genes thereby
influencing which developmental pathway certain cells will follow. A genetic and
molecular study of the gene encoding the new factor will be undertaken to
determine it s structure and its influence on target homeobox genes required for
formation of maxillary appendages. ***