* 9514149
* U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research on Environmentally       Friendly Manufacturing of Polymeric Materials from Natural  Wastes
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* James Mark, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 02/28/1999
* USD 36,000.00

9514149 Mark This U.S.-Bulgaria Cooperative Research award will study
"Environmentally Friendly Manufacturing of Polymeric Materials from Neutral
Wastes." The principal researchers are Dr. J. E. Mark of the University of
Cincinnati, and Dr. B. S. Fakirov of Sofia University. Theoretical developments
indicate that unusually good mechanical properties can be obtained by drying
swollen networks of semi-rigid chains while they are in the deformed state. This
approach was recently demonstrated for cellulosic esters and ethers and for some
poly(n- alkylisiocyanates), yielding increases in Young's modulus and tensile
strength by factors of 4 to 5. The proposed study aims at extension of these
successful experiments to collagen in the form of highly-degradable gelatin.
This material is particularly suited for the development of such techniques for
a number of reasons, including: (1) possibility of production from natural
wastes using very mild processing conditions; (2) water solubility; (3)
biodegradability, with absence of pollution problems; (4) low cost; and (5)
consumability as a food product. The expectation is to develop laboratory-scale
technology for manufacturing gelatin fibers and films with improved mechanical
properties potentially usable as commodity materials and goods. Depending on the
results obtained, an attempt could be made to commercialize the optimized
technology. This research in chemistry fulfills the program objectives of
bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Bulgaria to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit. ***