* 9514518
* An Archaeology Study of Emerging Social Complexity in the   Eastern Sahara of Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Fred Wendorf, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 26,984.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Fred Wendorf will conduct
archaeological excavations in the Nabta Playa region which is located in
southwestern Egypt. Previous work has indicated the presence of prehistoric
cattle pastoralists in the area from about 9,000 to 5,300 years ago. (After that
time rainfall decreased and the area was abandoned.) Visible remains in the
playa include several megalithic alignments, stone `calendar circles`, two small
stone tumuli covering burials of cattle and 34 largaer tumuli clustered into
three groups. Based on these preliminary information, Nabta appears to have
served as a regional ceremonial center and more recent counterparts are known
from the southern Sahara margin. While these latter are much younger they often
cover burial chambers for leaders. Dr. Wendorf will partially excavate one of
the Nabta mounds to determine what it contains, to collect datable organic
materials and to determine how the structure was built If skeletal materials are
recovered these data will provide the basis to design a larger longer term
research project. Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arise
and are maintained. Although a great deal is known about the Pharonic period of
Egyptian civilization, its antecedents are very poorly understood. Preliminary
Nabta research suggests that stratified social organization may date to at least
6,000 years ago in a pastoralist context. Dr. Wendorf's work may shed light on
the starting point of the developmental process.