* 9514074
* The Ecological Significance of Molecular Signaling Between  Bacterial Populations on Plant Roots:  Effect on Competitionand Coexistence
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Elizabeth Pierson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 01/31/1999
* USD 207,974.00

9514074 Pierson The rhizosphere, the zone of soil surrounding plant roots,
contains greater amounts of nutrients in the form of root exudate than the
surrounding soil. Therefore, microbial competition for these root exudates is
intense. In response to this competition, bacteria have evolved diverse
competitive mechanisms to allow them to compete for these nutrients. One benefit
of the expression of these competitive mechanisms is the inhibition of plant
pathogens, commonly termed biological control. However, commercial use of
biological control as been limited by inconsistent performance. This is the
result of our lack of understanding of the factors, including the plant host and
the natural microbial community, that affect the expression of these competitive
genes in the rhizosphere. Pseudomonas aureofaciens 30-84, one of the best
genetically defined biological control organisms, produces phenazine
antibiotics. Phenazine production is the primary mechanism responsible for the
competitive fitness of this species in the rhizosphere and for its ability to
suppress plant pathogens. We have shown that this bacterium regulates the
expression of the genes encoding phenazine production through the recognition of
a diffusible signal encoded by the gene phzI. Recently, it has been shown that
populations of diverse bacteria rely on the accumulation of structurally similar
signals to trigger the expression of host-associated genes. We have shown that
the expression of genes involved in phenazine production in strain 30-84 is
influenced by the production of diffusible signals produced by other rhizosphere
bacteria. The ecological significance of these interactions is that competing
strains may be able to influence the outcome of competition by affecting the
regulation of a competitive mechanism at a genetic level. The proposed research
will directly test the effect of diffusible signals produced by other
populations of bacteria on phenazine gene expression in P. aureofaciens,
including the effect of interactions on population densities in situ on plant
roots.