* 9514891
* Joint Planning Workshop for Photovoltaics Cooperation with  El Salvador
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* James Vary, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 04/30/1997
* USD 6,530.00

9514891 Vary This Americas Program award will leverage support from other
sources for a joint planning workshop, on photovoltaic power generation,
organized by Dr. James Vary, Iowa State University (ISU) and Dr. Ethelvina
Escobar, University of El Salvador. The objective of the workshop is to initiate
a long-term cooperative project in science education and research in alternative
power sources between the two universities. The proposed project will team
photovoltaics (PV's) specialists from ISU Microelectronics Research Center with
Dr. Escobar's group in El Salvador. ISU has a group of scientists working both
on the research and pilot production of photovoltaic devices. Dr. Escobar has
already established an active program in the development of alternative energy
sources for community development in El Salvador. Photovoltaics researchers from
Mexico and Costa Rica will also participate in this workshop. The extension of
research and technology in terrestrial PV's to third world countries is
important if the technology is to make it into the market place, since emerging
countries are likely to be its earliest users. This planning workshop will serve
to bring together experts from the region to promote collaboration on
photovoltaic devices, which may lead to the development of more efficient
alternative energy sources. ***