* 9514912
* Estrangement from the Public Sphere: Economic Change,       Democracy and Social Division in North Carolina
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Donald Nonini, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 04/30/2001
* USD 232,086.00

This award to the University of North Carolina funds several anthropologists
studying local political participation in 5 places in the region. The goal of
the project is to study people's participation in local political activities.
The effects of economic restructuring will be analyzed as they affect local
conceptions of `the public` whose interest should be served. The extent to which
the community component of Human Capital varies as local groups are estranged
from participation, both formally through voting and informally through
behavioral participation in local public institutions such as schools, law
enforcement and health clinics will be examined. The communities will vary by
whether their primary economic orientation is from the public sector, the
private firm sector, or whether the communities are `consumption` oriented,
including retirement and educational communities. Extensive in-depth local
ethnographies will be carried out in each of the five places, as well as case
studies of local `dramas of contestation`, or conflicts over resources carried
out in the public sphere. At the end of the fieldwork a final survey of 300
individuals in one of the communities will be carried out to see how the
ethnographic material can inform survey research. This research is important
because it focuses on an issue of great concern: the preservation and extension
of the community component of the Human Capital of America's public sphere,
where matters of public concern and common resource problems are debated. It
will advance our understanding of how the changing American political economy
affects local integrating and segregating practices among people viewed as
different because of their race, ethnicity, or other characteristics. The
methodology used, of focusing on local cultural narratives and interpretations
of significant cases of conflict, will shed light on basic processes of how
cultural interpretations of differences lead to differences in public resource
distributions and shape group relations.