* 9514907
* Understanding Geographic Space Without the Use of Vision
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Reginald Golledge, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 01/31/1999
* USD 202,938.00

U. of California, Santa Barbara This project examines the extent to which blind
and vision impaired people can develop and use in everyday tasks, spatial
information at the `geographic` scale. The methodology will utilize matched
groups of congenitally blind individuals (blind from birth), partially sighted
and sighted participants. Matching will be by age, sex, culture and socio-
economic factors. Tasks to be used in the research include location, distance
estimation, model building, direction finding and route following. Information
will be obtained from the participants and subsequently compared by using verbal
instructions and videotaping of question and answer sessions. The analysis will
also make use of debriefing sessions, preliminary consultative and background
interviews. The resulting data will be analyzed both quantitatively and
qualitatively. The research will have a cross cultural component where
information on cognitive mapping and human navigation will be compared between
the U.S. and the U.K. These studies will be closely matched to allow direct
comparison. This aspect of the research is important because of the debate as to
whether the concept of disability is functionally driven. Blind and vision
impaired persons in the U.S. have been faced with a `normalization, independent
and self-help` ethic whereas in the U.K. there is a `social welfare` ethic of
assistance. Dr Mark Blades at University of Sheffield and Dr Robert Kitchin at
University of Swansea will participate in this aspect of the work. Scale effects
and cross-cultural comparisons have been largely ignored in work on spatial
cognition of blind and vision impaired. The research addresses basic problems
relating to theories of spatial cognition by this disabled group, as well as,
practical problems of the ways in which spatial abilities and actions by blind
and vision impaired people can be enhanced in a manner that influences their
quality of life. The results will contribute to the body of information
revealing how the visually impaired and blind think about and behave in an
everyday geographic environment. This enhanced understanding has important
policy implications concerning planning and education. In addition the work will
likely provide information on ways this group's wayfinding and orientation
skills may be enhanced.