* 9514038
* CAREER:  Physiological Regulation of Estrogen Receptor Gene Expression by Estrogen
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2003
* Nancy Ing, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 02/28/2003
* USD 499,466.00

9514038 Ing Estrogen is the most powerful hormone within animals and man which,
in low doses that work over long times, regulates reproduction and many other
body processes. The goal of the proposed research by Dr. Ing is to learn how
estrogen acts at the molecular level. One way estrogen enhances its effects is
by increasing the protein it binds ("estrogen receptor") within the tissues. The
tissues that respond to estrogen. With it, she has demonstrated that estrogen
increases estrogen receptor protein and estrogen receptor messenger RNA (mRNA).
Contrary to current beliefs in estrogen action, however, estrogen did not
enhance the rate of estrogen receptor mRNA synthesis from the estrogen receptor
gene. Since proteins, like the estrogen receptor, are made with information
encoded in genes (proteins are made from mRNAs which are made from genes),
regulation may be occurring at the level of the mRNA instead of the gene.
Therefore, her hypothesis is that estrogen decreases the decay of estrogen
receptor mRNA to enhance concentrations of estrogen receptor protein in tissues
and estrogen responses of animals. The proposed experiments will prove the
hypothesis and then determine how it occurs in molecular terms. First, uterine
tissues from estrogen-treated and control animals will be cultured and analyzed
to determine if estrogen really does stabilize estrogen receptor mRNA. Next, the
specific segment of the estrogen receptor mRNA responsible for estrogen-
regulated stability will be identified in mutated mRNAs. Finally, the regulatory
proteins that bind and act on the estrogen receptor mRNA to stabilize it in the
presence of estrogen will be characterized. This insight into the basic action
of this powerful hormone will lead to a better understanding of normal
reproductive physiology on a molecular level. ***