* 9514612
* Temperamental Contributions to the Development of Social    Behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Nathan Fox, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2001
* USD 153,920.00

The goal of this project is to examine the social skills, self-perceptions, and
social relationships of 11-year-old children who, at earlier ages, had been
identified as extremely wary and socially inhibited. In our longitudinal program
of research we have found that the pattern of brain electrical activity (EEG),
recorded over the anterior frontal lobes, represents a marker of individual
differences in the tendency to express and modulate positive and negative
emotions. Thus, infants and toddlers who exhibit wariness and behavioral
inhibition during the first two years of life, and who display greater negative
right frontal EEG activation are more likely to be socially reticent during
preschool peer interaction. Furthermore, 4 year social reticence predicts social
withdrawal in the peer group at age 7 years. We posit that socially withdrawn
7-year-old children, especially those who display greater relative right frontal
asymmetry, will be rejected by peers in later childhood. Moreover, we
hypothesize that the friendships of these children, at age 11 years, will be
qualitatively inferior and more fragile than those of their non-withdrawn
counterparts. And finally, we postulate that physiologically assessed wariness,
in combination with impoverished social skills and peer relationships, will
predict negative self perceptions of social competence and peer relationships,
as well as internalizing problems in early adolescence (11 years). These
hypotheses will be examined by bringing the participants in our longitudinal
project to the laboratory for three visits at 11 years of age. Session 1 will
consist of same-sex quartets, much like the ones in which the children
participated at ages 4 and 7 years. Session 2 will consist of a friendship dyad
interaction in which the target child will be observed interacting with his/her
best friend. Also in Session 2, both the focal child and his/her best friend
will participate in a same-sex quartet with two additional unfamiliar children.
Session 3 will allow collection of psychophysiological data. As a result of
these three sessions, we will be able to describe the friendship and social
interactive patterns of both reticent and non-reticent children. We will also be
able to characterize the processes through which competent peer interaction
develops. %%% The goal of this project is to examine the social skills, social
relationships, and self-perceptions of 11-year-old children who, at earlier
ages, had been identified as extremely wary and socially inhibited. Earlier
research has suggested that adolescent and adult depression, anxiety, and other
problems of an `internalizing` nature may be predicted from negative self
appraisals and withdrawal from the peer group during childhood. The
developmental precursors of negative self appraisals and social withdrawal,
however, are by-and-large unknown. In our longitudinal program of research we
have found that infants and toddlers who display greater negative right frontal
EEG activation tend to be wary and behaviorally inhibited during the first two
years of life. This constellation of psychophysiology and behavior predicts
extremely wary, socially reticent behavior during preschool peer interaction.
And, 4 year social reticence, combined with negative right frontal EEG
activation, predicts social withdrawal from the peer group at age 7 years. In
the present study, we are predicting that socially withdrawn 7-year-old
children, especially those who display greater relative right frontal asymmetry,
will, at 11 years, be rejected when they attempt to initiate interactions with
their peers. We hypothesize also that the friendships of these children, at age
11 years, will be qualitatively inferior and more fragile than those of their
non-withdrawn counterparts. And finally, we posit that physiologically assessed
wariness, in combination with impoverished social skills and peer relationships,
will predict negative self perceptions of social competence and peer
relationships, as well as internalizing problems in early adolescence (11
years). These hypotheses will be examined by bringing the participants in our
longitudinal project to the laboratory for three visits at 11 years of age. In
these sessions, we will assess the quality of the children's peer relationships,
with a special emphasis on the quality and strength/fragility of their
relationships with their best friends. We will also assess the children's self-
expressed perceptions of their social skills and social relationships, as well
as their feelings of anxiety, social wariness, and depression. Finally, we will
continue to collect EEG data, given the purported significance of right frontal
asymmetries in the prediction of internalizing disorders in childhood and
adolescence. As a result of this study, we will be able to document some of the
early origins, and some of the early adolescent concomitants of negative
thoughts and feelings about the self, social wariness, and other problems of an
internalizing nature.