* 9514624
* Development of Voltage-gated Ion Channels in Amphibian      Muscle
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* William Moody, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dennis M. Higgins
* 04/30/2000
* USD 270,581.00

9514624 Moody Ion channels are proteins that mediate the movement of charged
molecules across cell membranes, and thus are responsible for generating the
electrical signals used by nerve and muscle cells. The development of
excitability in nerve and muscle is governed by complex changes in the
populations of ion channels that occur during embryogenesis. It is now clear
that in many cells the types and properties of ion channels at early stages of
development are very different from those in the mature state. These differences
reflect a developmental function for electrical activity, a function that is
distinct from the later roles of electrical signaling in the mature cell. By
measuring the functional ion channels that are present at different stages of
development. we can identify critical periods during which the particular
channels present are likely to create spontaneous electrical activity, and then
to determine whether that activity is in fact important for later development.
Because changes in channel properties during development can be vary rapid,
these critical periods can be short, often only a few hours long. In many cells,
they can occur before it is possible to identify the cell in the embryo. To
understand the biological function of the patterns of ion channel development,
therefore, it is necessary to identify cells as early in embryogenesis as
possible and to measure the types and properties of ion channels present over a
wide range of stages. This project uses electrophysiological recording
techniques to measure the properties of ion channels at various stages in the
development of a muscle, and molecular techniques to make specific changes in
that developmental profile. This will allow determining exactly how electrical
activity is influencing development. The results obtained in an accessible
experimental system such as frog muscle can then be applied to the development
of the mammalian brain, where it is known that electrical activity, often
mediated by ear ly sensory experience, plays a role in assuring normal cognitive
development.