* 9515495
* Americas Program Planning Visit:  Research Collaboration    with Guatemalan Regional Project and Guatemalan             Archeologists
* O/D,OISE
* 11/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Laura Kosakowsky, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 04/30/1996
* USD 2,291.00

9515495 Kosakowsky This Americas Program award will fund a visit to Guatemala by
Dr. Laura Kosakowsky, Boston University, to plan a research project with the
goal of identifying the archeological sequence of the Santa Rosa region on the
Pacific Coast of Guatemala. During this visit, Dr. Kosakowsky, with the
collaboration of Dr. Francisco Estrada Belli, director of the Santa Rosa
Archeological Project, will examine surface collections of ceramics from the
region in order to provide maximum information on the local ceramic chronology.
The analysis of ceramics is a critical step in the identification of
chronological placement of archaeological sites, and of regional and inter-
regional patterns of interaction. The examination of the available material will
provide a realistic background for selecting sites for excavation in the coming
season. The archeological sequence of the Santa Rosa area has been poorly
documented up to now, but there are indications that this region played a key
role in networks of trade and communication from as far away as Central Mexico,
El Salvador , the Guatemalan highlands, and the Maya lowlands. Since the region
is undergoing extensive modernization and agricultural intensification, it is
rapidly facing the loss of archaeological resources. It is critical that this
type of study be undertaken as soon as possible. ***