* 9515187
* Local Realities and Social Psychological Perspectives:      Interdependent Systems of Racial and Ethnic Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Marylee Taylor, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,954.00

This project examines how the character of local white and minority communities
shapes white Americans' attitudes and beliefs about racial and ethnic
minorities, and how locality characteristics affect black Americans' views of
their own lives. It will develop a database that brings census and crime
statistics about localities together with individual-level survey responses of
residents to the 1990 General Social Survey. The unique data set will then be
employed in a series of four studies. Study #1 will examine the reaction of
whites' perspectives about blacks, Latinos and Asian Americans to changes in the
size of local minority populations, in the overall community economic status,
and in the relative economic positions of local majority and minority groups.
Study #2 will assess the relationship of race-specific crime rates to white
respondents' fear of crime, support for more stringent law enforcement and
criminal penalties, tolerance of police violence, gun ownership, and stereotypes
about minority propensity to violence. Study #3 will test the hypothesis that
attributional patterns condition the relationship between minority need and
white support for social safety net programs. Study #4 will focus on the
perspective of African Americans, examining the extent to which concentrated
local poverty and high crime rates affect happiness, satisfaction, anomie, and
faith in people. %%% This study will produce knowledge that will be of value for
policy makers seeking to deal with the nation's persistent racial tensions. In
addition, it serves as a demonstration project weighing the scientific payoff
from combining data from a major attitude survey with data from the census and
the FBI crime reports. If successful, therefore, the project will be a model for
other research efforts in the future.