* 9515025
* Agenda Setting in the Supreme Court of Canada
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Roy Flemming, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/1999
* USD 153,608.00

9515025 Flemming Control over agendas, deciding what to decide, is a significant
exercise of power. Courts with discretion to select appeals they want to hear
can move legal policies and constitutional law in particular directions by
choosing some cases and by ignoring others. The literature on the United States
Supreme Court suggests that: (1) the Court's decisions reflect jurisprudential
criteria and concerns; (2) the agenda setting process is influenced by litigant
resources; and (3) justices on the Court vote strategically in accordance with
their policy goals and expectations of success. Very little comparative research
has been done in other developed democracies to test the generalizability of the
American literature. Here comparative research that replicates the methods and
findings in the United States will be conducted on the Supreme Court of Canada.
There are significant institutional and procedural differences between the U.S.
and Canadian court that make the latter an important case testing and
identifying the conditions for the U.S.-derived hypotheses. This study employs a
triangulated research to generate the quantitative, qualitative, and archival
data to develop a comprehensive explanation of how the Supreme Court of Canada
decides to decide and how it differs from the United States. %%%% Control over
agendas, deciding what to decide, is a significant exercise of power. Courts
with discretion to select appeals they want to hear can move legal policies and
constitutional law in particular directions by choosing some cases and by
ignoring others. The literature on the United States Supreme Court suggests
that: (1) the Court's decisions reflect jurisprudential criteria and concerns;
(2) the agenda setting process is influenced by litigant resources; and (3)
justices on the Court vote strategically in accordance with their policy goals
and expectations of success. Very little comparative research has been done in
other developed democracies to test the generalizability of th e American
literature. Here comparative research that replicates the methods and findings
in the United States will be conducted on the Supreme Court of Canada. There are
significant institutional and procedural differences between the U.S. and
Canadian court that make the latter an important case testing and identifying
the conditions for the U.S.-derived hypotheses. This study employs a
triangulated research to generate the quantitative, qualitative, and archival
data to develop a comprehensive explanation of how the Supreme Court of Canada
decides to decide and how it differs from the United States. ****