* 9515250
* Participation and Influence in Gender-Homogeneous and Mixed-Gender Task-Oriented Groups
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* James Balkwell, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 06/30/1998
* USD 94,675.00

This is a study of participation and influence in groups, exploring both status
expectations and the contextual constraint of gender composition. This
investigation develops a theoretical framework combining expectation-states
theory and contextual elements, involving both inducements and restrictions. In
previous expectation-states conceptions, a group permits its members to
participate and to prevail in disagreements according to their perceived
abilities, the governing principle being that their primary motivation is to
succeed at their collective task. When we add the situational constraints
arising from gender composition to this model, the implications for observable
interaction patterns change. This research project will investigate hypotheses
about the differences, focusing on five-person problem-solving groups, employing
42 mock juries ranging in gender composition from all male to all female, with
seven replications of each possible composition. %%% This research differs from
prior studies in three significant ways. First, it exploits enormous
improvements in audio-visual technology, producing a much fuller audiotape and
videotape record of the experimental sessions. Second, drawing on this fuller
information, it will produce a coding of the who-to-whom flows of interaction
using a more discerning set of content categories, derived from the Bales IPA
system and the Oregon MICS system. Third, using mathematical modeling and
associated data analytic procedures, it will confirm or disconfirm the
expectation-states hypothesis and contextual hypotheses at issue, which in
previous research either have not been jointly examined or have been confounded.
%%% The anticipated result of this research is a better understanding of how
external status and diffuse status-based constraints combine to shape
participation and influence in task-oriented groups. The tradition of research
to which this study belongs has contributed significantly to improvement of
group processes in commerce, industry, education and government. The findings
from this particular study potentially will generalize to all kinds of decision-
making groups. Given that American decision-making groups are increasingly
gender-diverse, this research will be of significant practical importance at the
same time that it tests competing scientific theories.