* 9515173
* Private Sector Dynamics in China
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* William Parish, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2000
* USD 144,474.00

This study examines the emerging small-enterprise sector in China, with an
emphasis on the problems that are shared with the small, informal sector in
market societies and other former socialist states. Data for the study come from
intensive interviews with entrepreneurs, large surveys that include the emerging
self-employed and small-business sector, a 1993 survey of 1,440 private
entrepreneurs, and a record of the continuing success or failure of these
enterprises over the subsequent three years. The study provides a baseline model
of the regional characteristics (economic development level, proximity to
suppliers and consumers, etc.) that promote different types of enterprises. The
study then delves into three theoretical debates. The first debate concerns the
interplay between formal and informal sectors, with an emphasis on state-sector
/ private-sector interaction. This part of the inquiry will reveal the niches
private enterprises can occupy -- ranging from more flexibly-specialized, lower
labor cost subcontracting through simple avoidance strategies, where the formal
sector produces high-volume, standardized goods and the informal sector produces
low-volume, cheaper quality goods. The second debate concerns whether economies
can grow in the absence of firmly established private property rights. Inspired
by studies of the role of informal social network ties in peripheral East Asia
and elsewhere, this study examines whether informal social ties provide
predictability and reduce transaction costs in ways that partially substitute
for firmly established private property rights. The third debate concerns the
social origins of entrepreneurs. This study examines the role of blocked
mobility in forcing individuals into different entrepreneurial paths. %%% The
research will provide fundamental scientific insights into general questions of
human adaptation to radical social change, exploiting the fact that China is
presently undergoing rapid economic transformation. At the same time , it will
assemble valuable information on socio-economic conditions in China that will be
useful to policy makers, both in China and the United States.