* 9515496
* U.S.-Hungary Research on Morphometric System for Seed       Classification and Identification
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Irwin Rovner, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/2000
* USD 13,342.00

INT 9515496 Rovner This U.S.-Hungary cooperative project between Dr. Irwin
Rovner of North Carolina State University and Dr. Ferenc Gyulai of the Hungarian
Institute of Archaeology will lay groundwork for an atuomated, morphometric seed
atlas featuring seeds of Europe. The primary quantitative parameters of
morphometry employed by the researchers will include measurements of several
shape factors, topographical features, and size measurement. The intent is to
produce a reference with greater precision than available in conventional
sources. This morphometric analysis of European seed populations will employ an
interactive, computer assisted image analysis system which possesses
capabilities for classification and identification. Initial efforts for the
atlas will draw upon a major seed reference collection from the Hungarian Museum
of Agriculture that represents between 15,000 and 20,000 taxa. The collection
includes modern seed populations as well as many archaeological seed collections
derived from sites encompassing a seven-to-eight thousand year sequence from
Neolithic through Medieval periods. These Hungarian collections will be
transferred for computer image analysis to North Carolina State University where
additional controlled studies of factors affecting seed morphology will be
conducted. In addition to the benefit of access to an automated reference for
the extensive European collection, results are expected to produce a reference
tool that may be broadly used for seed identification and analysis in many areas
of basic research as well as environmental and commercial applications. This
project in systematic plant biology fulfills the program objective of advancing
scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United States and Eastern Europe
to combine complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong
mutual interest and competence. ??