* 9515252
* Annual Cliometrics Conferences
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Samuel Williamson, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 10/31/1999
* USD 74,983.00

9515252 Williamson This grant provides renewed support for the annual Cliometric
Conferences. This project supports the 1997, 1998, and 1999 Cliometric
Conferences. The venue of the conference changes annually. Conference sites will
be selected from a list of several universities offering to host Cliometric
Conferences. The field of cliometrics evolved in the 1960s from research
interests in several fields; most notably economics, history, and statistics,
but drawing also on demography, political science, and sociology. Its focus has
been on the application of economic theory and quantitative analysis to a wide
range of problems in economic history. The intent of the Cliometric Conference
is two-fold: to encourage new members of the profession and to provide an
opportunity for discussion and feedback on current research in the field. The
record of previous Conferences indicates that both goals have been met. Of the
224 paper- presenters at Cliometrics Conferences since 1985, 173, or 77 percent,
presented but a single paper in that period. At the 1995 conference, 75 percent
of the presenters were first-time presenters. The practice of inviting a mix of
new and established scholars is considered extremely valuable by many first-time
attendees, who have discovered advisors, mentors and research collaborators
through these conferences. At the same time, Cliometrics Conferences have served
as a forum for all major debates and developments in the field of economic
history and have consistently encouraged the development of new and better data
bases. A large number of important works in the field were first presented at
Cliometrics Conferences. In the six conferences held so far in the 1990s, three
major topical areas are emerging, accounting for about a third of the papers
selected. First is the timing and extent of market integration for labor,
commodities, and all factors to accompany the continuing interest in capital
market integration. Second is quantitative study of the political economy of
public finance and of public spending. Third is analysis of political economy in
a broader sense: of legal systems, of property rights, and politics itself.