* 9515394
* Excavation of Ziyadeh, Syria
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Frank Hole, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2000
* USD 135,398.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Frank Hole and his colleagues will
conduct two seasons of field research and a follow-up season of analysis at the
archaeological site of Ziyadeh. Located on the Khabur River in northeastern
Syria, the site has four major periods of occupation which span the period from
the sixth through the third millennium BC. The site itself consists of a mound
and Dr. Hole and his team will excavate through it to reveal the entire
occupational sequence and to collect cultural materials such as ceramics,
lithics, possible metal and fauna. They also shall conduct fine sieving
operations to recover botanical remains. On this basis it will be possible to
reconstruct environmental change and human response through time. The sequence
of cultures will also be defined and it will be possible to determine whether
the area exhibits population continuity or rather was occupied by successive
waves of immigrants. Archaeologists wish to understand the processes which led
to the rise of complex societies and northern Syria and adjacent regions are
extremely important because it was here that many plants and animals were first
domesticated and both complex societies and later civilizations arose. While
much work has been done in the Near East, very few sites cover such a long
expanse of time and contain such rich environmental information. The processes
which led to the observed cultural phenomenon are not yet clear and in recent
years increasing attention has focused on the role of environmental change as a
causal factor. This region in Northern Syria is semi-desert and therefore can
exhibit marked change in response to relatively small changes in rainfall. It
provides an excellent situation to examine the relationship between
environmental and cultural change. This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide information of interest to many archaeologists. In 1998
the region will be flooded as part of a development project and the work must be
done now. The project will also shed new light on the processes which led to the
development of civilization and complex societies.