* 9515289
* Hohokam Ceramics and Social Organization During the         Sedentary Period
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1998
* David Abbott, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1998
* USD 89,437.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. David Abbott will conduct an
analysis of ceramics collected from Hohokam sites located in Arizona's Phoenix
Basin. He will focus on the early Sedentary period of Hohokam development and
analyze potsherds carefully excavated from a number of sites. The geological
region in which these are located is extremely diverse and the composition of
sands and clays which potters employed varied significantly from subarea to
subarea. Abbott's prior work has demonstrated that it is possible to examine
sherd matrix and determine the source of the raw material. Through such
microscopic and electron probe analysis he will determine the points of origin
for thousands of sampled sherds. On this basis it is then possible to
reconstruct sedentary period ceramic exchange systems and thus gain insight into
social organization. Hohocam peoples were agriculturists who lived in a harsh
semi-arid environment and who depended on large and complex irrigation systems
to produce crops. Dr. Abbott has completed a similar analysis of ceramic
exchange during the following Classic period and the results indicated that
exchange occurred primarily within individual irrigation subsystems. This
indicates that social organization and the control and management of irrigation
were tied closely together. The Sedentary period work will shed light on how
this system developed. Although canals were present during the Sedentary period,
preliminary results indicate that exchange may not have followed the Classic
pattern and were not closely tied to irrigation canals. It correct, this
conclusion would contradict widely held archaeological assumptions.
Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies arose. This process
often occurred in semi-arid environments and researchers have postulated that
the need to develop and maintain irrigation systems played a central role. Dr.
Abbott's research speaks directly to this question. It also sheds light on how
people at a simple level of technology were able to subsist in harsh
environmental conditions. It will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists and shed new light on America's past.