* 9515443
* Proyecto Maya-Colonial:  Postclassic Political Geography of Central Peten, Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Prudence Rice, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1999
* USD 330,573.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Don Rice and his colleagues will
conduct three field seasons of archaeological research in the Peten region of
Guatemala. This research builds on a previously NSF supported project. The goal
of the work is to understand what happened to Mayan cultures after the collapse
of the `Classical Maya.` Archaeological evidence clearly demonstrates the degree
of social complexity which was achieved at the height of Mayan development.
Priest emperors ruled over large areas of lowland Middle America. A writing
system was devised and the importance of monumental architecture is demonstrated
by temple mounds which survive to present times. Both archaeological and textual
data indicate that large numbers of people were integrated into single political
units and that traditional agricultural techniques served to provide adequate
food in a difficult lowland tropical environment. In approximately the 9th
century AD however this classic Mayan society `collapsed` and the reasons for
this are poorly known. DR Rice and his colleagues have focused on the time
interval between the 9th and 17th centuries AD, when Europeans conquered this
area. They have worked from early Spanish texts which described, and located -
in a general way - major Mayan towns. Through on the ground survey they have
located many of these and conducted trial excavations. This information has
provided the framework for the current major excavation project which will allow
the Mayan `decline` to be traced over a ca. 800 year interval. Drs. Rice, Rice
and colleagues will excavate portions of 41 structures to obtain comparative
data on site histories and functions of specific civic-ceremonial structure
types. This project is important for several reasons. It will provide
information on a little understood period of prehistory. The data it produces
will be of interest to many archeologists and it will increase our understanding
of how complex societies arise, and also decline.