* 9515395
* Ethnobiology of San Pedro Mixtepec, a Zapotec-Speaking      Community of the Sierra de Miahuatlan, Oaxaca
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Eugene Hunn, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1999
* USD 186,798.00

Oaxaca, Mexico Zapotec Ethnobiology This award to the University of Washington
will support a linguistic anthropologist's documentation of the indigenous
knowledge of plants and animals known in a traditional Zapotec-speaking
community in Oaxaca, Mexico. Using standard techniques of ethnography and
ethnobotany the investigator will establish the precise correspondence of each
local name to the names categories of Western scientific botanical and
zoological taxonomies. The similarities between local and Western scientific
classifications provide evidence of universal mental processes by which humans
comprehend the diversity of the natural world, while the differences reflect
contrasts of cultural meaning between indigenous peasant and Western industrial
societies. The project will analyze the within-community distribution of
knowledge by age, sex, schooling, and occupation in order to establish the
cultural consensus of the local knowledge structure. Focusing on local
conceptions of forest management through fire, the project will analyze how
local indigenous knowledge impacts on environmental change. This research is
important because traditional indigenous knowledge systems are fast
disappearing. Careful case studies such as this allow us to further our
understanding of fundamental processes of human variation in cognitive
structure. The fine-grained analysis of local variation in knowledge will
advance our understanding of how natural knowledge systems are instated and how
they change.