* 9515335
* Role-Theoretic and Policy-Based Models of Supreme Court     Decision Making
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Jeffrey Segal, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/28/2001
* USD 148,290.00

9515335 Segal This project combines and tests role-theoretic (legal and
restraintist) and policy-based (attitudinal and positive) models of Supreme
Court decision making. The project will answer questions about the Court's
decision making that have not been answered systematically before, such as the
influence of legal arguments over text and intent, the extent of deference the
Court gives to elected decision makers, and the extent of sophisticated voting
by the justices. The role of legal arguments will be tested by examining claims
and counterclaims as to text, intent, and precedent in briefs filed before the
Court. Attitudinal effects will be tested by determining, after controlling for
legal and political variables, whether justices have remaining predispositions
to support litigants favoring liberal or conservative positions. These factors
will be studied over the votes of the justices in the 1,018 cases docketed and
decided by full opinion in the 1979, 1980, 1985, 1986, 1991, 1992, 1993, and
1994 terms of the Court. The data that do not already exist in the U.S. Supreme
Court Judicial database will be coded from a content analysis of briefs filed
before the Court. %%%% This project combines and tests role-theoretic (legal and
restraintist) and policy-based (attitudinal and positive) models of Supreme
Court decision making. The project will answer questions about the Court's
decision making that have not been answered systematically before, such as the
influence of legal arguments over text and intent, the extent of deference the
Court gives to elected decision makers, and the extent of sophisticated voting
by the justices. The role of legal arguments will be tested by examining claims
and counterclaims as to text, intent, and precedent in briefs filed before the
Court. Attitudinal effects will be tested by determining, after controlling for
legal and political variables, whether justices have remaining predispositions
to support litigants favoring liberal or conservative positions. These factors
will be studied over the votes of the justices in the 1,018 cases docketed and
decided by full opinion in the 1979, 1980, 1985, 1986, 1991, 1992, 1993, and
1994 terms of the Court. The data that do not already exist in the U.S. Supreme
Court Judicial database will be coded from a content analysis of briefs filed
before the Court. ****