* 9515341
* Mover-Stayer Models for the Analysis of Event-History Data  in Social Science Research:  A Project Description
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Kazuo Yamaguchi, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/1999
* USD 123,794.00

This project develops three groups of mover-stayer models for the analysis of
event-history data. Mover-stayer models employ a pair of regressions: an
`S-regression` for the proportion of stayers, where stayers are a latent
population of `people` with zero risk of having the event, and an `M-regression`
for the conditional rate of having the event among movers, where movers are a
latent population of people with nonzero risk of having the event. Mover-stayer
models provide information that cannot be obtained from the results of
conventional hazard rate models. This research further develops mover-stayer
models by: (1) extending general mover-stayer models to permit the use of time-
varying predictors (2) developing mover-stayer models specifically designed for
the analysis of diffusion processes (such as diffusion of information, diseases,
or innovation) to identify whether a predictor of a higher rate of diffusion
implies either more rapid diffusion, or a larger number of people who are
affected by the diffusion event, or both; (3) developing mover-stayer models for
event-history data with some missing information. Applications of these new
methodological tools to analyses of first marriages and remarriages, drug-use
progression, and residential mobility will provide important new substantive
insights.