* 9515120
* Alternative Evidence for Domestic Stock in Southern Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Paul Goldberg, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1998
* USD 16,344.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Charles Bousman and his
collaborators will conduct archaeological field work at the site of Blydefontein
Rockshelter which is located in the Karoo region of South Africa. They will also
analyze the excavated finds. Blydefontein is interesting because its deposits
span the last several thousand years and it was during this period that domestic
livestock first appeared in Southern Africa. Although the site contains no
skeletal remains of domesticates from this period, one layer is composed largely
of animal dung which may have been deposited by sheep. The goal of this project
is to collect and analyze this material by a variety of techniques. The results
will be compared to controlled samples which derive from modern day sheep and
from hyraxes - small guinea pig-like animals which also inhabit caves in
Southern Africa. Dr Bousman and colleagues will conduct microstratigraphic
analysis at the site. They will also study pollen and plant phytoliths which are
incorporated into the deposit. Similar analyses will be undertaken with diatoms
and calcite spherolites. Disaggregated sediment samples will be inspected in an
attempt to identify hair or other materials which could help identify
contributors. This research is significant for several reasons. The first is
methodological. Given the generally poor preservation of archaeological
materials it is extremely difficult for archaeologists to reconstruct the past.
Animal bones survive only very rarely and need very specific chemical and
geological conditions to be preserved. The techniques that Dr. Bousman and his
colleagues hope to perfect will be widely applicable in a large number of
situations. Secondly, this research is important because of the new light it
will provide on Southern Africa's past. Animals were not domesticated in this
region of the world but rather were introduced from the outside. The adoption of
sheep and goat and later cattle had an enormous impact of the way people lived.
It is unclear when, how or by what means domesticates arrived in this region and
Dr. Bousman's research will shed new light on the subject. Finally domestic
animals have had major effect on environment and the planned research will
increase our understanding of human-environment interactions.