* 9515404
* The Career Implications of Life Course Opportunities and    Planning
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Dennis Hogan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/1999
* USD 42,162.00

This is a project to study career advancement over the life course of men and
women, testing the relative efficacy of human capital and social capital. Human
capital is defined as the acquisition of cognitive competence and the ability to
signal that cognitive competence has been achieved. Social capital is defined as
social resources acquired from social background and network contacts that aid
in the acquisition of favorable adult roles. In particular, this study examines
how career advancement and mid-life success are determined by: 1) human and
social capital among adolescents and young adults, 2) the opportunity structure
surrounding adult roles, and 3) life course planning. Data are from the
Wisconsin Longitudinal Survey, a representative sample of 10,317 men and women
first interviewed in 1957 in their senior year in high school, with subsequent
data collection representing their experiences in early adulthood and mid-life.
The project integrates recently developed methodologies for the measurement of
human and social capital, occupational career lines, and occupational success.
The models developed for the study will be applied to data on men and women who
were high school students 15 years later to determine the extent to which the
findings of the 1957 cohort of high school seniors hold true under much less
favorable economic circumstances and following marked changes in gender roles.
The research also examines the extent and dimensions of inequality between men
and women, to determine whether social capital is more critical for women
because it may overcome blocked opportunities, or conversely whether the
stronger career performance of men is accounted for by social capital. %%% This
research will test fundamental scientific theories about the factors that govern
an individual's career, thus contributing to an understanding of the
stratification system of industrial society, which is an issue of great
importance for sociology. The knowledge gained also can contribute to gre ater
efficiency and justice in the American economy, because factors that prevent
people from gaining the jobs for which they best suited are both inefficient and
unjust. Increased understanding of how information and planning can contribute
to good career choices will also result from this research.