* 9515149
* Linking Domestic and International Sources of Alliance      Formation
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1998
* W. Ben Hunt, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1998
* USD 70,000.00

9515149 Gilligan The dominant theory used to explain international relations
(neo-realism) finds the primary source of national security decisions in the
dog-eat-dog world of the international system. At the core of this theory is the
belief that the international behavior of states is driven by the dictates of
national self-preservation within an anarchic system. In studies of domestic
politics, however, the dominant approach is to think of political decisions as
driven by politicians' desire to stay in power. This investigation combines
these insights by modeling the international behavior of the state in terms of
the political survival of the politicians who make national policy. This model
incorporates both realist and domestic concerns, as politicians must worry about
foreign military threats to their regime's survival as well as internal threats
from domestic rivals for power. The researchers argue that the constraints of
regime preservation are much more binding than the constraints of international
anarchy alone, and that such a combined perspective explains the behaviors
accounted for by a systemic approach as well as those cases neo-realism can not
explain. The formal model generates specific and falsifiable claims regarding
many aspects of international behavior, but the investigators intend to focus on
a central behavior for most neo-realist models - - security alliance formation.
By compiling existing data on the economic, military, and political
characteristics of nations considering joining an alliance, as well as gathering
new information on parameters such as perceived domestic and international
threat, the investigators evaluate the strength of a model of regime
preservation in explaining patterns of alliance formation. ***