* 9515038
* A Geometric Approach to Two Dimensional Measurement
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Michael Levine, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2000
* USD 184,996.00

The goal of this project is to develop a theory for nonparametric,
multidimensional, item-level measurement. The investigator's approach to
multidimensional modeling relies on two recent advances in measurement: the
submodel theorem and ForScore. The submodel theorem asserts that smooth
multidimensional measurement models have equivalent unidimensional submodels.
ForScore, a suite of unidimensional model fitting programs, provides means for
fitting various unidimensional models that are equivalent to the smooth
multidimensional models. The project will result in a set of computer programs
for implementing the theory and a demonstration application of the theory in
counseling psychology. Latent variable models are used in physical, biological,
and social sciences. Multivariate latent variable modeling is less well
developed than univariate modeling. If the project is successful, more complex
and accurate applications of latent variable models will quickly become possible
because researchers will be able to reduce problems involving many variables to
univariate problems. For example, consider the analysis of gender differences.
Men and women on average respond differently to questions of vocational choices.
This research will allow the application of powerful unidimensional differential
item functioning measures to be used in the two-dimensional domain of vocational
choice. The analysis will increase our understanding of the etiology of gender
differences in vocational choice and assist in the design of instruments that
will be more useful to women.