* 9515006
* Prejudice and Politics in the Netherlands
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Paul Sniderman, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 03/31/1999
* USD 86,404.00

The predicaments of post-colonialism launched a wave of immigrants across
Europe; the collapse of communism has swollen it. These new "outsiders" raise a
host of problems for governments across Europe. That a number of these
governments and societies are themselves under economic and political stress,
for reasons independent of or only marginally related to the arrival of outside
groups, only aggravates the problem. Throughout Western Europe there is an
unmistakable anger toward outsiders, sparking anti-migrant violence and swelling
the popular appeal of new parties parading under quasi-fascist banners and
draping themselves in racist, xenophobic sentiments. This proposal seeks funding
to continue an on-going collaborative research program on the consequences of
prejudice for intergroup conflict. The research will be conducted in the
Netherlands and costs will be shared with European colleagues. The Netherlands
offers an important site for this research because of, on the one hand, its
egalitarian political culture and, on the other hand, its history of
colonialism. Computer assisted experimental surveys of Dutch citizens will be
used to gauge the possibilities for theoretical melding of situational
perspectives on group conflict with dispositional perspectives. This project
extends a series of studies conducted both in the United States and in Italy by
the principal investigator and his European collaborators. * * *