* 9515330
* Noncompetitive Inhibition of the Acetycholine Receptor
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* David Johnson, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Paul B. Farel
* 04/30/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9515330 Johnson The neuromuscular junction is a critical relay point in the flow
of information from the central nervous system to muscles in all vertebrate
animals. Motor neurons ending at these junctions release the neurotransmitter,
acetylcholine, which diffuses a short distance to interact with molecular
receptor molecules, the acetylcholine receptors. These critical receptors are
channel pores that open when activated by acetylcholine, thereby initiating the
cascade of events that leads to muscle contraction. Through funding of this
grant experiments are carried out to determine the detailed structure of
acetylcholine receptors, which can be obtained in large quantities from the
electric ray. The approach is that of quantitative fluorescence spectroscopy, a
unique technique for studying structural features of intact acetylcholine
receptor molecules. The experiments are meant to delineate the specific binding
sites of inhibitors substances and thus to enhance the understanding of how
these bindine sites change as the acetylcholine receptor pore opens and closes.
This study should significantly contribute to the development of a molecular
understanding of the actions of chemicals on the acetylcholine receptor. Such
understanding will provide insights into how this critically important protein
functions at a molecular level. Concepts and experimental approaches developed
in the study of the acetylcholine receptor will be applicable to the vast array
of other neurotransmitter and hormone receptors found in all animals.