* 9515231
* Memory Characteristics of Elderly Eyewitnesses
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1996,09/30/1998
* James Bartlett, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 09/30/1998
* USD 172,544.00

9515231 Bartlett As the elderly are disproportionately likely to be the victims
of certain crimes, the legal system will have to rely more and more on elderly
witnesses. There has as yet been little research with respect to the performance
of the elderly in this role, and existing research has yielded few solid
conclusions. The objective of this research is to examine systematically the
performance of the elderly as witnesses. It will (1) investigate the conditions
under which the elderly are likely to perform poorly and well; (2) test the
rules and procedures within the legal system that may be manipulated to enhance
the quality of information obtained from elderly witnesses, (3) evaluate the
utility of psychometric measures for distinguishing accurate from inaccurate
witnesses, and (4) explore the potential for using the relatively unimpaired
"implicit memory" of the elderly to assess the accuracy of their memories or to
elicit additional information. Experiments involving simulated crimes and other
events will be used to compare the performance of young and elderly subjects in
order to answer basic questions about age differences. Research has documented
that jurors, attorneys, and others within the legal system tend to assume that
the elderly witnesses have difficulty in performing accurately. Our goal is to
obtain solid information as to what, if anything, should be considered when
dealing with seniors who are witnesses to crimes. %%%% As the elderly are
disproportionately likely to be the victims of certain crimes, the legal system
will have to rely more and more on elderly witnesses. There has as yet been
little research with respect to the performance of the elderly in this role, and
existing research has yielded few solid conclusions. The objective of this
research is to examine systematically the performance of the elderly as
witnesses. It will (1) investigate the conditions under which the elderly are
likely to perform poorly and well; (2) test the rules and procedures within th e
legal system that may be manipulated to enhance the quality of information
obtained from elderly witnesses, (3) evaluate the utility of psychometric
measures for distinguishing accurate from inaccurate witnesses, and (4) explore
the potential for using the relatively unimpaired "implicit memory" of the
elderly to assess the accuracy of their memories or to elicit additional
information. Experiments involving simulated crimes and other events will be
used to compare the performance of young and elderly subjects in order to answer
basic questions about age differences. Research has documented that jurors,
attorneys, and others within the legal system tend to assume that the elderly
witnesses have difficulty in performing accurately. Our goal is to obtain solid
information as to what, if anything, should be considered when dealing with
seniors who are witnesses to crimes. ****