* 9515474
* Molecular Mechanism of Clathrin Coat Dissociation and its   Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Ernst Ungewickell, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 02/28/1998
* USD 132,681.00

95-15474 Ungewickell The vectorial transport of selected membrane proteins from
the plasma membrane and the trans-Golgi network to the endosomal system involves
clathrin coated vesicles. The clathrin coat is connected by hetero-tetrameric
adaptor proteins to the underlying membrane and is removed enzymatically before
fusion at the targeted membrane. Neuronal clathrin coated vesicles contain in
addition to the adaptors the monomeric coat proteins AP180 and auxilin. Results
from in vitro reconstituted system imply that uncoating of clathrin requires the
cognate form of the heat shock protein hsp70 (hsp70c) and a 100 KDa cofactor.
This cofactor has been identified as auxilin. Auxilin was previously
characterized as a clathrin assembly protein. The function of auxilin in the
uncoating is reminiscent of DnaJ proteins that function together with hsp70 to
constitute a chaperone system involved in prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells in
numerous functions: protein folding, protein transport across membranes, and
activation of DNA binding proteins. DnaJ-like proteins are presumed to target
hsp70 to specific substrates. The objective of this proposal is to gain insights
into the molecular mechanism of the uncoating reaction and to prove that auxilin
or auxilin-like proteins function together with hsp70c to form a chaperone
machine that specifically dissociate clathrin coat and regulate clathrin
dynamics in vivo. This will be acheived by investigating the domain structure of
auxilin to determine which parts interact with assembled clathrin coat and with
hsp70c as well as how these interactions are regulated. Truncated forms of
auxilin will be expressed in bacteria, purified, and assayed in vitro to
determine their ability to bind to clathrin, to recruit hsp70c to the clathrin
coat, and to elicit uncoating of the clathrin coat. Chemical cross linking
reagents will be used to identify novel uncoating intermediate that presumably
contains auxilin, hsp70c, and clathrin. Mutated genes that encode auxilin that
are unable to recruit hsp70c to clathrin will be introduced by transfection into
neuronal and non-neuronal cells to examine their effects on clathrin mediated
membrane traffic. Auxilin homologues will be search for in non-neuronal cells
using the in vitro functional assay with fractionated homogenates of various
cells. cDNAs encoding possible homologues will be cloned and sequenced. Studies
of the chaperone-mediated uncoating of clathrin coated vesicles are relevant not
only to understanding clathrin dynamics, but also to understanding the molecular
mechanism of a specific eukaryotic chaperone machine. %%% The vectorial
transport of selected membrane proteins from the plasma membrane and the trans-
Golgi network to the endosomal system involves clathrin coated vesicles. The
clathrin coat is connected by hetero-tetrameric adaptor proteins to the
underlying membrane and is removed enzymatically before fusion at the targeted
membrane. Neuronal clathrin coated vesicles contain in addition to the adaptors
the monomeric coat proteins AP180 and auxilin. Results from in vitro
reconstituted system imply that uncoating of clathrin requires the cognate form
of the heat shock protein hsp70 (hsp70c) and auxilin. Auxilin was previously
characterized as a clathrin assembly protein. The objective of this proposal is
to gain insights into the molecular mechanism of the uncoating reaction and to
prove that auxilin or auxilin-like proteins function together with hsp70c to
form a chaperone machine that specifically dissociate clathrin coat and regulate
clathrin dynamics in vivo. This will be acheived by investigating the domain
structure of auxilin to determine which parts interact with assembled clathrin
coat and with hsp70c as well as how these interactions are regulated. Studies of
the chaperone-mediated uncoating of clathrin coated vesicles are relevant not
only to understanding clathrin dynamics, but also to understanding the molecular
mechanism of a specific eukaryotic chaperone machine. ***