* 9515143
* Explaining Cross-Cultural Variation in Work and Society
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,02/29/2000
* William Parish, National Opinion Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 02/29/2000
* USD 255,095.00

This is the Korean part of a larger research project on cross-cultural
variations in labor markets and social stratification that will also collect
data in Taiwan and Japan. This is a multi-society, public-use survey on work,
family, social networks, and civil society. During this initial round of what is
anticipated to be a periodically repeated survey, the emphasis is on work and
human capital. The project is a comparative "natural experiment" examining how
labor market and social stratification patterns differ in a subset of three
nations that have followed quite different strategies for economic development.
In the Korean phase of this work, a large survey will be administered to a
randmm sample of about 2,000 people aged 25-59, evenly split between males and
females. %%% Standard theories of labor markets, stratification and human
capital have been developed in Western countries, and some important findings of
research done in the United States may simply be artifacts of American history.
Thus it is essential to conduct comparative research in developed nations with
very different backgrounds, and this research in Asia will illuminate much about
the real dynamics of development in America as well as providing important
information about three of America's chief trading partners. The project's
principal goal is to produce a high-quality, public-use data set that can be
utilized broadly by social science researchers in the United States, East Asia,
and other countries, thus creating a unique opportunity to test hypotheses and
contribute to social scientific theory with data from one of the most dynamic
regions of the world.