* 9515518
* Three-Dimensional Reconstruction from Electron Micrographs  of Randomly Oriented Macromolecules
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* Charles Lawrence, Health Research Incorporated/New York State Department of Health
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2001
* USD 433,593.00

Three-dimensional Reconstruction from Electron Micrographs of Randomly Oriented
Macromolecules. Knowledge of the structure of macromolecules is essential to an
understanding of their functions in biological systems. Many large
macromolecules can only be analyzed by threedimensional electron microscopy. For
single asymmetrical particles, in contrast to crystalline objects, resolutions
achieved in three dimensions have been limited to 2-3 nm. The techniques
proposed here will contribute to a fuller usage of information contained in a
micrograph and are an important step toward achieving higher resolution and thus
a better understanding of biological function. A method is proposed for three-
dimensional reconstruction from electron micrographs of randomly oriented single
macromolecules. Biological particles are radiation sensitive, and imaging must
be done under low-dose conditions. Only techniques that combine information of
many identical particles can overcome the limits imposed by radiation
sensitivity. One of the most successful methods of this kind was SECReT (Single
Exposure Conical Reconstruction Technique), developed by the P.I.. Programs for
this method have been distributed to laboratories world wide and have been used
for the determination of more than 15 structures over the last seven years.
However, SECReT requires that all particles used in a reconstruction have the
same orientation within the plane of the specimen. Deviations from this
preferred orientation limit the resolution in three dimensions. Proposed here is
a new method for determining the orientation of particles from their
projections. This technique can be used for refining the orientation of
projections used for SECReT and for the determination of projection angles of
particles with unknown orientations. Successful development of this technique
will lead to substantial reduction in experimental effort and increase the
resolution achievable in three dimensions. The theory of Radon t ransforms is
the basis for three-dimensional reconstruction algorithms. Most research has
focused on the design of efficient inversion algorithms and only a few
applications have made use of their potential as image processing tools. In this
proposal Radon transforms are used as tools for simultaneous translational and
rotational alignment of projections in three dimensions. Once the orientations
of the projections are known a threedimensional reconstruction can be
calculated. The alignment/reconstruction method will be combined with a Gibbs
sampling technique for overcoming noise limitations and for image
classification. Programs to assess the feasibility of the proposed technique
have been written and first results have been published. The new technique will
be applied to two objects, the calcium release channel from sarcoplasmic
reticulum and the 50S ribosomal subunit from Escherichia coli. The two
macromolecules were chosen because they exhibit features that are advantageous
for testing the procedures, and because results at higher resolution will
contribute to a better understanding of their function. The four-fold symmetry
of the calcium release channel can be used to increase the signal to noise
ratio, whereas the 50S ribosomal subunit is a globular structure with few
protuberances and ideal for testing the limits of the applicability of this
method.