* 9515457
* U.S.-Australia Joint Workshop on Electron Density FunctionalTheory: Recent Progress and New Directions/Brisbane,        Australia/July 1996
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Giovanni Vignale, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 04/30/1997
* USD 33,680.00

9515457 Vignale This award supports the participation of twelve American
researchers at a workshop entitled "Electron Density Functional Theory: Recent
Progress and New Directions" to be held in Brisbane, Australia between July 15
and 19, 1996. The American organizer for this workshop is Dr. Giovanni Vignale
of the Department of Physics, University of Missouri - Columbia. The Australian
organizer is Dr. John Dobson of the Faculty of Science and Technology at
Griffith University, Nathan, Queensland. Electron Density Functional Theory
(DFT) is a theoretical / computational tool used by solid state physicists and
engineers to predict materials properties and to model electronic and optical
devices. Chemists and biologists also use DFT for molecular modelling. The
objectives of the workshop are to acquaint energy transfer researchers with the
current state of theoretical and experimental knowledge in dealing with large
and small molecular systems, to identify experiments and theoretical
developments which may have the greatest impact on advancing knowledge about
large molecular vibrational energy transfer, and to foster further collaboration
and communication between American and Australian investigators in this research
area. A few selected participants will come from Canada, France and Germany.
Australian support for this workshop is provided through the Australian
Department of Industry, Science and Tourism (DIST) under the U.S.-Australia
Cooperative Science Program.