* 9515153
* Trends in Intercountry Income Inequality
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Glenn Firebaugh, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/1998
* USD 47,010.00

This is a study of intercountry income inequality. Nations vary greatly in the
average incomes of their citizens, by a factor of about 100 worldwide, and this
intercountry inequality is the major component of world income inequality,
significantly more important than inequality within nations. This study has
three related objectives. First, it will construct trends in intercountry
inequality since mid-century based on two measures of national income (one based
on exchange rates, the other based on purchasing power parity) and on three
measures of inequality (the Gini coefficient, Theil's index, and the squared
coefficient of variation). Second, it will decompose trends in intercountry
inequality into the part due to changing income ratios and the part due to
nations' changing shares of the world population. Third, it will estimate each
nation's contribution to total intercountry inequality at each measurement point
at five-year intervals. %%% This research will make it possible to determine the
characteristics of nations that have increased or decreased their contribution
to intercountry inequality over time. Thus this dataset will provide the
foundation for a quantitative scientific literature on the underlying causes of
change in what is the major component of world inequality: inequality between
nations.