* 9515459
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Post-flooding        Effects of Native and Non-native Fishes on Community        Recovery in New Zealand Streams
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Joseph Holomuzki, Transylvania University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 05/31/1997
* USD 11,990.00

9515459 Holomuzki This award will support the travel of Dr. Joseph Holomuzki of
the Division of Natural Sciences, Transylvania University in Lexington,
Kentucky, to enable him to conduct collaborative research with Barry Biggs from
the Freshwater Division of the National Institute of Water and Atmospheric
Research (NIWAR), located in Christchurch, New Zealand. The goal of this
research is to document the role of native and non-native fishes as community
organizers in New Zealand streams. Specifically the work seeks to determine
whether native and non-native fishes differ in their abilities to withstand
scouring floods and to examine the effects of these fishes on post-flood
recovery patterns of stream communities. Interest in how biotic (trophic
interactions) and abiotic (flooding) forces interrelate to organize communities
is of current importance in studies of stream ecology. The effect of introduced
trout on New Zealand stream communities is little known. The American
investigator brings to the study his expertise in biotic dynamics and
interactions; the New Zealand researcher has extensive background in abiotic
factors. This study brings together the complementary skills of the
collaborating scientists. The research in New Zealand is supported through the
Ministry of Research, Science and Technology.