* 9515244
* Democratization, Regional Change, and Ethnicity in the      Southern Balkans: The Case of the Rhodope Region of Bulgaria
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* John Pickles, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ngoc Linh Lam
* 05/31/2000
* USD 184,940.00

SBR-9515244 John Pickles U. Kentucky This project examines (sub-national)
regional economic and political change in a society undergoing a shift from a
command to market oriented economy, the southern Rhodope region in Bulgaria.
This shift and its associated decentralization, demonopolization, and
liberalization have brought to the subject region, like many peripheral regions
in Central and Eastern Europe, withdrawal of industrial investment, decline in
agriculture, and increasing social polarization. In the Rhodope, the social
change has most negatively affected the large Turkish-speaking minority. The
research project is focused on three forms of transition: (1) the
democratization of local and national state power, new civil institutions, and
the emergence of ethnic politics focused on the Turkish-speaking population; (2)
decentralization of control over industry, regional restructuring of production,
branch-plant closure, and mass unemployment; and (3) privatization of tobacco
production and the effects of continued monopoly power in tobacco marketing. The
three research questions are: (1) How have the economic changes affected support
for ethnically based political parties and actors since 1989? (2) How has the
rise of the Turkish-dominated political party affected the nature of regional
economic change? (3) What roles do gender and ethnicity play in these changes,
within households, manufacturing plants, and local politics? Working with Robert
Begg of Indiana University of Pennsylvania and Mueke Meurs of The American
University (via subcontracts) and colleagues in the Bulgarian Academy of
Sciences and the University of Sofia, the PI will interview political and
institutional leaders, industrial managers, and households, and will make use of
secondary statistical data. The research results should have relevance for our
increasing recognition of the causal linkages among economic, political, and
social-identity (gender, ethnicity) change in local settings. The results s
hould have relevance to other peripheral regions in rapidly changing counties of
Central and Eastern Europe. The research itself will add to the English-language
writing and expertise on this world region.