* 9515136
* Improving Within-School and School-Community Systemic       Linkages for At-Risk Students
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Larry Hedges, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/1999
* USD 233,587.00

The primary purpose of this research is to investigate empirically the impact of
recent federal reform initiatives legislated by Title I of the Elementary and
Secondary Education Act on the narrowing of the achievement gap between
educationally at-risk students and their more advantaged peers. These reform
initiatives have encouraged schools to: reconcile fragmentation between their
Title I and regular services; foster effective school decision-making and
organizational structure; develop effective parent involvement activities, and;
promote stronger school-community partnerships. This project makes use of the
comprehensive, Congressionally mandated Prospects data files, which consist of
standardized reading and math achievement scores for a nationally-representative
sample of nearly 40,000 students, and detailed information regarding the
students themselves, and their schools, classrooms, and families. The
investigators' analyses will generate national estimates of the extent and
intensity of these reform activities, and will produce empirically-based
paradigms for the improvement of federal Title I programs and the schools that
serve at-risk students. This information will guide stakeholders from all levels
of the educational system to develop policies and activities that promote
equitable educational outcomes.