* 9515222
* Democracy, Institutions, and Differential Paths of Economic Growth Among New World Economies:  From Settlement to 1940
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Stanley Engerman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 02/29/2000
* USD 228,969.00

Kenneth L. Sokoloff Stanley L. Engerman Stephen H. Haber National Bureau of
Economic Research SBR-9515222 The research will study how the relationships
between political economy, economic institutions, and growth evolved and were
manifested among the economies of the New World since settlement by the
Europeans. Studies of modern expansion or economic growth in western Europe and
certain overseas offshoots have argued that political democracy and economic
growth tended to emerge together. This research will attempt to determine if
this is true in North and South America. The economies of North and South
America followed very different paths of economic and political development even
though all enjoyed extraordinarily favorable environments with respect to
natural resources per person, were established by the same small set of
countries and were peopled by individuals from the same economic classes of the
same populations. Despite these similarities at the time of settlement, they
came to differ enormously with respect to the degree of inequality in political
power, human capital, and wealth within their societies, the nature and
structure of their economic institutions, as well as their realization of
growth. Another reason why New World economies provide an attractive natural
laboratory for the study of democracy, institutions and growth, is that they
experienced a number of major alterations in political regime, like the
achievement of independence, with associated changes (or failures to change) in
economic institutions. This research will also examine in detail the impacts of
changes in institutions due to such events, with a rigorous application of the
comparative approach across economies, to improve the understanding of the role
of institutions in economic growth.