* 9515283
* The Business Value of Information Technology:  Models,      Empirical Analysis, and Application
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Kenneth Kraemer, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 03/31/1999
* USD 150,000.00

Organizations continue to increase their investments in information technology
(IT) as a means of achieving higher levels of performance because their
executives see these investments as a way to counter the impact of global
competition. IT is seen as a means to create business value through: automation
- substituting capital for high cost labor thereby improving productivity and
reducing cost structures; informatization - reducing cycle times for new product
introduction; and transformation - improving business processes in general
through redesign using IT capabilities. The continually higher IT costs and the
lack of empirical evidence about payoffs have resulted in questions by
researchers and senior executives about the final payoffs from IT. Some recent
studies have demonstrated a positive return on IT investments, while others have
not, and so significant questions remain. There are a large number of
organizational variables that mediate the payoff from IT, which are omitted in
microeconomic analyses, and that are important to understand for better IT
management. Behavioral analyses indicate that organizational performance depends
on the choice of a firm's strategy as well as its execution, and that IT
contributes primarily to the latter though a set of organization-IT linkages.
This research tests an explanatory model of these linkages and assesses the
contribution of IT to business value. The research is funded under the Joint
NSF/Private Sector Initiative with the cooperating organization, Computer
Sciences Corporation Research and Advisory Services.