* 9515216
* Education, Technology, and the Wage Structure:  Human       Capital and the Economy during the Past Century
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Claudia Goldin, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 06/30/1999
* USD 388,150.00

9515216 Goldin This project examines the rise of secondary schools -- the most
important educational advance for much of the 20th century, and the economic
consequences of rapid educational change -- including productivity and wage-
structure shifts. It addresses why education increased and what role was played
by the public sector. Questions studied include: Did the wage structure always
widen with new technologies, and how did it respond to increased supplied of
educated labor? Did secondary schools diffuse evenly across the states or did
some embrace the movement decades earlier? Did the areas with more progressive
education reap returns from their public-sector investments because local spill-
over effects were greater in the past? What was the growth of the educational
stock and how did it impact economic growth over the past century? A theme
running through the project is the importance of egalitarianism in expanding
education and its reinforcing nature in society and the economy. Of special
interest is the new educational-flow data that will be created by this project.
The 1940 census was the first to inquire about the education of Americans, but
the responses of the older cohorts have been questioned for some time. This
project creates corrected estimates of the human capital stock by building them
up from the flow data and then using them to revise some well-know estimates of
the role of human capital in economic growth. Preliminary work suggests that
these new data series are often vastly different from those derived from the
1940 census and this indicates that education's role in economic growth may have
been larger than previously thought.