* 9515361
* Self-Assembly of Block Copolymers in Supercritical Fluids,  U.S.-Turkey Cooperative Research
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2002
* Benjamin Chu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 02/28/2002
* USD 19,197.00

Description: This award is to support collaborative research by Dr. Ben Chu,
Chemistry Department, State University of New York at Stony Brook and Dr. Burak
Erman, Polymer Research Center, Bogazici University in Istanbul, Turkey. In this
research the two scientists will use a combination of modern analytical methods
(e.g synchrotron ultrasmall angle x-ray scattering) and modern computer
simulation techniques (e.g. molecular dynamics) to provide deeper understanding
of the structure/property relationship for the self-assembly behavior of block
copolymers in supercritical fluids. It is proposed to use short-chain diblocks
of F3C(CF2)m-(CH2)nCH3 in supercritical Carbon dioxide and to investigate the
self-assembly behavior as a function of polymer concentration, total chain
length, chain length ratio, temperature and CO2 pressure by means of computer
simulations, experiment and modeling. Scope: This award is to partially fund
visits by the U.S. P.I. and a U.S. graduate student to Bogazici University, and
the visit of the Turkish scientist to SUNY,Stony Brook. Dr. Erman will be
seeking funds from the Turkish Government to cover part of the costs in that
country. The project brings two very experienced scientists in the field of
polymer chemistry to collaborate on understanding the process of polymerization.
The expected results could help improve the production of polymers without the
use of organic sulfurs which are an environmental hazard. The project also
allows for the training of a U.S. graduate student in an international setting
at one of Turkey's best technical universities. The project fits well with the
objectives of the Division of International Programs.