* 9515435
* Formative Period Settlement and Society in Oruro, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Marc Bermann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/1999
* USD 44,972.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Marc Bermann will conduct
archaeological excavations at the sites of Chuquina and San Andres which are
located in the Bolivian altiplano - a high plateau region in the Andes. He will
focus on the Formative Period which dates from about 2000 BC to 300 AD. It is
this period which laid the groundwork for the rise of complex Andean
civilizations and Dr. Bermann wishes to understand the earliest stages of this
process. Although prior work in the region has indicated a wealth of
archaeological materials, a detailed chronological sequence has not been
established. Through the excavation of two stratified sites Dr. Bermann will
collect a large series of ceramic and lithic remains. Changes in marker tool
types will be examined to determine change over time and on this basis it will
be possible to relate surface materials to this master sequence. Radiocarbon
analysis will allow assignment of absolute dates. Archaeologists know that the
first civilizations arose at roughly the same time in many parts of the world
and they wish to understand the driving forces behind this process. While the
Andean region is best known for the Inca culture which the first Spanish
explorers directly observed, the Incas were preceded by other earlier
civilizations. The first of these had its base in the Bolivian altiplano and Dr.
Bermann's work will shed light on its origins. With a solid chronology, it will
then be possible to examine individual sites, place them accurately in time and
then trace the process which led to increasing complexity in social
organization.