* 9515480
* Judging Capital Trials
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* William Bowers, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2000
* USD 67,498.00

BOWERS 9515480 This study draws upon the empirical research about judicial
behavior and criminal courts, and the distinctive legal, normative, and
situational context of capital cases, to examine how the decisions, rulings, and
interpretive practices of trial judges are affected by their backgrounds,
values, and role orientations, the courthouse and community settings of their
work, and their response to distinctive features of capital cases, such as their
perception of the likelihood of federal habeas reversal, state statutory
sentencing provisions, the implications of death as punishment, the effects of
heightened publicity, and the capital case experience and perspectives of other
judges. By examining how trial judges discharge their constitutional
responsibility in capital cases, this study will seek to contribute to the
development of an empirically grounded understanding of trial judging. It uses a
case-focused interviews with a sample of 60 trial judges who have presided over
a full capital trial within a year of the interview to (a) describe the actions
and interpretive practices of capital trial judges and the rationales they give
for their decisions, (b) assess legal and normative influences on uniformity of
practice among capital trial judges, and (c) assess individual and contextual
sources of variation in capital trial judging by judge, by court and by case
characteristics. %%%% This study draws upon the empirical research about
judicial behavior and criminal courts, and the distinctive legal, normative, and
situational context of capital cases, to examine how the decisions, rulings, and
interpretive practices of trial judges are affected by their backgrounds,
values, and role orientations, the courthouse and community settings of their
work, and their response to distinctive features of capital cases, such as their
perception of the likelihood of federal habeas reversal, state statutory
sentencing provisions, the implications of death as punishment, the effects of
heightened p ublicity, and the capital case experience and perspectives of other
judges. By examining how trial judges discharge their constitutional
responsibility in capital cases, this study will seek to contribute to the
development of an empirically grounded understanding of trial judging. It uses a
case-focused interviews with a sample of 60 trial judges who have presided over
a full capital trial within a year of the interview to (a) describe the actions
and interpretive practices of capital trial judges and the rationales they give
for their decisions, (b) assess legal and normative influences on uniformity of
practice among capital trial judges, and (c) assess individual and contextual
sources of variation in capital trial judging by judge, by court and by case
characteristics. ****