* 9515416
* Government Policies and International Asset Return Dynamics
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Geert Bekaert, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynn A. Pollnow
* 06/30/1999
* USD 194,020.00

The purpose of this research is to examine the effect of various government
policies on international asset returns, including exchange rates. The first
project analyizes whether problems similar to what has occurred recently with
the peso which arise from monetary policy changes can explain anomalous behavior
in the interest rate term structure. It is postulated that monetary policy
affects the stochastic process underlying interest rates and exchange rates in
such a way that it induces econometric inference problems. The second project
examines monetary policy in the U.S. and Germany proposing non-linear policy
rules for both countries. The dynamic effects of policy shocks on real and
nominal exchange rates and interest rate differentials and their predictability
are examined both in the context of a non-linear vector autoregressive setting
and in the context of an equilibrium model. The third proposed project focuses
on real exchange rates in the context of a dynamic economy with non-traded
goods, in particular houses. The main issue addressed is the relative
variability of real and nominal exchange rate changes versus inflation rates. A
final issue to be examined is the effect of government policies on the degree of
integration of emerging equity markets with global capital markets and on
economic growth. An empirical methodology is developed to test whether financial
market integration and stock market development contribute to economic growth.
This project also involves the development of new and better indicators of
financial market integration and stock market development for a set of
developing countries.