* 9515451
* Jury Decision Making in Capital Cases:  The Punishment      Phase
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Richard Wiener, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 05/31/2001
* USD 234,106.00

9515451 Wiener This project use social cognition theory to study the way in
which eligible jurors understand and apply the law in capital murder trials to
determine whether to sentence a defendant to life in prison or to death.
Previous research has found that potential jurors do not reliably comprehend
instructions which direct jurors to weigh aggravating and mitigating factors to
determine a sentence. The current project involves two separate studies of juror
and jury decision that will attempt to determine whether cognitive prototypes
that appear to be inconsistent with the law interfere with jurors' understanding
of sentencing instructions. The first study involves structured interviews with
100 capital jury-eligible citizens to determine their beliefs about accused and
convicted murderers, victims of murder, aggravating circumstances, mitigating
circumstances, and other elements of law. The second study is a mock jury study
with video presentation of a re-enacted murder trial and jury deliberations. It
will test the hypothesis that miscomprehension of sentencing instructions is
produced not only by unclear language but also by the existence of
l)incongruence between the jurors' schemata of murder (measured in study 1) and
the law outlined in the instructions and 2) the lack of procedural knowledge
concerning the cognitive steps that jurors must enact to follow the
instructions. The overall goal of the research is to understand the types of
cognitive errors that jurors commit and the way in which these errors may
influence deliberations and final sentences in first degree murder trials. %%%%
This project use social cognition theory to study the way in which eligible
jurors understand and apply the law in capital murder trials to determine
whether to sentence a defendant to life in prison or to death. Previous research
has found that potential jurors do not reliably comprehend instructions which
direct jurors to weigh aggravating and mitigating factors to determine a
sentence. The c urrent project involves two separate studies of juror and jury
decision that will attempt to determine whether cognitive prototypes that appear
to be inconsistent with the law interfere with jurors' understanding of
sentencing instructions. The first study involves structured interviews with 100
capital jury-eligible citizens to determine their beliefs about accused and
convicted murderers, victims of murder, aggravating circumstances, mitigating
circumstances, and other elements of law. The second study is a mock jury study
with video presentation of a re-enacted murder trial and jury deliberations. The
overall goal of the research is to understand the types of cognitive errors that
jurors commit and the way in which these errors may influence deliberations and
final sentences in first degree murder trials. ****