* 9515029
* Summer Institute on Game Theory and Economics for 1996-1998 at Stony Brook, New York
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Pradeep Dubey, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9515029 Tauman The series of annual Summer Institutes in Game Theory and
Economics is designed to stimulate and disseminate new advances in research on
game theory and its applications, and to make conceptual and methodological
developments in game theory available to an expanding group of scientists in
economics ald other disciplines. Each year the month-long program of research-
oriented conferences and workshops and an intensive course of instruction on a
topic of major significance, complemented by a further period of informal
research activities, will bring together a large international group of
researchers - a mix of established scholars, junior faculty, and graduate
students - whose interests represent a diverse array of theoretical and applied
aspects of game theory. The programs proposed for 1996-1998 are a continuation
of the series of Summer Institutes held at Stony Brook in 1990 - 1995, each of
which attract more than 200 participants. Formal activities include a five-day
conference with plenary and parallel sessions, and invited and contributed
papers; two weeks of workshops on selected themes; and one to two weeks of
intensive instruction on selected topics. he value of this format and approach
is evidenced by the success of the previous Institutes. In the summer of 1996
four activities are planned: a five day International Conference; a five day
workshop on Mechanism Design; a five day workshop on Social Learning; and a one
week intensive course in Repeated Games. ??