* 9515374
* Workshop on Sand Dune Accumulations and Ground-Water Basins in the Eastern Sahara, U.S.-Egypt Workshop
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Farouk El-Baz, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/1997
* USD 44,660.00

Description: This award is to provide partial support for a `Workshop on Sand
Dune Accumulations and Groundwater Basins in the Eastern Sahara.` It will be
organized by Dr. El-Baz from the U.S. in cooperation with Dr. Ibrahim Himida,
Deputy Director, Desert Research Center, Cairo, Egypt. Participants will include
17 senior scientists, 3 post-doctoral fellows, and one graduate student. Of the
total, seven will be from the U.S. and five from developing countries in the
region of the eastern Sahara. The eastern Sahara is the driest place on earth.
Its sandsheets and dune fields, which are sculptured by aeolian activity, are
largely enclosed in topographic depressions. Cycles of pluvial periods that date
back to 320,000 years ago appear to correspond to interglacial stages, which
indicate major global climate changes and the resulting alternation of wet and
dry episodes. It is also thought that the rain and surface water seeped through
the underlying rocks to be stored in porous layers and fracture zones. Such
water would have first accumulated in inland depression forming lakes. The
sediment that were carried by rivers and streams would have served as the source
of the sand that accumulated into dunes. The question to be answered by the
workshop is: can sand dunes fields be considered indicators of the presence of
groundwater below the surface? The workshop will include collection of pertinent
data as well as Landsat images, the preparation of country reports on research
topics for Egypt and for the other countries included in that region. Scope:
This award supports seven U.S. scientists, including two junior scientists and a
graduate student, to work with scientists from Egypt, and other countries in the
eastern Sahara, and with a number of European scientists in a workshop and a
field study on an important study to determine the possible relationship between
the observed sand dunes and the presence of ground water. This project is likely
to result in identification of possible joint research by U.S. scientists and
scientists of the region, in addition to obtaining answers to the interesting
scientific questions related to the formation of sand dunes. This project is
being supported by INT and EAR.