* 9515332
* Collaborative Research on Candidate Emergence in U.S. House Elections
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Louis Maisel, Colby College
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 07/31/2000
* USD 94,675.00

Maisel 9515332 The nature and quality of the choice citizens are offered in
congressional elections is central to the health of American democracy. In the
candidate-centered arena of electoral politics, a great deal depends upon the
individual candidates who choose (or choose not ) to run. Much of the problem
reduces to a very significant incumbency advantage in U.S. House elections: when
the incumbent decides to run for reelection, he or she is perceived as very
difficult to beat. As a result, potentially strong candidates who might offer
voters a significant alternative do not emerge to challenge the sitting member.
The average challenger, therefore, is underqualified, underfunded, and
relatively invisible to voters in the district. The result is that House
elections often are not competitive, and the choice voters make is distorted to
the significant advantage of incumbents. The dramatic partisan change that
resulted from the 1994 election probably did not disturb the long-term
incumbency effect, although it may dramatically alter the contours of
congressional-election choice in other ways. In this investigation the
researchers will examine candidate emergence by surveying a national sample of
potential House candidates. The researchers argue that there are two "decisions"
relevant to entering a House race in any particular year: a general commitment
to run for a House seat and a specific decision to run in a given race.; The
investigators contend that the general commitment to run is a necessary
condition for virtually all House candidates and results from a strong interest
in public policy outcomes, a sense that the House is an attractive and desirable
institution in which to serve, and an ambition to hold public office. By and
large, these variables are not "strategic" in nature. In contrast, the
investigators argue that the decision to run in a specific year is heavily
influenced by the potential candidate's perceived chances of winning his or her
party's nomination and , if nominated, the general election. The researchers
suggest an expected utility model that combines these strategic and longer-term
consideration, along with the costs potential candidates must bear to make a
run. The investigators carry out a two-stage study building on an earlier pilot
study. The first stage involves a survey of informants in a national sample of
U.S. districts. Informants who are politically aware of local affairs. They will
provide information about the district, the incumbent, and about potential
candidates who might run for the U.S. House of Representatives. The second stage
involves surveying state legislators who districts overlap with the sample U.S
House districts. This is the first investigation to identify and study a sample
of strong potential candidates for the U.S. House and will enhance substantially
our understanding of the factors that influence candidate emergence in
congressional elections. ***