* 9515449
* U.S.-New Zealand Cooperative Research: Biochemical          Mechanisms Controlling Leaf Expansion and Tree Response     to Elevated Carbon Dioxide
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Kevin Griffin, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 09/30/1999
* USD 33,000.00

9515449 Tissue This award provides partial travel support, over a duration of
two years, to assist two American investigators, Dr. David Tissue of the
Department of Biological Sciences at Texas Tech University and Dr. Devin Griffin
from the Desert Research Institute in Reno, Nevada, to conduct collaborative
research in New Zealand with Dr. David Whitehead at the Canterbury Agricultural
and Science Center of the New Zealand Government's Landcare Research Institute.
The primary emphasis of the collaboration will be on determining potential
mechanisms that regulate the effect of elevated carbon dioxide and nitrogen on
leaf carbon balance, including those involving photosynthetic enzymes and
mitochondrial biogenesis. The cooperative research will study these mechanisms
at a field site in California on Ponderosa pine, the most widely distributed
conifer in North America, and in New Zealand on Monterey pine, the most
extensively planted and economically important tree in that country. The
American investigators bring to the study expertise in physiology and
biochemistry, while access to the trees and an elevated carbon dioxide open-top
chamber facility available in Christchurch, contributes to this collaborative
study. Funding in New Zealand is provided through the Ministry of Research,
Science and Technology.