* 9515312
* Provincial Urban Households in the Aztec Empire:            Archaeology at Yautepec, Mexico
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Michael Smith, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2001
* USD 174,618.00

In 1993, with National Science Foundation support, Dr. Michael Smith and
colleagues excavated a series of domestic residences at the Aztec site of
Yautepec which is located in Mexico. A wealth of artifacts, including 1.2
million ceramic fragments were recovered and these provide the first look at
Aztec urban life. This current award provides three years of support to permit
Dr. Smith and team to analyze the recovered materials and to reconstruct how
large prehistoric Aztec cities functioned. The specific methods to be employed
include: quantitative analysis of excavated deposits to determine formation
processes; ceramic seriation; radiocarbon dating; quantitative typological and
attribute analyses of ceramics; ceramic petrography; neutron activation analyses
of ceramics and obsidian to determine chemical composition; analysis of human
skeletal remains; floral and faunal studies; statistical and spatial analyses of
domestic artifact assemblages. Cities are important components of nearly all
state societies and archaeologists have long acknowledged the crucial role
played by urban centers in the origin and operation of states. Many of the
traits that distinguish states from simpler societies are also characteristics
of cities and important political, economic and religious institutions are
usually concentrated in urban centers. Therefore in order to document and
explain the development and organization of ancient states, archaeologists need
to map and excavate cities. The Aztecs constructed one of the largest and most
impressive prehistoric New World states. It was heavily urbanized yet very
little, aside from Dr. Smith's recent work, is known about the nature of Aztec
urbanism. Dr. Smith's project will help to solve this problem. His data have the
potential to help resolve a number of issues involving urban structure, economic
organization and the political processes which characterized Mexico at this
time. This research is important for several reasons. It will provide data of
interest to a large number of archaeologists and shed light on how complex
societies - including our own - arise and are maintained. Because a number of
students are included in the research, Dr. Smith's project has a strong
educational component.