* 9515183
* Opportunity, Diversity, and the New American City:  A       Program of Research in Interethnic Attitudes, Residential   Segregation, and Labor Market Discrimination
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Lawrence Bobo, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 04/30/1999
* USD 99,437.00

This is a study of inter-ethnic attitudes, residential segregation, and labor
market discrimination. It will analyze data collected by the 1993-1994 Los
Angeles Survey of Urban Inequality, which was expressly designed to link inter-
ethnic attitudes and beliefs to labor market outcomes and to processes of racial
residential segregation. This survey involved large samples of the non-Hispanic
white (N = 863), African American (N = 1119), Latino (N = 988) and Asian
American (N = 1055) adult populations of Los Angeles County. The substantive
core of the survey was three-fold: (1) development of a detailed portrait of the
human capital attributes and labor market behaviors of individuals; (2) mapping
the residential integration relevant knowledge, intentions, and preferences of
respondents; and (3) understanding general patterns of inter-ethnic attitudes
and beliefs. The research to be done draws systematically on measures of the
degree of ethnic identity, inter-ethnic stereotypes, perceptions of group zero-
sum competition, personal and collective perceptions of racial and gender-based
discrimination, folk explanations of inter-ethnic economic inequality, and views
on affirmative action. These measures will be used to map the meanings that
characterize self-understanding and inter-ethnic relations for the black, white,
Asian, and Latino residents of one of the most ethnically diverse cities of the
world. Then the research will explore how these views affect and are affected by
labor market factors and racial residential segregation. %%% The scientific aim
of this research is to understand the social psychological processes that may
reinforce or reduce urban ethnic inequality and the associated inter-ethnic
tensions. It will examine the complex series of interconnections among labor
market processes, racial residential segregation, and inter-ethnic attitudes
that undergird modern ethnic inequality. Success in this research will help
policy makers understand the causes of persistent urban po verty, especially as
experienced by segments of the African American, Latino, and Asian American
communities.