* 9515439
* Democratization, Institutional Choice and Political         Consequences:  A Comparative Analysis of Constitutional     Designs and Electoral Systems in Africa
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Shaheen Mozaffar, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9515439 Mozaffar Constitutional designs and electoral systems define the basic
institutional framework of political life in a democracy. Their choice is one of
the most important decisions made in new democracies. Their consequences for
government stability and for peaceful management of political conflicts are
important determinants of the survival of new democracies. This investigation
undertakes a comparative study of constitutional designs and electoral systems
in the emerging democracies of Sub-Saharan Africa. The study addresses three
related questions: 1) what are the basic institutional characteristics of
constitutional designs and electoral systems in Africa's emerging democracies?
2) What factors account for the choice of these constitutional designs and
electoral systems? 3) What are their consequences for conflict management, for
government stability, and for democratic consolidation in Africa? The
investigation collects and analyzes data on the key institutional features of
constitutional designs and electoral systems in all 48 African countries which
have made, or are scheduled to make, the transition to democracy; and the
results of presidential and legislative elections. The first type of data are
collected for three time period: 1945-circa 1965 (decolonization and early
postindependence, and largely democratic, period); circa 1990 (largely
authoritarian period, but also including varied democratic experiments); and the
post-1990 redemocratization period. The second type of data will be collected
for the post-1990 period. This award for Research at an Undergraduate
Institution promises to considerably enhance our understanding of the topic. The
data set to be generated will be of assistance to other scholars interested in
the requisites of democratic systems. ***