* 9515511
* U.S.-Slovak Physics Research on Light-Front Quantization and the Effective Hamiltonian Method
* O/D,OISE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* James Vary, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 23,080.00

INT 9515511 Vary This U.S.-Slovak theoretical physics project between Dr. James
Vary of the Iowa State University and Dr. Lubomir Martinovic of the Slovak
Academy of Sciences' Institute of Physics will examine light-front quantization.
The goal of the team is to use a systematic and practical approach to the
evaluation of the Hamiltonian framework in quantum field theory for analytical
and numerical applications. The researchers intend to focus their efforts on
quantum chromodynamics (QCD), a strongly interacting field theory that can be
compared with experiments in the non-perturbative regime. Test applications will
be developed to demonstrate concepts and illustrate utility. Initial efforts
will feature a 1+1 dimension problem and a second one, in 3+1 dimension, that
will incorporate findings from the first. This work should yield models for
investigating specific formal and numerical issues in field theories. Overall,
results are expected to facilitate the construction of equations for effective
Hamiltonian methods useful in study of high energy physics phenomenology. This
project combining nuclear theory and mathematical physics fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied
States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??