* 9515322
* Reconstruction of Global Ice Age Ice Sheets from Global     Sea-Level and Earth-Deformation Data
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* James Clark, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 33,514.00

Clark 9515322 The two main goals of the proposed work are: 1) to reconstruct the
change in thickness of all of the large ice sheets that once covered much of the
Earth's surface during the last ice age, and 2) to explain sea-level changes and
earth deformation that have occurred during late-glacial and postglacial time as
a result of glacio-isostatic processes. The reconstruction of ice-age ice sheets
has usually been attempted by glaciologists and Quaternary geologists who model
the flow of ice sheets and assume the climate and other boundary conditions are
known. Because the great weight of the ice sheets caused the earth to deform an
alternative approach is to use earth deformation data (e.g. sea-level data,
tide-gauge data, geodetic/GPS data or proglacial and postglacial lake shoreline
tilt data) and a numerical model of viscous flow within the Earth's mantle to
infer the weight of the ice sheets as they advanced and then retreated. The
success of initial attempts to perform this "inversion" for the North American
Laurentide ice sheet have demonstrated the feasibility of performing the global
calculation. To insure that the predicted ice sheets are plausible the numerical
inversion procedure utilizes quadratic programming methods to provide physical
constraints upon the predicted ice sheets. The predicted ice sheets can be
constrained to be always non-negative, less than a prescribed maximum thickness,
with thickness profile thinning in the direction of glacier flow, and having a
maximum rate of thinning or thickening. Errors can be determined for the
resulting ice-sheet prediction. A recently implemented method uses "a priori"
estimates of the most likely ice-sheet thickness history to "guide" the
inversion process. Results are required to fit the deformatioin data using least
squares criteria while the predicted ice-sheet thicknesses are still as close as
possible to the a priori model. Prescribed errors of the a priori model control
how strongly the predicted ice sheet is co nstrained by the a priori model,
although the errors may be exceeded if the deformation data warrant it. This
approach allows considerable spatial resolution in the inversion for ice-sheet
history because the inverse problem is always overdetermined regardless of the
number of unknown ice-sheet thicknesses. The number of equations always exceeds
the number of unknowns. An additional benefit is that the procedure provides
remarkable numerical stability in the determination of the matrix
eigenstructure. As the ice sheets retreated their meltwater filled the ocean
basins resulting in a rise in sea-level which has been observed in the
geological record and recently estimated through time. This "eustatic" sealevel
rise provides an important constraint upon the inversion process by indicating
the volume change of the Earth's ice sheets during deglaciation while
deformation data provide an estimate of the spatial distribution of this volume.
Meltwater loading of the ocean floor is an important factor contribution to
variation in relative sea level curves at sites distant from ice sheets. An
important goal of the proposed work is to include this factor in the inverse
procedure, together with the requirement that sea level remain on a
gravitational equipotential surface. Understanding of the dynamic nature of ice
sheets and their impact upon the earth will be valuable in global climate
studies (speed of ice-sheet advance and retreat), climate modeling (ice-sheet
thickness estimates affecting global circulation patterns), and geodynamic
studies (component of earth movement associated with glacio- and hydro-isostasy)
as well as in glacial geology.