* 9515450
* The Integrative Aspects of Fluid and Electrolyte Balance in Birds
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Eldon Braun, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Judith A. Verbeke
* 12/31/1999
* USD 218,000.00

9515450 Dantzler In mammals the kidney is the sole organ responsible for
regulating the water and salt content of the body and mammals have a urinary
bladder in which to store the output of the kidneys (urine) until the bladder
can be emptied at a convenient and safe time. In birds on the other hand, the
kidneys function together with the lower gastrointestinal (GI) tract to regulate
the salt and water content of the body. This is because birds do not have a
urinary bladder in which to store urine. Instead, the urine enters the terminal
portion of the GI tract, the cloaca. The urine does not remain here to be
excreted, but is moved into the GI tract ( the colon) by muscular contractions
of the cloaca and colon. In the colon, the composition of the urine can be
modified by the cells that make up the lining of the colon. Thus, the kidney
must work together with the lower GI tract to maintain the fluid and salt
balance. How this integration of function is controlled is one of the major
emphasis of the proposed research. A better understanding of how birds regulate
water and salt balance is of major importance to growers of birds for commercial
purposes, especially the poultry industry where quite frequently disturbances of
water and salt balance in flocks can have significant economic impact. Another
emphasis of the proposed work deals with how birds excrete the nitrogen that is
formed as a by product of metabolism. Mammals excrete nitrogen as urea which is
quite soluble in water and seldom causes problems unless there has been major
kidney damage. Birds on the other hand excrete their excess nitrogen as uric
acid, a compound that is virtually insoluble in water and tends to precipitate
from solution and form large plate-like crystals. However, when bird urine is
examined no crystals of uric acid are found despite of very high concentrations
of uric acid. Instead of crystals the urine contains small spheres that are
sufficiently small to pass along the kidney tubules without pl ugging the
tubules. We have already determined that these small spheres are up of uric acid
and protein. Very little is known by what mechanism and where in the kidney
these spheres of uric acid form. Birds do not often form kidney stones, and it
is not understood why stones are not more prevalent with the large amount of
uric acid in the urine. However, out breaks of kidney stones do occur in
commercial flocks with disastrous effects. Understanding the basic process of
how bird kidneys handle uric acid will help people to deal more efficiently with
out breaks of kidney stones in commercial flocks and in the trade that deals
with exotic birds. In summary, the results of the studies should lead to a
better understanding of kidney function in birds and how the kidneys function
together with the lower GI tract to maintain whole animal water and salt
balance.