* 9515367
* Demographic and Political Change in the Classic-Postclassic Transition in Pacific Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Frederick Bove, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1997
* USD 63,843.00

With National Science Foundation support Dr. Bove and his colleagues will
analyze archaeological materials which have been obtained through carefully
controlled collection over a number of years in the western coastal region of
Guatemala. The area contains numerous sites and materials which date from the
Classic period of Mesoamerican prehistory as well as from the succeeding
Postclassic period. Dr. Bove will focus on two subregions which are located on
the western coast and which span this transitional period. Through analysis of
stone tools, ceramics, architecture and the size and distribution of sites he
hopes to answer a number of questions. First, he will employ the technique of
obsidian hydration to assign absolute dates to archaeological occurrences and
thus develop a chronology for both regions. Through analysis of ceramic remains
he will determine, in each area, whether the same peoples were present through
time or if population replacement occurred. Study of site numbers and extent
will permit him to determine changes in population size over time. It will also
be possible to examine many facets of social organization. One can determine the
extent of social differentiation within a single area and on an inter-area basis
how power relationships may have altered over time. Many archaeologists have
focused on the Classic-Postclassic transition in Mesoamerica because, according
to traditional interpretations, it marks a major social collapse. It was during
the Classic period that the largest and most impressive Mayan temples were
constructed and Middle American culture reached a peak. At the end of this
period many sites appear to be abandoned, monumental construction ceases and
people appear to live in smaller less hierarchically organized groups.
Archaeologists have postulated a number of reasons why such changes may have
occurred and these range from increased warfare to ecological collapse induced
by overexploitation of the environment. The western Guatemala area is
interesting because it appears not to conform to this senario. Preliminary
evidence indicates a high degree of continuity and numerous Postclassic sites
are present. However it has not yet been possible to reconstruct changing
population densities or to determine if social organization was altered. The
goal of Dr. Bove's work is to address these immediate questions. The underlying
issue which Dr. Bove wishes to study is how and why societies change. He
believes that recurring cycles may be involved and a region such as western
Guatemala provides an excellent laboratory to address questions of this type.Its
rich archaeological remains cover over a thousand year span and it is,
therefore, possible to obtain a rich and long term data base.