* 9520854
* Affect and Persuasion II
* SBE,BCS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Richard Petty, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 07/31/1999
* USD 158,612.00

This program of research includes nine experiments in three interrelated project
areas that build on prior findings about the role of emotions in human judgment
and persuasion. The first project area examines the manner by which affect
influences attitudes when people are highly motivated and able to think about a
message. In particular, research will examine how temporary mood states
influence people's judgments of the risks and benefits of various courses of
action, and what the implications of this are for accepting or rejecting the
conclusions of a persuasive advocacy. The second project area examines emotional
(affective) versus rational (cognitive) persuasive messages and explores a
controversy in the literature as to when each type of message is more likely to
be effective. That is, if one's initial attitude is based mostly on emotional
factors, is it better to challenge this attitude with an emotional or a rational
appeal? The third project area examines the phenomenon of bias correction.
People are sometimes aware of the fact that their moods and emotions can bias
their judgments. To what extent do people attempt to correct for these presumed
biases when they are made salient and what is the mechanism by which these
corrections are made? Situations in which people "overcorrect" their judgments
will also be explored. The latter phenomenon is interesting in that it suggests
that people can sometimes become more biased the more they attempt to be
unbiased (i.e., accurate) in their judgments. Although many of the most
important health issues of our time involve such things as convincing fearful
people to change their behaviors because of AIDS, or influencing depressed
teenagers to seek help, relatively little is known about the role that emotions
play in human judgment processes and in persuasion. The major goal of the
proposed research is to continue a line of investigation on the role of emotion
in human judgment. In general, this research examines how emotion influences peo
ple's judgments in different situations such as when the issue is highly
important or not, or when people are able to think carefully or not. For
example, when an issue is not very important, people are expected to agree more
with virtually any message when they are in a good rather than a bad mood
regardless of the quality of the arguments given. As the importance of the issue
increases, however, emotions are expected to influence judgments by different
mechanisms such as by biasing the processing of the substantive arguments in the
message. In such high processing situations, positive emotions can be associated
with less rather than more influence such as when a person in a happy state
rejects a message about smoking and cancer because the likelihood of getting
cancer seems reduced when people are happy. This research has implications for
understanding how emotions influence both mundane decision making such as
product choices, and more important decisions such as changing one's job or
seeking medical attention.