* 9520846
* Dissertation Research:  Energetic Consequences of Hatching  Asynchrony and Clutch Size
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Wesley Weathers, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9520846 Many bird species that feed their young in the nest lay eggs that hatch
asynchronously, with the first laid eggs hatching from two days to two weeks
before the last laid eggs. This study tests two long-standing hypotheses that
seek to explain this phenomenon. The first suggests that asynchrony increases
males' contribution to reproduction and thus reproductive success of a pair, by
prolonging the time that males feed females and young. The second suggests that
asynchrony reduces peak energy demands, by spreading the cost of raising
offspring over a longer time. Although these hypotheses differ in their details,
both assume that hatching asynchrony evolved in response to food limitation
during the breeding season and that it functions to reduce parental effort.
Falsifying these hypotheses would mean that breeding is not invariably
constrained by food availability, which would alter our understanding of the
factors that limit avian reproductive success. This research will test these
hypotheses by measuring the metabolic rate of free-living green-rumped
parrotlets that are rearing either synchronous and asynchronous broods
containing either 4 or 8 chicks. Green-rumped parrotlets exhibit the most
extreme degree of hatching asynchrony found in birds, yet are capable of rearing
synchronous and asynchronous broods with equal success, making them ideal
subjects for this project. Field metabolic rate of parents feeding young will be
determined using the doubly labeled water technique, a method that employs
isotopically labeled water to determine directly metabolism of free-living
animals. The results will increase our understanding of the way that costs of
reproduction affect breeding systems, and the extent to which energy demands
have played a role in the evolution of avian life histories. It will also expand
our knowledge of tropical parrots, on e of the most threatened groups of birds,
and provide baseline data that may aid future conservation efforts.