* 9520804
* Genetic Algorithm Devleopment for Multi-Objective           Optimization of Seismic Mixed-Constructued Structures With/ Without Control of Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Vittal Rao, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1998
* USD 149,840.00

9520804 Cheng This project deals with a fundamental problem which often arises
in intelligent engineering aimed at optimum design of buildings and civil
infrastructure systems where multiple variables and loading conditions are
involved. Optimum design means, among other things, to maximize service life,
safety and functionality while minimizing material use, labor, maintenance,etc.
A critical step and requirement in the process of multi-objective optimal design
is a computational algorithm which could give consistent, stable solutions to
the complex optimization formulation. In this project, an innovative
optimization technique, namely, a genetic algorithm will be developed for civil
structural applications under seismic condition. This algorithm is based on the
Darwinian survival-of-the-fittest strategy by eliminating unfit characteristics
and using random exchange through reproduction, recombination (cross over), and
mutation. Emphasis is placed on formulation of n-parent uniform cross- over
operator and parallelization to achieve an emerging computing technique for both
global and robust optimum solutions. Other research efforts also undertaken as a
part of this research include structural modeling of building systems with mixed
construction materials, formulation of multi- objective functions and
constraints for building structures, development od optimum based design
criteria for static and earthquake load with/without control systems, and
assessment and improvement of current optimum design algorithms. ***