* 9520226
* Performance and Reliability/Availability Models for the     Analysis of Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Noe Lopez-Benitez, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 06/30/1999
* USD 137,732.00

The purpose of this project is to investigate high level models for the
performance and performability analysis of distributed computing systems hosting
replicated programs and data files. The high level models studied rely on
Stochastic Petri Nets (SPN) used hierarchically to model the behavior of the
system in the presence of several types of hardware faults as well as software
failures. Systems targeted include real-time systems where critical jobs are
deadline constrained. These jobs are partitioned into tasks with precedence
relations depicted via a task graph. Although task graphs can be evaluated
directly, the evaluation assumes the existence of an unlimited number of
processing units. Using Stochastic Petri Nets (SPN) the evaluation of task
graphs can include other constraints such as a limited number of processors and
existing allocation schemes static or dynamic. At the SPN level, state reduction
can be achieved by generating only those states that satisfy functional as well
as performance requirements specified in the form of symbolic boolean
expressions. A synergistic approach will be investigated to predict the effect
of hardware failures on the performance of a system running a single or multiple
tasks, that may require access to distributed data files. The combination of SPN
models and previously proposed reliability models such as those used to evaluate
multiterminal reliability, has the objective of reducing the state space of the
underlying Markov model (failure/repair models) even though hardware failures
include nodes and links. Once the failure/repair model is generated, performance
reward levels can be associated with each structural state of the system. This
work will contribute to the systematic design of distributed systems. Design
requirements such as delay, network throughput, load, task completion time,
cost, etc., will be analyzed in terms of their susceptibility to failures in the
hardware support for a particular applica tion. It will also contribute to the
evaluation of existing systems in order to detect bottlenecks or weak points and
suggest appropriate remedial course of action (to either update or replace
existing equipment). The systematic prediction of performance and reliability in
terms of selective critical tasks, will aid in the process of updating currently
saturated computer systems. In particular, the performance models of partitioned
jobs will be useful in predicting the average completion times under
userselected allocation schemes via a single SPN-based model of a given task
graph. Thus, giving users a rapid assessment on the suitability of particular
schemes in a real-time distributed computing environment. ***