* 9520272
* Dissertation Research: An In Situ Hybridization Study of a  Rhizobacterial Community
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Mark Hines, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 5,354.00

9520272 Hines Molecular techniques that use 16S rRNA as phylogenetic descriptors
offer potential for delineating the microscale structure and activity of
rhizosphere bacterial communities in a manner that was not previously possible.
Studies are currently underway which are investigating the population
composition of sulfate-reducing bacteria in a salt marsh rhizosphere by: 1)
probing bulk RNA; 2) amplifying and sequencing of rRNA genes for determining
diversity, and 3) enumerating, isolating and characterizing sulfate-reducing
bacteria. The research in this dissertation proposal will complement this work
by investigating bacteria on plant roots at the cellular level using in situ
hybridization technology which has only recently become advanced enough to
visualize bacteria on roots using fluorescent probes and confocal laser
microscopy. This goal will be achieved by conducting preliminary investigations,
and then visiting the laboratory of Dr. R. Amman in Germany who has agreed to
instruct the student investigator in the state of the art of using laser
microscopy and in site hybridization techniques with fluorescence detection. The
work will be completed using the laser microscope at the Gulf Breeze EPA
Laboratory in collaboration with Dr. R. Devereux. Development and application of
in situ techniques will enable the identification and visualization of
individual bacteria in their native microhabitat, will elucidate the micro-
ecology of these bacteria in relation to their spatial arrangements with other
bacteria, and will demonstrate the interaction of bacteria with various parts of
the root. The results will not only portray complex biogeochemical interactions
between microbiota and plants, but will provide a manner in which to monitor
exogenous bacteria artificially introduced into the rhizosphere.