* 9520484
* U.S.-China Cooperative Research: Optical Astrometric        Observations as Measures of Global Change
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Clark Wilson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Alice C. Hogan
* 07/31/1998
* USD 17,688.00

*** 9520484 Wilson This award supports a three year collaboration between Clark
Wilson, Geological Sciences Department, University of Texas at Austin, and Li
Zhengxin, Shanghai Observatory of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, on optical
astromeric observations as measures of global change. The project involves use
of optical astromeric observations of latitude to investigate whether such
measurements provide useful measures of climate variability. Shanghai
Observatory has been designated as the international repository and analysis
center for these optical records, and analysis of the data by Professor Li has
revealed intriguing fluctuations which appear correlated with recognized climate
variations such as the El Nino/Southern Oscillation. The collaboration will
combine the unique Shanghai optical astrometry data collection and the
experience of Professor Li with the geophysical, computational and climate data
resources at the University of Texas at Austin. The objectives of the proposed
research are to determine whether there is a physical basis to account for
apparent correlations between climate change and optical astromeric data, and to
interpret historical optical and climaterelated time series in light of such
physical relationships. Although space geodesy has replaced less accurate
optical astrometry in monitoring the rotation of the earth, the optical data of
the past remain of considerable value. These data are especially useful when
combined to form a polar motion time series for the pre-space geodetic period,
because it has been shown that polar motion measures global properties of the
distribution of air and water over the past century when few climate-related
observations are available. ***