* 9520826
* Dissertation Research: Paleovegetational Response to Volcanism: Eocene/Oligocene Lower Cedarville Flora, California
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Richard Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9520826 Fisher At numerous sites in northern California, Oregon, and Washington,
volcanic deposits preserve ancient vegetational types and make possible the
critical analysis of trends in plant species replacement and habitat change
through time. Graduate student Jeffrey Myers under the guidance of Professor
Richard Fisher at the University of California-Santa Barbara is studying
deposits of Eocene and Oligocene age, ca. 30 million years old, in the West, to
assess vegetational changes across a broad region of the landscape over a
relatively short span of geological time. The goal is to distinguish between a
single, major secular shift in vegetation (moist humid tropical to seasonal
temperate forest) or a more complex mosaic pattern of local habitat types.
Numerous deposits of the same age will be visited and sampled, and their major
plant components identified; a critical aspect of the research is to incorporate
modern analyses on post-depositional processes (so-called taphonomic processes
like decay and local transport by water or by animals) so ensure that fossil
deposits accurately reflect local vegetation. Interest in global climate change
and its environmental effects reinforces the need for fine-scale analysis of the
fossil record. The Eocene-Oligocene focus of the proposed research emphasizes a
time of global cooling, with resulting shifts in temperate-zone vegetation. How
and over what timescales the vegetation changes in species composition are major
unresolved questions in paleontology, to which this research brings a rigorous
taphonomic approach.