* 9520361
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Support: Peace Dividend in   Israel and Egypt
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Michael Ward, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frank P. Scioli  Jr.
* 08/31/1997
* USD 4,950.00

9520361 Ward The peace dividend is an attractive, yet, elusive subject. The
search for security benefits led Israel and Egypt to sign the Camp David peace
agreements in 1979. In addition to immediate benefits accruing from the
recognition of borders and its right to exist, Israel should receive longer-term
benefits from decreases in defense spending; as money better invested in other
parts of the economy pays off. As well, in addition to benefits accruing from
Israel's final withdrawal from the Sinai Peninsula, Egypt may receive similar
longer-term benefits, now that it has agreed on peace with a former enemy. In
the years since the Camp David agreements, peace, however lukewarm, has been
achieved, major security concerns have been addressed, and Egypt has been
accepted back into the Arab fold, perhaps leading to additional bilateral peace
treaties with Israel. When do the longer-term welfare benefits, the peace
dividends, become obvious. Whether one looks at the global, developing
countries, or regional samples, Israel and Egypt have witnessed better than
average growth rates and bigger cuts in defense spending. Should these trends
have arrived so quickly, or are they part of a larger time frame which includes
earlier years? There are clearly connections between peace and economic
prosperity in Israel and Egypt. This research will uncover and describe these
links, show how they have been achieved, project what the future holds, and
suggest how lessons learned in Israel and Egypt might be applied in warring
dyads elsewhere. ***