* 9520579
* Variability of the Climate System
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* James Kinter, Institute of Global Environment and Society
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/1999
* USD 365,061.00

Abstract ATM-9520579 Schneider, Edwin K. Kinter, James L. Institute of Global
Environment and Society Inc. Title: Variability of the Climate System The
project consists of a series of numerical experiments designed to increase
understanding of the natural variability of the climate system. It is necessary
to have accurate estimates of the natural variability to identify climate
signals produced by external forcing and to evaluate climate predictions. This
research is relevant to the goals of TOGA and CLIVAR/GOALS and is expected to
contribute to IPCC/USGCRP. The proposed research will define and carry out an
experimental procedure to isolate and estimate the contributions to natural
climatic variability from atmospheric, land and oceanic processes. Specific
processes that will be examined are atmospheric chaos, stochastic forcing of the
land surface, stochastic forcing of the ocean mixed layer, coupled
ocean/atmosphere chaos, the annual cycle of solar forcing. Results will be
obtained by analysis of several multi-decade to century long numerical
integrations made with variants of a numerical climate model. The basic version
of the model will include global atmosphere and ocean general circulation
submodels, land surface processes including effects due to vegetation, and sea
ice. First, the errors of the fully interactive coupled model in simulating the
observed annual mean and annual cycle of sea surface temperature will be
ascertained. Modifications to the model will be made to reduce the magnitude of
these errors. A control integration without flux corrections will be carried out
to determine the equilibrium climate. In subsequent integrations the
interactions between the component submodels will be restricted in order to
either eliminate or reduce atmosphere/land and atmosphere/ocean coupling. The
changes, which will be introduced in various combinations, include replacement
of the dynamical ocean with a specified climatological sea surface temp erature
or by mixed layer ocean, specification of climatological soil mixture and snow
cover, and elimination of the annual cycle. The climatology for the restricted
model simulations will be that of the control integration. Intercomparsion of
the results and Nature will provide estimates of the contributions of the
atmosphere/land and atmosphere/ocean interactions to the modeled and actual
climate variability. Related experiments will also be done to study the
influence of flux correction and oceanic initial conditions in climate
simulation and prediction. Changes in natural variability introduced by the flux
correction procedure will be evaluated using an equilibrium simulation in which
the full climate model before improvement is flux corrected to produce the same
climatology as the control integration. An experiment will be done to estimate
the departure of the current climate from equilibrium due to the changing
greenhouse forcing.