* 9520707
* Dissertation Research:  Gene Expression in Response to      Mechanical Stress or Wind in Poplar
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Frank Telewski, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 09/30/1998
* USD 9,500.00

9520707 Woody plants vary in their ability to tolerate wind stress. Many trees
respond to wind stress by adding woody secondary growth which increases wind
tolerances, but the genetic basis of traits that improve wind tolerance is
nearly unknown. This research will compare the genes expressed in poplar trees
subjected to wind stress to those in trees which have not been stressed. Poplars
are selected as a model woody plant system because of their economic value in
biomass production, ease of propagation, small genome size, ease of isolation of
DNA and RNA, and transformability. The comparison of genes will be accomplished
using differential display of polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products. This
technique enables a side by side comparison of those messenger RNAs (mRNAs)
which become active in wind-stressed versus the unstressed plants. These mRNAs
will represent genes which are activated by wind stress and may contribute to
the structural tolerance of the plants. The differentially expressed genes will
be cloned, sequenced and used to probe (screen) poplar varieties which vary in
their response to wind stress. That procedure will identify the role of the
genes in the signal cascade pathway for wind stress response in plants having
secondary growth. Plants that are successful in wind exposed sites should
possess and express these genes. Identification and cloning of the genes will
allow early identification of wind-tolerant individuals and strains, and may
allow transformation of poplars and other woody plant subjects to improve
tolerance to wind and decrease the risk of wind damage.