* 9520153
* GOALI:  Stochastic Optimization for the Scheduling of       Tests in the Development of New Chemical Products
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 11/30/1998
* USD 219,557.00

Abstract - Grossman - 9520153 To introduce a new chemical in the market there
are tests that have to be performed by and R&amp;D organization. These are
mostly regulatory requirements such as environmental and safety tests. If a
potential product fails any test it cannot reach the market. Scheduling the
tests for the development of new products has important economic implications.
The fundamental trade-off is between greater sales and income that result from
longer schedules. One of the complications in the scheduling is its
combinatorial nature, especially when the number of potential products is large.
In addition, there are uncertainties in the costs of the tasks, probabilities of
success of the tasks, in the income of the products. Furthermore, there are
precedence constraints for the tests, constrains on resources for performing the
tests, and on the capacity and investment capital for the manufacturing
facilities. This project is concerned with the study of stochastic optimization
models and methods fmr the optimal scheduling of testing tasks for the
development of new products. An effective optimization model will be developed
for the optimal scheduling of testing tasks that maximizes New Present Value and
that can capture the major trade-off and decisions involved in this problem, as
well as the relevant constraints. Preliminary work has indicated that one can
model the problem as a large-scale mixed -integer linear program that uses
continuous time representation and discrete distributions for the stochastic
parameters. However, this model can become computationally expensive for modest
number of products and tests. Therefore, computational strategies will be
investigated that rely on the use of cutting planes, decomposition and logic.
The integration of the optimization model for testing with the model of the
process network of the manufacturing company in order to assess the effect of
plant capacity constraints as well as to identify investment opportunities for
mo difying designs or building the new facilities will also be explored. Another
problem of interest will be to determine the required modifications in existing
facilities to accommodate the production of new produats. While most of the
theoretical and computational work will be performed at Carnegie Mellon, there
will be extensive interaction with DowElanco. Initially it will consist of
information gathering to fully understand the issues involved in this problem.
At a later stage, realistic case studies aimed at agricultural chemicals will be
developed to test the proposed methods.