* 9520626
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Fuel Use and      Metabolic Architecture in the Hawkmoth Amphion Floridensis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Henry Horn, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/1997
* USD 5,420.00

9520626 Flying insects vary in the metabolic fuels they use to support
energetically costly flight. Flies and bees usually use sugars to fuel flight,
while moths and butterflies usually use fat stores. This research will examine
metabolic physiology at several levels in a hawkmoth whose heavy body, narrow
wings and rapid flight impose high flight costs. Measurement of rates of oxygen
consumption and carbon dioxide production during flight will indicate whether
sugars or fats are being oxidized. Moths that have fed on sugar-rich nectar will
be compared with unfed moths to determine whether fuel use varies with
nutritional status. Maximum reaction rates of catabolic enzymes in the
carbohydrate and lipid burning pathways of flight muscle will be assayed to
determine how feeding and flight performance relate to the moth's underlying
metabolic biochemistry. Stable isotope analysis will be used to characterize the
contribution of larvally-obtained and adult- obtained resources to egg
provisioning. The research will improve understanding of the constraints on
activity metabolism and the relative importance of metabolic capacity and fuel
availability in limiting performance. Improved understanding of the way energy
is allocated between flight and reproduction may increase our understanding of
the population dynamics of flying insects.