* 9520280
* Development of Detail and Design Criteria for Steel Beam to Concrete Filled Tube Column Connections in Seismic Regions
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Satyendra Ghosh, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 09/30/1999
* USD 153,435.00

9520280 Azizinamini Composite construction consisting of concrete filled tube
(CFT) columns with relatively thin-walled steel tubes, has been used in building
construction in U.S. and Far East. In general, in this type of construction,
steel beams are framed to these columns at each floor level. Detail and design
criteria for connecting steel beams to CFT columns are almost non existent. The
overall objectives of this project are to develop an economical connection
detail for connecting steel beams to CFT columns and provide accompanying design
provisions. The focus of this investigation is to develop the Fully Restrained
(FR) type steel connection detail for CFT columns for buildings ranging from 10
to 20 stories high and for seismic performance categories D and E defined per
"NEHRP Recommended Provisions for the Development of Seismic Regulations for New
Buildings". The connection detail to be selected and design provisions to be
developed will give consideration to the following issues: a) level of
ductility, b) economy and constructability, c) avoiding over stressing the steel
shell portion of the CFI columns, d) preventing damage to the joint region of
the column by moving the location of the plastic hinge to some safe distance
away from the column face, e) taking advantage of composite action between the
concrete slab and the steel beam. At least two structural configurations will be
investigated. static and dynamic linear and inelastic analyses considering
different ground motions will be conducted to establish a level of ductility
required for the connection. Both finite element analysis and experimental study
will be carried out to develop the connection detail and design provisions.
Results of this research should fulfill this technology gap and expedite
acceptance of composite structures in construction industry. This is a project
supported under NSF 94- 154 a CIS Solicitation "Research on Composite and Hybrid
Structu res".