* 9520403
* GOALI:  University-Industry Collaborative Research on       Fluidic Self Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Sangtae Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Mihail Roco
* 06/30/1999
* USD 267,290.00

ABSTRACT Sangtae Kim An industry-university collaborative project will be
undertaken to improve basic understanding and develop numerical techniques for
anew manufacturing method (fluidic self assembly) in microelectronics using
slurry flow, The Beckman Display (company for large panel displays) and the
University of Wisconsin at Madison will jointly contribute to this
interdisciplinary project requiring expertise ion two-phase flow, computer
intensive algorithms, and construction of microelectronic devices. An advanced
Monte-Carlo approach using significantly reduced computational resources will
developed for the three-dimensional viscous flow simulation of moving of a large
number of devices such as electronics chips over a target substrate. The target
substrate has a negative shape to the flowing devices to be mounted on it. The
project will include a six month visit of Dr. S. Kim to the industrial partner,
followed by fundamental research at the university. Fluidic self assembly aims
to be used for manufacturing of microscopic assemblies, with extended technical
capabilities and reduced cost as compared to one of a time approach in robotic
assembly. Example of potential application include integration of gallium
arsenide onto silicon in communication lasers and silicon onto plastic for
active matrix flat panel liquid crystal displays. ***