* 9520489
* Minority Postdoctoral Research Fellowship
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Roberto Heredia, Fellowships
* Fellowship Award
* Catherine N. Ball
* 07/31/1998
* USD 85,000.00

This two year fellowship for postdoctoral study will allow Dr. Heredia the
opportunity to obtain training in the analysis of linguistic structure and
language processing at the University of California, San Diego. Dr. Heredia's
research interests have been on bilingual memory representations. During his
postdoctoral tenure he will learn new techniques for the `on-line` (real-time)
study of language processing and be exposed to new theoretical frameworks for
understanding linguistic structure. The research will involve comparing real-
time processing in young bilinguals with performance by elderly adults and
patients with Alzheimer's Disease. Alzheimer's bilingual subjects will be tested
to see whether their memory deficits are due to the deterioration of their
memory structures, or alternatively, as a result of their memory processes
deficits (e.g., data-driven vs. conceptually-driven processes). In constructing
bilingual or monolingual models of memory representation, the ultimate goal is
to understand the architecture of cognition. Both bilingual and monolingual
research helps us to understand it. Work on bilingual lexical and semantic
processing attempts to understand bilingual semantic memory by applying and
extending existing work on monolingual aging Alzheimer's patients to
bilingualism.