* 9520923
* Modelling Phase Ordering Kinetics in Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Bulbul Chakraborty, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 165,000.00

9520923 Chakraborty Kinetics of ordering in alloys will be investigated using
models based on descriptions of the electronic structure of metallic alloys. By
predicting microstructures and growth laws, these studies will provide the
opportunity of making quantitative comparisons between theory and experiment.
The type of modeling will also bridge the gap between experiments and
theoretical results obtained using kinetic Ising models and their continuum
version, the time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau model. The microscopic models of
alloys have two features which make the study of growth kinetics relevant and
interesting. The models include a description of the coupling between elastic
strains and chemical order and they include typical metallic interactions such
as Osize-effectO terms and long- range interactions arising from Fermi surface
effects. Two types of models will be considered in the current work. One is a
particular version of the embedded atom approach which provides a very good
description of non-transition metal alloys, and the other is a model based on
the direct pair- correlation function of alloys which can be calculated from the
coherent potential approximation to disordered alloys. The latter approach is
known to provide an excellent description of transition metal alloys and
particularly of any fermi-surface realted effects. The study of kinetics can be
divided into three separate parts: (1) direct Monte Carlo simulations of
embedded atom Hamiltonians including chemical and displacement effects, (2)
simulations of Langevin equations based on Ginzburg- Landau functionals
constructed from microscopic models,and (3) studies of a generalized Ising model
which provides the simplest model of ordering accompanied by a structural
transition. The generalized Ising model has a wider range of applicability than
alloys and will provide a description of kinetics in any system where there is a
coupling between a structural distortion and some orderi ng field. %%%
Theoretical research will be conducted on the properties of metallic alloys. In
particular, studies will be made on how the components of a binary alloy mix
together to form various phases and structures. Understanding how these phases
evolve will contribute to predicting the properties of these alloys and how
various processing paths affect these properties. ***