* 9520728
* Dissertation Research: Balancing Costs and Benefits in a    Mutualism: Conditionality in the Interaction Between the    Grass, Hystris patula and its Fungal Endophyte
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Michael Martin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 07/31/1997
* USD 9,000.00

9520728 Martin Associations between fungal endophytes and grasses range from
parasitic to mutualistic, and are ideal for studying the conditionality of
interactions. Frequencies of infected plants in populations can increase over
time; this is often cited as evidence that the interaction with seed-borne
endophytes is a mutualism. The assumption is that relative fitnesses of infected
and non-infected plants are constant. If relative fitnesses vary, the
interaction between grasses and fungal endophytes may be delicately balanced,
and shift from mutualism to parasitism depending upon environmental factors
affecting costs and benefits. This project will test several factors that are
hypothesized to affect the relative fitness of infected and non-infected plants.
These include the roles of associated herbivore abundance, plant resources, and
fungal endophyte strain in determining the balance of costs and benefits to the
plant. Little is currently known about the extent of conditional outcomes in
mutualisms, the mechanisms that determine outcomes, or the consequences of
variation in outcome. Without this information it will be difficult to address
important questions about the ecology of mutualisms. Since many plant species,
including important agricultural crops, have associated fungal endophytes,
understanding the mechanisms behind these mutualistic interactions also has
considerable applied value.