* 9520797
* Carbon Chemistry in Kuiper Disk Comets
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Maria Womack, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 11/30/1996
* USD 22,927.00

9520797 Womack It has been hypothesized that short-period comets and giant
comets (like Chiron and SW1) share a common origin in the Kuiper Disk located
10-100 Astronomical Units (AU) from the Sun. Interestingly, recent observations
indicate that these two populations of Kuiper disk comets may exhibit very
different physical and chemical behavior. For example, short-period comets are
small in size ranging from 1-10 km in diameter, and are predominantly water ice
and so sublimate mostly within 1-2 AU from the Sun; while the giant comets are
&gt; 10 times larger than short-period comets, sublimate at larger distances
from the Sun (r &gt; 5 AU) and hence are thought to be comprised of some other
highly volatile ice (quch as methane, carbon monoxide or Nitrogen). Current
models of the protosolar nebula indicate that the chemical behavior of the
dominant carbon-bearing molecules carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, methanol, and
hydrogen cyanide are very sensitive to the physical and chemical processes that
occurred during solar system formation. Therefore, the relative abundances of
these species in primitive icy bodies, such as comets, are expected to place
powerful constraints on comet-formation models. Comparison of these molecular
abundances in the two populations of comets are, therefore, vital in testing
models of the Kuiper disk region of the solar nebula. Observations of the
rotational spectra of emissions from carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, methanol and
hydrogen cyanide will be obtained of comets using millimeter and submillimeter
wavelength telescopes. Complementary observations will be obtained and optical
imaging techniques will be used in interpreting the spectra. A fundamental goal
of this research is to make an exploratory comparison of carbon chemistry in
several short-period comets with that in two large, distant comets. This work
will search for chemical differences between these two groups to examine whether
or not they are really two distinct divisions , or instead are better described
by a continuous distribution of different chemical compositions. The work will
help establish the feasibility of the proposed observations, determine which
molecules are the best for testing models, and determine how often the large
continuously active comets need to be observed in order to significantly
constrain models of solar system formation.