* 9520668
* Dissertation Research: Genetics of Incipient Speciation in  Two Species of Salticids
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Wayne Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1998
* USD 8,100.00

9520668 MADDISON The forces that have lead to the great diversity of life on
earth are poorly understood. This study will compare the genetics of two species
of jumping spiders in an attempt to understand the processes driving speciation.
These two species, isolated on the mountain ranges in southeast Arizona, appear
to be evolving at a very rapid rate. Their habitat was continuous between the
mountain ranges as recently as 10,000 to 14,000 years ago. In this short period,
males of one species have diverged considerably. Another closely related species
also shows some divergence, but not nearly to such a striking degree.
Mitochondrial and nuclear genes will be examined in order to reconstruct the
genetic forces that have promoted morphological divergence. The genetic data
will be used to test new theories developed in the past ten years. one of these,
coalescent theory, attempts to reconstruct the past genetic structure of a
species by examining a gene genealogy of that species. The genealogy of
mitochondrial DNA has been used in attempts to infer the history of humans, but
we know little about how mitochondria evolve in general. This study will add to
our knowledge of how mitochondria evolve, which may influence how we interpret
future genetic data with this molecule. This study allows a unique opportunity
to examine speciation while it is still occurring. The mountain ranges in
southeast Arizona are habitats that have become fragmented from each other due
to climatic changes. They may provide a model that will lead to better
understanding of how populations have responded to range fragmentation in the
past. Such understanding will be useful in developing conservation strategies to
deal with widespread habitat fragmentation due to human disturbance.