* 9520325
* Computational Studies of Dynamical Phenomena in Nanoscale   Ferromagnets
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Mark Novotny, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1998
* USD 434,000.00

9520325 Novotny This project is part of the Computational Approaches to Real
Materials (CARM95) program. The Division of Materials Research, Division of
Advanced Scientific Computing, and Division of Mathematical Sciences are all
supporting this research. Fundamental and technological issues motivate this
work. Magnetic mass storage technology is rapidly progressing to the state where
single bits are stored on the nanoscale. At the same time, understanding of
model and realistic fundamental behavior of ferromagnetism in the restrictive
geometries of thin films, whiskers, and single- domain grains is rudimentary at
best. The investigators propose to further develop and utilize an acceleration
developed by Novotny (the Monte Carlo Markov Absorbing Chain algorithm) to study
dynamical phenomena in real ferromagnets in the nanoscale domain. The
investigators are developing codes on the SP-2 at the Supercomputer Computations
Research Institute at Florida State University. They will then make production
runs on the SP-2 at Cornell University. These calculations couple with recent
advances in engineering magnetic materials on this scale and on experimental
studies of dynamical phenomena using magnetic force microscopies. %%% This
project is part of the Computational Approaches to Real Materials (CARM95)
program. The Division of Materials Research, Division of Advanced Scientific
Computing, and Division of Mathematical Sciences are all supporting this
research. Fundamental and technological issues motivate this work. Magnetic mass
storage technology is rapidly progressing to the state where single bits are
stored on the scale of thousands of atoms. At the same time, understanding of
model and realistic fundamental behavior of ferromagnetism in the restrictive
geometries of thin films, whiskers, and single-domain grains is rudimentary at
best. The investigators propose to further develop and utilize a computer
algorithm developed by Novotny that is much f aster than others. The project
simulates phenomena that evolve in time in real ferromagnets on the scale of
thousands of atoms. The investigators are developing codes on a parallel
computer at the Supercomputer Computations Research Institute at Florida State
University. They will then make production runs on a similar machine at Cornell
University. These calculations will couple with recent advances in engineering
magnetic materials on this scale and on experimental studies of dynamical
phenomena using magnetic force microscopies. ***