* 9520572
* Dissertation Research: Chromosome Evolution in Musca:       Translocated Male Determining Factor
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Edwin Bryant, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 11/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9520572 BRYANT The normal male karyotype of the housefly, Musca domestica,
consists of five pairs of autosomes and a pair of dimorphic sex chromosomes.
Some males however have two X chromosomes and a portion of the Y chromosome
containing the male determining factor attached to one of the third autosomes.
This new male karyotype which was rare or absent fifty years ago is now found
around the world and has replaced the normal male karyotype in many populations.
Surveys suggest that the third chromosome containing the translocated male
determining factor decreases with latitude and overall frequencies continue to
increase with time. Since genetic recombination is normally absent in male
houseflies, the third autosome containing the translocated male determining
factor is prevented from exchanging genetic material via crossing over. Theory
predicts that this should result in the accumulation of mutations on this
chromosome causing it to diverge from normal third chromosomes. This study is
concerned with determining how much the new male determining chromosome in the
housefly has changed since the acquisition of the male determining factor. This
study will survey the frequency of the new male determining chromosome from
several different populations from around the U.S. Strains containing the
translocated male determining factor on the third autosome will be studied and
compared in terms of the accumulation of deleterious mutations, gene
inactivation and dosage compensation. The accumulation of sexually antagonistic
alleles associated with the new male determining chromosome will also be
investigated.