* 9520187
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  RAND Goes Domestic:        The RAND Corporation's Diversification into Social          Welfare Research, 1958-1972
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* David Hounshell, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1996
* USD 5,000.00

Hounshell/Jardini Mr. Jardini, under the direction of Dr. Hounshell, is
undertaking dissertation research on the RAND Corporation as a case study of the
production of knowledge during the Cold War and the interaction between national
security and social welfare research and policy during that period. The RAND
Corporation was formed at the conclusion of World War II as a means by which
America's finest intellectual talent could be harnessed to national security
research and policy making in peacetime. Under a cloak of secrecy, RAND hosted
remarkable advances in such diverse fields as computer and software design,
materials science, space systems, and especially, in social science
methodologies such as game theory, linear and dynamic programming, and systems
analysis. Yet on July 14 1966, RAND's board of trustees decided to terminate the
corporations exclusive military focus and diversify into social welfare
research. Moving aggressively, RAND quickly secured funding support from a wide
range of public and private institutions, and by 1972 its research and methods
had become central to the social welfare movement. This means that, ironically,
the sophisticated methodologies developed at RAND to contemplate nuclear war
became some of the nation's fundamental weapons in the war against poverty and
other social ills. Drawing from a wide range of documentary sources, including
RAND's previously inaccessible archives, Mr. Jardini is employing RAND's
diversification as a window on the complex interaction among national security
and social welfare research and policy making in Cold War America. In general,
he is exploring the evolution of RAND's research program, RAND's development and
use of innovative methodologies as an "independent" research organization in
federal policy making, the gradual deterioration of the 1950's model of secret
science, and the consequences of RAND's central role in both national security
and social welfare research and policy analysis. RAND's central role in bo th
national security and social welfare policy-making allows this dissertation to
address several other critical issues and contribute substantially to rapidly
developing fields of scholarship. What led to the emergence of nonprofit
research and advisory organizations, and what was their role in government
policy formulation during the post-World War II ear? How have American's
perceptions of the roles of science and technology in national policy-making
changed over time? Of what consequence is it that many of the central analytical
methodologies employed in social research and problem-solving were created to
address national security concerns? What were the implications of massive
defense sponsorship for the definition and content of Cold War research and
research methods? As the US moves to meet the challenges of the post-Cold War
era, it is of increasing importance that scholars analyze and understand the
issues taken by in this dissertation.