* 9520600
* Dissertation Research: Behavioral and Ecological Mechanisms of Colonisation in a Butterfly Metapopulation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Michael Singer, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,267.00

9520600 Singer Metapopulations are collections of populations that interact
through dispersal. Their persistence in the face of population extinctions
relies on colonization; the establishment of new populations in unused habitat.
However, mechanistic studies of colonization in natural systems are lacking,
even though mechanism at this scale may strongly structure large-scale
metapopulation dynamics. The goal of this research is to investigate the
behavioral and ecological mechanisms that structure colonization in a
metapopulation of the checkerspot butterfly. The metapopulation, located in the
Sierra Nevada of California, recently suffered a set of weather-induced
population extinctions, and provides unoccupied habitat patches for study.
Behavioral mechanisms to be studied include habitat preference and host-plant
search efficiency within habitats. The ecological mechanisms are temporal and
spatial patterns in habitat quality and host-parasitoid relations between the
checkerspot butterfly and a braconid wasp. Preliminary results indicate that
colonization is occurring slowly, that habitat quality is highly structured
temporally, and that habitat preference is not optimal, but depends instead on
history of host use at the study site. This study will contribute significantly
to basic understanding of the role of dispersal in maintaining metapopulation
structure, and some of the mechanisms governing colonization of new habitat
patches. The results will have broad application to resource management
strategies and attempts to conserve biodiversity.