* 9520191
* Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Metals, Superconductors, and  Spin-Polarized Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Christopher Stanton, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9520191 Stanton This theoretical project will investigate the optical and
dynamical properties of carriers photoexcited by ultrafast, femtosecond lasers
in metals and superconductors and in spin- polarized semiconductors. This work
will provide new theoretical information on ultrafast dynamics in degenerate
Fermi systems; hot electron effects in metals; quasi- particle dynamics in
semiconductors; and, spin dependent scattering in polarized and magnetic
semiconductors. The goal is to bring the theoretical understanding of the
carrier dynamics in these systems up to the same level as the understanding in
bulk and quantum confined semiconductors. This involves realistic band stucture
and scattering rates together with detailed transport calculations. In addition,
for bulk semiconductors, the dynamical band gap renormalization associated with
the many-body Coulomb interaction in nonequilibrium systems will be studied.
Results obtained by other investigators for quasi- equilibrium conditions will
be extended to include effects associated with a wave-vector-dependent Coulomb
hole term; a photoexcited two-component plasma with one species (electrons)
substantially lighter than the other (holes); and, the effect of time-dependent,
nonequilibrium distribution functions on the band gap renormalization. This
gives us an opportunity to explore observable, time- dependent, nonequilibrium
many-body effects. %%% Tunable femtosecond lasers now make possible the detailed
study of electronic processes in solid state systems. While much initial work
has focused on bulk semiconductors nad quantum confined semiconductors, a
variety of new systems will be studied in this research. In particular, systems
to be studied include metals, superconductors and polarized semiconductors.
While the technology of ultrafast laser studies of solid state systems has
advanced rapidly over the past few years, the associated theoretical studies
have lagged. This grant will provide valu able theoretical insight on the
complex behavior of these systems when perturbed by laser irradiation. ***