* 9520443
* Detecting Extra-Solar Planets:  Crossing the Jupiter        Threshold
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Geoffrey Marcy, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 12/31/1999
* USD 331,698.00

9520443 Marcy Our Solar System remains the lone planetary system that is known
to be around a normal star. Current observational efforts have failed to
discover extrasolar planets at a threshold of the mass three times that of
Jupiter orbiting approximately 30 solar-type stars. A search for extrasolar
planets, by observing the reflex acceleration of the hmst stars, measured by the
Doppler effect, will be carried out. As our Sun executes a velocity amplitude
change of 13 m/sec (as observed from outside the solar system) due primarily to
Jupiter, it is planned to achieve a Doppler measurement precision of 2 m/sec to
ensure detection of giant planets orbiting around other stars. This
unprecedented Doppler measurement precision stems from novel developments in
spec- trometer design and spectral analysis. In addition, a new Schmidt camera
has been specially engineered to produce a sharp, symmetric Point Spread
Function (PSF) over the full format of a fast echelle spectrometer. A 2048x2048
CCD detector will be used to gather all stellar Doppler information, within 1000
Angstroms wavelength, spread over 30,000 CCD pixels. The analysis of the Doppler
shifts in the spectra will consist of an entirely novel simultaneous solution of
all spectrometer parameters (wavelength scale and PSF) and Doppler shift. A
detailed error budget for the Doppler measurements yields a bottom line accuracy
of 2 m/sec. This precision renders the detection of Jupiter-like planets
detectable at the 5 sigma level, and Saturn-like planets will be marginally
detectable. Actual test observations of the spectra of Solar-like stars enable
one to achieve a precision of 3.5 m/sec. This accuracy will be improved with the
next-generation Doppler analysis techniques. Already, however, by averaging sets
of five exposures, the error in the mean is less than 2 m/sec. It is planned to
monitor 15 G-type and K- type stars and make measurements of the Doppler
wavelength shifts to a precision of 2 m/sec. Eighty five other stars will be
observed with an accuracy of 5 m/sec in the measurement of the Doppler
wavelength shifts (depending on the brightness of the individual stars). These
new techniques will make it possible to observe stars and measure velocity
changes, indicative of giant planets, within 3 years.