* 9520633
* Purchase of a AC-80 NMR Spectrometer
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Nicholas Turro, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 05/31/1997
* USD 76,000.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation Program will help the
Department of Chemistry at Columbia University acquire an AC-80 NMR spectrometer
that will operate as a multiuser steady state (SS) and time resolved (TR)
instrument for the detection of chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization
(CIDNP). The Principal Investigators will employ the instrument to investigate,
by multinuclear (1H, 13C, 31P) SS-CIDNP and TR-CIDNP, the mechanisms of diverse
photochemical systems including (1) the reactions of organic radical ions
produced by photosensitized electron transfer; (2) the photochemistry of
phosphites and phosphine oxides; (3) the measurement of exit rates of radicals,
produced by photolysis of ketone from micelles as a function of micelle size and
radical structure; (4) the photosensitized cleavage of thymine dimers in systems
that model photoinduced repair of damaged DNA; (5) a search for CIDNP in
oriented biological macromolecular solids; and (6) time resolved CIDNP of
biradicals produced by photolysis of cyclic ketones. In addition to the research
described above, the instrumentation will be used by undergraduates in advanced
organic chemistry laboratories, in physical-analytical laboratories, in research
project laboratories, in senior research and in summer undergraduate research.
The instrument will be coupled into an "electronic smart classroom" containing
state-of-the-art multimedia facilities to allow students and faculty to
introduce data directly from experiments into lecture, recitation and discussion
groups on demand. Finally, the computer interface will be employed to produce
modules that will simulate important NMR experiments and will be accessible to
students on their own personal computers through ColumbiaNet. Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is the most powerful tool available to the chemist
for the elucidation of the structure of molecules. It is used to identify
unknown substances, characterize specific arra ngements of atoms within
molecules, and to study the dynamics of interactions between molecules in
solution. Access to state-of-the-art NMR spectrometry is essential to chemists
who are carrying out frontier research. The results from these NMR studies are
useful in areas such as polymers and catalysis, and in biology.