* 9520456
* Application of Expert Systems to Power System Dynamic       Analysis and Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Shelli Starrett, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9520456 Starrett Current trends in power system regulation and planning are
causing complex, unpredictable, nonlinear phenomenon to limit the economic
operation of power systems. The analysis and computations required to ensure
that the system will operate within its reliability criteria are becoming
increasingly difficult and time consuming. The resulting data is often hard to
interpret. The goal of this research is to develop computer- based expert
systems to: process data, identify patterns, classify system conditions
according to expected problems, suggest scheduling or control changes, and
control the system. Artificial neural networks (ANN's) are useful for pattern
recognition and data classification. Depending on the type of network used,
ANN's can be trained to give a desired output under certain conditions, or they
can be allowed to recognize patterns in data without pre-defined output
specifications. An ANN advisory system is proposed that will monitor system
data, process patterns and warn the operator of dangerous system conditions.
Fuzzy logic systems formulate output decisions based on sets of rules that apply
within ranges of system conditions. Thus they can efficiently deal with
uncertain conditions and a range of operating points. The classification results
of the neural networks can be used to form a flexible, yet predictable control
system using fuzzy logic control. The ANN/fuzzy logic system will be designed to
allow adjustments in response to changing power system conditions. ***