* 9520877
* Evaluation of University-based Cross Disciplinary Research  Centers
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1995,02/28/1997
* William Tash, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1997
* USD 74,991.00

Federal financed academic Science and engineering research and development
expenditures at universities and colleges reached $11.1 billion in FY 1992 (NSF,
1994). Industry-sponsored R&D expenditures at universities and colleges reached
$1.3 billion, and such support has been growing by over 20% per year throughout
the 1990s (NSF, 1994). Cohen, Florida, & Goer (1994) estimated that over 12,000
university faculty members and 23,000 doctoral level researchers were involved
in university-industry research centers in 1990, for total funding of $4.12
billion in research and related activities. Yet, despite the large university
investment in such centers relatively little is known about their formation,
management, involvement of faculty and students, effectiveness of operations,
impediments to successful functioning, industry relations and characteristics
associate with center performance. It has been argued by Geiger (1990) that
research centers and institutes have been the decisive factor in the postwar
expansion of the university research system and have taken a leading role in
developing big science research projects. More recently, our own survey (Stahler
& Tash, 1992; Tash & Stahler, 1992) of the fastest growing research universities
in the 1980's suggests that centers are particularly important as a catalyst for
major increases in research funding at universities since they help concentrate
resources in targeted areas. This study is a survey of a sample of 75 plus of
the 150 largest research universities to clarify issues surrounding industry-
based research centers. The 150 universities will be stratified into three
groups based on their total R&D expenditures for FY 1992: 1-50, 51-100, 101-150
to sample various sizes of research universities. Within each stratum of fifty,
a random sample of 25 plus universities will be selected. The study will explore
a variety of issues associated with the formation, and effective functioning of
centers within the university environment. these will include such areas as the
contribution to the educational mission of the university, discovery of useful
knowledge for industry and other sponsors, conflict areas with academic
departments and central administration, advantages to sponsors to sustain
collaborative relationships with centers, the extent of real interdisciplinary
collaboration evidenced, advantages and disadvantages for faculty both junior
and tenured to participate with centers, incentives for research staff, and
other benefits to the university, government, and industry by involvement with
centers. This study represents an extension of the study conducted by Cohen et
al. (1994) and our prior survey (DuCette, Stahler, & Tash, 1993; Stahler & Tash,
1992; Tash & Stahler, 1992), and is guided by our conceptual work described in
our paper in the Journal of Higher Education (Stahler & Tash, 1994).