* 9520139
* Model-Based Design of Optimal Nonlinear Filters             for Binary Images
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Edward Dougherty, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/1997
* USD 55,240.00

All translation-invariant binary image filters possess morphological
representations. Hence, finding an optimal filter involves finding the
structuring elements that yield a filter having minimum error - in our case,
mean-absolute error (MAE). This observation leads to automated design procedures
for restoration and enhancement filters when treating both the observed
(corrupted) and ideal images as random set processes. A key design aspect is
postulation of image models for the ideal and observed processes. This research
concerns filter robustness relative to modeling assumptions: to what degree is
filter performance degraded relative to deviations from the design assumptions?
Our approach is to assume parameterized ideal and observed image processes and
to consider the effects of applying an optimal filter for a given parameter
vector to images corresponding to different parameter vectors. The design of
enhancement algorithms is an integral part of the manufacture of electronic
office equipment. This time-consuming (up to a year), and performance is limited
by the ability of a human being to consider only a relatively small number of
possible algorithms. Recently, enhancement algorithms have been automatically
designed by higher-level algorithms that use statistics in conjunction with
mathematical models of images and imaging systems, thereby significantly cutting
design time while at the same time producing better enhancement. The present
research investigates design from various image models. It also addresses the
"robustness" question: since a designed enhancement algorithm is based on
modeling assumptions, practical application requires that we have a reasonable
idea of how it will perform on image data that differs to varying degrees from
the data on which it has been designed.