* 9520233
* Design Requirements for Shear Connectors in Encased Steel   (SRC) and Concrete Filled Tube (CFT) Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Charles Roeder, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 10/31/1997
* USD 175,116.00

9520233 Roeder Composite steel and concrete infrastructures and buildings are
desirable for seismic design, because they economically provide both the
strength and stiffness needed to assure good performance under adverse loading
conditions. However, composite action requires a shear transfer between the
steel and the concrete. The transfer requirements are highly variable depending
upon the location of the component in the structure. Los of this transfer
through slip may result in a dramatic loss of strength and stiffness with very
little energy dissipation. Shear connectors may be used to transfer shear force
between elements but they are costly, and engineers are motivated to minimize
their use. At present, there are no guidelines or specification provisions to
help them determine the best shear connector placement in US practice. This
research will provide design guidelines for establishing the most economical
shear connector requirements in both encased steel (SRC) and concrete filled
tube (CFT) construction, while assuring good seismic performance. This project
will consist of a thorough review of existing test data to determine the shear
capacity that can be developed with various CFT and SRC applications. A series
of experiments will be performed to fill gaps in existing knowledge and data.
Studies on creep, shrinkage and the Poisson effect represent potential problems
in using bond or adhesion for the shear transfer mechanism, and experiments will
be performed. The experiments will establish a more complete picture of bond
stress and shear transfer capacity for both CFT and SRC applications. A range of
SRC and CFT prototype structures based on the Theme Structures established for
this research project will be analyzed to determine the shear transfer demand
necessary to assure satisfactory seismic performance. The shear transfer
capabilities will be correlated to the demand to develop design guidelines and
recommendati ons. This is a project supported under the year 1 program of the
Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS), solicitation NSF 94-154. ***