* 9520709
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Bacteriology and the       Medical Inspection of Immigrants, 1891 to 1930
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Nancy Stepan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 07/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

SBR-9520709 Doctoral Dissertation Research: "Bacteriology and the Medical
Inspection of Immigrants." This project examines the impact of bacteriology on
immigration policy in the U.S. More particularly, it looks at the intersection
of bacteriology, immigration, and nationality through the historical examination
of medical inspection at American borders, the points at which the nation
defended and defined itself. Bacteriology provided a modern medical language of
contagion and personal pathology that was used to define disease in terms of
national safety. The pathological characteristics ascribed in particular
immigrant groups were used in a subtle and complex calculus for defining not
simply which diseases or conditions should be excluded, but which peoples should
be excluded from the "national body." This project will trace the thesis that
bacteriology was essential to the construction of disease, immigrant, and nation
through three overlapping components. First, this project will document
differences in medical inspection and exclusion by statistical analysis of
annual immigration data for all U.S. ports, supplemented by case studies of
selected ports along the East, West, and Gulf Coasts. Second, the project
describes bacteriology's role in shaping scientific and social understandings of
disease and its carriers through an analysis of the disease categories used for
the medical diagnosis and exclusion of immigrants. Finally, the project places
bacteriology in an international context by exploring its comparative
significance in controlling immigration to Canada and Mexico and its role in
international negotiations regarding these respective borders.