* 9520888
* SGER:  Determining Seed Bank Age Structure with Tandem      Accelerator Mass Spectrometry C14 Dating
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1996
* Catherine Pake, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1996
* USD 20,000.00

9520888 Venable There are many questions in both pure and applied ecology for
which an understanding of seed bank dynamics and seed age structure is critical.
These include an understanding of succession, extinction and colonization
dynamics, revegetation policies, and weed management. Traditionally, the only
way to determine seed bank age structure has been to follow seed cohorts for
many years. This project will use new techniques involving Tandem Accelerator
Mass Spectrometry (TAMS) to date modern seed banks with 14C. This technology, in
conjunction with the variable levels of atmospheric 14C as a result of nuclear
bomb testing which peaked in 1963, should permit accurate estimates of the ages
of seeds produced over the last 30 years. This procedure will be tested with
seeds of a Sonoran Desert annual plant. The dating procedure will be calibrated
with seed of known age and then utilized to age a carefully sampled seed bank of
this desert annual. It is widely believed that long-lived seed banks play an
important role in the ecology of desert annuals and desert annuals have played
an important role as model organisms in the development of our understanding of
adaptation to environmental variability and community dynamics in variable
environments. Long-term demographic data are available for desert annuals at the
study site. The long-term data will aid in the interpretation of the 14C dates,
because differences in production of seeds over the last 14 years can be
compared to their incorporation into the seed bank. Likewise, the 14C dates will
aid in the interpretation of the long-term data by permitting estimation of the
role of seed retention in population dynamics. The research in this Small Grant
for Exploratory Research proposal will lead to important breakthroughs in the
development of technology that will permit in-depth understanding of long-term
community dynamics and diversity. Seed bank age structure is critical in many
habitats for many ecological questions, and TAMS 14C aging of seeds for up to 30
years of age would constitute a major methodological breakthrough.