* 9520295
* Behavior of SRC Column-Composite Steel Beam Connections     Subjected to Seismic Loading
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,01/30/1998
* James Wight, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/30/1998
* USD 153,803.00

9520295 Wright This research project will investigate the seismic response of
exterior frame connections in composite (steel-concrete) structures. The
connections will consist of a steel-reinforced concrete (SRC) column and a
composite beam (steel beam and concrete slab). Transverse steel beams, steel
decking and a floor slab will all be part of the test subassemblies to more
closely simulate composite connections as they would be constructed in the
field. The primary experimental variables will be the moment strength ratio
between the SRC column and the composite beam, and the type of confinement
reinforcement used in the SRC column in the joint region of the connection
subassembly. Within the joint perimeter hoop reinforcement will need to be
composed of as many as four pieces that are lap spliced as they pass through the
steel beam webs. For some of the specimens a fiber reinforced concrete (FRC)
will be used in the connection region to enhance the bond along the splice
lengths. The FRC will add some internal confinement to the concrete in the
connection and should slow the deterioration of the concrete shear mechanisms in
the connection. Post test analytical studies will be used to simulate the
measured connection behavior and to help develop an analytical model that could
be used for further parametric studies. The analytical modeling will be
coordinated with prior and current U.S. research projects concerned with
modeling the dynamic response of composite frame structures. This is a project
supported under the year 1 program of the Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS),
solicitation NSF 94-154. ***