* 9520730
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Synaptic Plasticity Associated with Song Development
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Timothy DeVoogd, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* David Vleck
* 08/31/1997
* USD 6,777.00

9520730 Information is encoded in the brain by modifications in cellular
structure and changes in numbers of synaptic connections between neurons. The
brain is organized into discrete neural circuits which process specific types of
learned information and control specific behaviors. When the connections
(synapses) within these neural circuits are altered, the output of the circuit
changes and the behavior that it controls is modified. The objective of this
research is to increase understanding of the development of a learned behavior
and the neural circuitry which controls that behavior. The development of one
naturally occurring learned behavior, bird song, will be related to the
development of synapses within specific song-related brain areas. Song in birds
is a complex learned behavior that is controlled by a highly localized system of
interconnected neurons. Synapse numbers in song-related brain areas of normally
raised individuals and of individuals that have had no opportunity for song
learning will be quantified using high magnification electron microscopy. The
singing behavior and social behavior of both groups will be analyzed to
correlate neuroanatomical and behavioral changes. Preliminary data indicate that
song-deprived individuals possess approximately 40% more synapses than normally
raised individuals. This may indicate that song learning is accompanied by a
large scale reduction in synapse numbers. This research will increase our
understanding, not just of the neural basis for song learning, but of principles
and mechanisms important for many different forms of learning in different
species of animals.