* 9520118
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Role of Race and Gender in Legislative Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* George Rabinowitz, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Rosalind Wilson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 4,114.00

Over the past two decades, the look of state legislatures has changed
dramatically. Between 1975 and 1991 the number of women state legislatures more
than doubled. The number of African American state legislators increased by an
even greater proportion. This dissertation research seeks to examine the effects
of the introduction of new groups on legislative behavior and outcomes. The
general question to be addressed by this work: What evidence is there that new
groups change not only the way a state legislature looks but also the way a
legislature acts? Specifically, it focuses on the impact of black and women
state legislators on legislative activities and products. A 6 state database
will be created and will contain information on the legislator, on bill content
and disposition, and on legislative districts. Specific research questions
include: Do females and racial minorities focus on different policy areas than
do white male legislators? Are they more supportive of certain policies than
their counterparts? Are they as successful in getting their bills passed? Do
blacks and women engage in coalition building to a greater or lesser extent? Are
particular stages of the legislative process a focus of activity by these
newcomers? What is the impact of constituency on the behavior of these
legislators?