* 9520335
* Dissertation Research: Allocation of Parental Effort in the Brown Thrasher--Effects of Predation Risk and Food          Availability
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* John Zimmerman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 2,860.00

9520335 Zimmerman Many studies suggest that the two most important factors
limiting the reproductive success of birds are nest predation and food supply.
It has recently been proposed that the combined effects of these two factors may
act to limit nesting success through a conflict between the time parents
allocate to foraging for nestlings and time needed to guard the nest from
predators. Birds nesting in territories with an increased food supply should be
able to devote more time toward guarding the nestlings from predators and
therefore experience reduced levels of nest predation. In addition, birds
nesting in areas with reduced predator abundance should be able to allocate more
time toward foraging for nestlings and therefore increase reproductive success
through greater fledgling mass and survivability. This research will test these
time allocation hypotheses in a population of brown thrashers by simultaneously
manipulating food supply and predation risk. Nesting success will be monitored
and behavioral observations will be conducted to determine how parents allocate
time to foraging and guarding behaviors when nesting in areas of increased food
supply, reduced predation risk, or both. This research will enhance our
understanding of the factors that shape avian foraging strategies and determine
nesting success. Given the recent population decline in many bird species, the
results may also contribute to attempts to conserve biodiversity.