* 9520760
* Dissertation Research: Effects of an Atmospheric Nitrogen   Deposition Gradient on White Spruce (Picea glauca)          Ectomycorrhizae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1998
* Timothy Fahey, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1998
* USD 9,100.00

9520760 Fahey Nitrogen availability may be an important factor influencing the
abundance, diversity, and function of ectomycorrhizal fungi (ECMF).
Understanding ECMF responses to nitrogen is critical not only because natural
spatiotemporal variation in nitrogen availability, but also because
anthropogenic nitrogen deposition has altered nitrogen availability in forest
soils. Recent evidence suggests that declining production and diversity of ECMF
fruitbodies in Europe is correlated with multiple air pollutants, including
atmospheric nitrogen deposition. The objective of this dissertation research is
to determine the effect of nitrogen deposition on ECMF of white spruce over a
short, steep nitrogen deposition gradient in Alaska. Hypotheses are that 1)
there is lower ECMF diversity near the nitrogen source, 2) ECMF species dominant
at high and low nitrogen sites differ both in their ability to colonize roots,
and in their effect on tree nutrition and growth, under high and low soil
nitrogen availability. Initial sampling focused on fungal species distribution,
tree nutrition and growth, and soil chemistry. Preliminary results indicate that
high nitrogen deposition sites have lower diversity and abundance of ECMF than
low nitrogen deposition sites. Seedling experiments will examine differences
among ECMF species in root colonization and nitrogen transfer under high and low
nitrogen availability This research is important because fungi, in general, and
mycorrhizal fungi, in particular, are primary agents of decomposition and
nutrient cycling in ecosystems. Given that chronic anthropogenic nitrogen
deposition is occurring throughout the world, knowledge od the effects of this
pollution is essential for understanding the future consequences of humankind's
impact on natural systems.