* 9520946
* Algorithms in Parametric Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/1995,02/28/2001
* David Fernandez-Baca, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Sloan
* 02/28/2001
* USD 163,965.00

Two topics in the design of combinatorial algorithms are addressed: (1)
Parametric problems on graphs with vertex and/or edge weights, with particular
emphasis on Megiddo's method of parametric search; (2) The construction of
evolutionary trees for sets of species, focusing on methods where species are
described by the characteristics they exhibit. First, parametric computing deals
with problems where the input is a continuous function of one or more
parameters; it has applications in: (1a) Sensitivity analysis (that is, studying
how changes in costs affect the choice of optimum solution to a problem); (1b)
Lagrangian relaxation (a powerful heuristic for coping with difficult
constraints in optimization problems); (1c) computational geometry; and (1d)
computational biology. The primary goal of this project is to study the
circumstances under which parametric problems can be solved within the same time
bound as their underlying non-parametric problems. This leads to an examination
of the roles of parallelism, dynamic algorithms, and graph and space
decomposition techniques in parametric search. A secondary goal is to obtain
bounds on the number of times the optimum solution to certain parametric
problems changes as the parameter is varied across its range. Second, an
evolutionary tree or phylogeny describes how a set of species evolved from a
common ancestor. The research on phylogeny construction deals primarily (2a)
with finding faster algorithms for important special cases, and (2b) with
developing dynamic algorithms for updating existing trees. Dynamic algorithms
are particularly useful in practice, as they permit scientists to analyze
different scenarios for evolution and to modify existing trees to reflect
increased knowledge about sets of species. It appears that the development of
efficient dynamic algorithms requires clean characterizations of sets of species
admitting certain kinds of phylogenies. Such characterizations may be of
interest in their own right.