* 9520319
* Real Space Method for First Principles Calculation of       Electronic, Magnetic, and Spectroscopic Properties of       Halogen-Bridged Transition Metal Compounds
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Ponnuswamy Sadayappan, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 509,000.00

9520319 Wilkins This award is one made through the FY95 Computational Approaches
to Real Materials competition. Funding is provided through the Divisions of
Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific Computing, as
well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate. The research combines algorithm and code
development with materials theory to address important materials problems for
which computational breakthroughs can produce large payoffs. As such, the
research spans the strategic initiatives in High Performance Computing and
Communications and Advanced Materials and Processing. The halogen-bridged
transition-metal linear-chain compounds are unique in their wide chemical
tunability with respect to their ground state and their energy gap. Momentum-
space computation has indicated that these materials may have technological
importance. Real space computation will allow much larger systems to be studied
due to transitioning from calculations scaling as the cube of the number of
particles being considered to those scaling linearly with the number of
particles. The larger systems will enable more accurate optical properties to be
calculated and enable accurate treatment of defects, including polarons and
solitons, which will allow realistic calculations of optical and magnetic
properties. Computational aspects of the work include development of specialized
parallel sparse matrix algorithms; use and development of load-balancing
heuristics; development of parallel disk-based algorithms for fast Fourier
transforms and other matrix operations; and, use of shared data-space model such
as provided by High Performance Fortran. Codes will be run on a variety of
platforms. %%% This award is one made through the FY95 Computational Approaches
to Real Materials competition. Funding is provided through the Divisions of
Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific C omputing, as
well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate. The research combines algorithm and code
development with materials theory to address important materials problems for
which computational breakthroughs can produce large payoffs. As such, the
research spans the strategic initiatives in High Performance Computing and
Communications and Advanced Materials and Processing. The research will focus on
a class of materials called halogen-bridged compounds. These compounds can be
readily modified by varying their structure and components in order to achieve
desired electronic, optical and magnetic properties. Thus, they are Odesigner
materials.O Present computational techniques only hint at these possibilities.
The present research will develop computational techniques in order to deal with
much more realistic systems of these compounds. Consequently, successful
completion of this research will advance computation on state-of-the-art
computers, will assist in fundamental understanding of the properties of these
compounds and will enable the accurate design of a class of materials for a
variety of applications. ***