* 9520228
* Fourth International Workshop on Computational Electronics  (October 30 - November 2, 1995, Tempe,AZ)
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* David Ferry, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* George K. Lea
* 04/30/1996
* USD 8,489.00

The Project summary should include a statement of objectives, methods to be
employed, and the significance of the proposed activity to the advancement of
knowledge or education. Avoid use of first person to complete this summary. The
purpose of this project is to contact the next International Workshop on
Computational Electronics to be held in Tempe, Arizona on October 30- November
2, 1995. This workshop is the fourth in a series and is held under the auspices
of the National Center for Computational Electronics at the University of
Illinois. The workshop will cover all aspects of advanced simulation and
modeling of electronic transport in semiconductor and semiconductor devices,
particularly those aspects that utilize intensive computational and/or
visualization resources. This workshop is intended to be an international forum
for the discussion of the current trends and future directions of computational
electronics. The IWCE attempts to bring together engineers, physicists,
computational scientists, and applied mathematicians in the area of simulation
and modeling. The proceedings of the Fourth IWCE will be published as a regular
issue of VLSI Design. The will be an issue of approximately 300 pages, as all
manuscripts will be contained in a single issue. Papers will be submitted at the
beginning of the workshop with regular refereeing occurring during the workshop.
Final revised (accepted) manuscripts will be due approximately three weeks after
the workshop.