* 9520893
* Investigation of Mechanisms of Facet Growth and In-Situ     Fabrication of Si-Based Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Kang Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1998
* USD 327,913.00

9520893 Wang The objectives of this project are to achieve fundamental
understanding and control of facet growth in selective epitaxial growth, and to
develop an in-situ growth technique of nanometer scale heterostructures of
Si/SiGe and Si/SiGeC. In-situ facet growth of Si-based nanostructures using
disilane based gas source molecular beam epitaxy will be studied; individual
nanostructures will be self-isolated. The approach includes: (1) A theoretical
model for understanding and control of facet growth. The model will take
substrate orientations, pattern alignments, and heteroepitaxy of Si/SiGe and
Si/SiGeC will be included into account. (2) Surface migration of various
species, anisotropy of growth rate, and migration lengths for different facets
will be studied. (3) Optical properties will be explored with large area
photoluminescence and photoexcitation spectroscopy. A Scanning Near-field
Optical Microprobe (SNOM) will be used to detect the luminescence from a single
nanostructure cell. In addition, atomic force microscope and SNOM will be used
to examine mesas and to determine migration length, and size dependent growth
rate. Crystalline quality and strain in the nanostructures will be assessed by
X-ray diffraction. %%% This research aims toward gaining an understanding of
crystal facet growth in the nanometer scale and the control of fabricating
nanostructures, free of surface damage and other effects. These nanostructures
are expected to exhibit many new phenomena and improved properties, which are
very important for ultra-large scale integrated circuits and nanoelectronics.
The research addresses two bottleneck problems encountered with conventional
methods: surface damage caused by direct dry etching and the limitation of
lithography for achieving a desired feature size. Because of the pervasiveness
of silicon integrated circuit technology and its enormous economic importance,
the technological impact of the proposed program is potentially very large. An
important feature of the program is the training of students in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area of materials research. ***