* 9520803
* Acyclic Diene Metathesis Polymerization
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* K. Wagener, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9520803 Wagener The viability of acyclic diene metathesis (ADMET) polymerization
has been demonstrated during the most recent funding period by identifying the
functionalities which can be tolerated during this condensation reaction. This
new chemistry has led to telechelic hydrocarbon polymers synthesized by
depolymerization reactions, as well as to many advanced polymer systems. This
grant addresses four generally related research areas which expand upon what has
been done thus far with ADMET polymerization. The chemistry of conjugated dienes
will be explored. Hydrocarbon conjugated dienes will be examined fipst followed
by expansion to aromatic conjugated dienes. The mechanistic enigma associated
with terminal aliphatic dienes will be elucidated. Further, the catalyst base
for ADMET chemistry will be expanded to include considerably less expensive
systems, and speed of these reactions (the kinetics) will be elucidated in such
detail that the practical application of these results will be well understood.
Thermoreversible network polymers will be made with the goal of improving the
recyclability of waste plastics systems, and finally, chiral polymers will be
prepared to broaden the utility of this new chemistry. %%% Interest in the
commercial utility of ADMET chemistry is high, as judged by the response from
American industry during the past three years of NSF support. Particularly
significant are applications to the synthesis of specialty polymers, the
preparation (via depolymerization) of targeted molecules of high commercial
value, and the utility of ADMET chemistry in the reuse of well known commercial
polymers, such as polybutadiene. This renewal builds upon all of these
opportunities. ***