* 9520884
* Collaborative:  Assessing Effects of Food Web Structure on  Patterns of Productivity and Trophic Transfer in Lake Food  Webs
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Hunter Carrick, SUNY College at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1998
* USD 38,000.00

9520884 Carrick This research will examine the effect of upper food web
configuration on pelagic ecosystem structure, carbon flow, and productivity in
Castle Lake, California. This research builds on a whole lake food web
manipulation, and augments the value and importance of a well-developed long
term data set emphasizing biological and climatic determinants of primary
productivity. In this project, food web configuration in Castle Lake will be
manipulated by varying the stocking rates of rainbow trout. The manipulation
will reduce rainbow trout, thus increasing the abundance of golden shiners,
copepods, and micrograzers of bacteria. By measuring rates of microbial and
primary production and assessing population and growth dynamics of metazoans and
fish, this research will estimate patterns of production and carbon flow through
the food web under different food web configurations. The response of the Castle
Lake food web to trophic structure manipulation will be compared to concurrent
dynamics in an unperturbed reference site, Cliff Lake. In addition to the whole
lake manipulation, a series of meso- and microcosm experiments to address
mechanisms determining food web structure will be conducted. This research will
be summarized and synthesized within a quantitative simulation model. This
quantitative framework will allow integration from investigations spanning a
variety of spatial and temporal scales, and will allow interpretation of
microbial and classic-based food web dynamics within the context of the long-
term data record for the Castle Lake ecosystem.