* 9520972
* Measuring the Kinetics of Surfactant Adsorptive - Desorptive Exchange:  The Role of Surfactant Structure and Charge
* NONE,NONE
* 01/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Kathleen Stebe, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 03/31/1999
* USD 144,687.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9520972 Kathleen J. Stebe Johns Hopkins University The aim of this
study is to probe the dependence of the absorption kinetics of surfactants on
their structure and charge. Two methods will be used; the pendant bubble and the
oscillating bubble techniques, which have precise theoretical descriptions in
terms of surfactant mass transfer and thermodynamics. The shape of a pendant
bubble in surfactant solution becomes increasingly elongated as surfactant
diffuses and absorbs, reducing the surface profiles. These profiles are matched
to theoretical diffusion controlled relaxation's to obtain diffusion
coefficients. Equilibrium data establish the surface equation of state and the
adsorption isotherm. In the oscillating bubble method a small spherical bubble
is formed, equilibrated, and subsequently forced to oscillate by the action of a
piezo-piston. Phase angles and amplitude ratios between the radial and gas phase
pressure oscillations are analyzed to confirm the diffusivities and to obtain
the adsorption-desorption coefficients. For non-ionic surfactants, the
theoretical framework to use these techniques has been established. In the first
part of this study, the equilibrium and dynamics of surfactant absorption of a
homologous series of nonionic surfactants, the polyethoxylates, will be studied.
The absorption of ionic surfactants used to describe the equilibrium and
dynamics of surfactant absorption. Because Debye lengths are typically small, of
order 1000A, an approach based on a thin Debye length will be adopted. Diffusive
flux alone determines the sublayer concentration. Surfactant partitions between
the interface and the bulk according to an absorption kinetic barrier which is
caused, in part, by the surface potential. The potential gradient at the surface
concentration. Instantaneous electrical equilibrium is assumed, so the potential
obeys a Gouy-Chapman distribution within the double layer. A surface equation of
state and adsorption isotherm tha t properly incorporate the surface potential
will be adopted. This approach will be used to develop models for ionic
surfactant adsorption in the pendant bubble and in the oscillating bubble
methods. Theory will be compare to experiment for the a series of the long chain
acids.