* 9520503
* Characterization of a Novel Group I Intron in               Bacillus Bacteriophage FS7
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Lise Wilson, Siena College
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 59,900.00

; R o o t E n t r y F o/ @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l o/ @ o/ @ 4 @ 9 : ; &lt; = &gt; ? @ A B F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9520503 Wilson PRIVATE This proposal is for a Career
Advancement Award to extend the PIs sabbatical leave from Siena College for one
semester; to provide release time from teaching for an additional semester upon
return to her home institution; and to provide summer salary support. She wishes
to continue a promising line of research initiated during a sabbatical in Dr.
David Shub's laboratory at the State University of New York at Albany. During
the proposed period of support she also plans to write and submit a research
grant on this project to the NSF Research in Undergraduate Institutions program
so that she can continue the investigations in with undergraduates. A systematic
search for introns will be undertaken to explore the evolutionary relationships
between Group I introns in prokaryotic genes. A recently discovered self
splicing intron within the thymidylate synthase (TS) gene of B. subtilis
bacteriophage ,B22 (thy) shares a number of properties with the previously
identified thymidylate synthase (td) Group I intron of bacteriophage T4, as well
as with the other known T4 introns (nrdB and sunY). A number of candidate phages
of gram(+) bacteria, identical in structure to ~22, will be explored by PCR for
introns within their TS genes. Each new intron discovered will be cloned into an
in vitro transcription vector to analyze its ability to self splice from primary
transcripts, and sequenced to deduce its folded structure, and ascertain its
relatedness to the known Group I introns. %%% Although the vast majority of
eukaryotic genes contain introns, none has been identified as residing in
eubacteria or their viruses until the surprising discovery of a self splicing
intron in the thymidylate synthase gene of bacteriophage T4. Others in T4 were
quickly discovered as well. All of the intron containing genes in T4 encode
proteins involved in the synthesis of deoxyribonucleotides in infected host
cells. In the Career Advancement Award, a systematic search for introns in
prokaryotic genes will be undertaken. each new intron identified will be
analyzed for its ability to self-splice, and its structures and relatedness to
other group I introns will be determined. *** ; @ ....()()))()() Z : phoenix W
EH o ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 8 Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ t @ @ @ @ @ J
6 Microsoft Word 6.0 3 e = e " " " " " " " L L L L L d n L C x | | | | | | | # f
W T 4 " | | | | | | " " | x | | | | " | " | 6 &gt; " " " " | | 5 | 9520503
Wilson PRIVATE This proposal is for a Career Advan