* 9520447
* Engineering Research Equipment: Instrumentation for a       Vertically Integrated Controls Laboratory
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Peter David Washabaugh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1997
* USD 54,616.00

9520447 Bernstein The Department of Aerospace Engineering at the University of
Michigan will purchase a real-time control processor and related diagnostic
equipment that will be dedicated to support research in engineering. The
equipment will be used for several research projects, including, in particular:
control of a rotating actuator, control of noise, control of rotating imbalance,
control of combustion, and control os slosh. Control-system technology is an
enabling technology for many complex, high performance systems. In many of these
applications the control system is so essential that the system simply cannot
operate without it. On the other hand, failure of the control system can have
dire consequences. Graphic examples include the Chernobyl disaster and Airbus
crashes. In view of the importance and risks of control-system technology, this
proposal seeks laboratory equipment in the form of a real-time control processor
and related equipment to allow researchers to carry out a broad range of
experiments in feedback control technology. The equipment to be purchased under
this grant will allow us to upgrade and expand our current control laboratory
facilities. Multichannel identification and control capabilities will be used to
implement and assess the performance of multivariable controllers. Our goal is
to develop a vertically integrated control laboratory in which data is passed
seamlessly from identification experiments to control law synthesis and,,
finally, to real-time code generation for implementation and testing. This high
degree of integration will be critical for exploiting and demonstrating the
capabilities of new developments in control technology for a variety of
applications. ***