* 9520137
* Dissertation Research:  Structure and Function of the Manual Long Bone Shafts of Australopithecus afarensis
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Alan Walker, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 07/31/1997
* USD 11,993.00

Although a number of important new fossil finds relating to the emergence of
humans have been discovered in the past twenty years, there remains a great deal
of controversy surrounding their interpretation - for example, how the animals
such as the `Lucy` finds got around - did they walk like us, or shuffle, or arm-
swing, or do something different. This dissertation project will analyze the
evidence from hand bones to the debate about the locomotion of A. afarensis, the
`Lucy` species. Unlike the hands of all other primates, our hands have little or
not role in locomotion. This research will examine the metacarpals and finger
bones (phalanges) of a number of extant and fossil monkeys in order to determine
the structural correlates of locomotor differences. Data will be obtained from
x-rays, molding, and measuring original specimens and casts. Correlations will
be made betwen metacarpal cross-secional geometric properties, mid-shpft shape
of metacarpals and phalanges, and their curvatures, and a comparison will be
performed, taking into account the different body sizes. A pilot study has
already confirmed the usefullness of these measurements, showing that there are
structural features of the long bones of the hand which do correlate with
different locomotor repertoires. These features will in turn help to elucidate
the locomotor behaviors of A. afarensis, and should be useful in determining
such behaviors in other extinct hominoids. This award will also enhance the
training of an energetic and excellent professional prospect.