* 9520134
* Relevance in Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1997
* Aditi Dhagat, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Yechezkel Zalcstein
* 01/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

For doing medical diagnosis, one may wish to design a learning algorithm which
attempts to determine from test data which combinations of symptoms indicate
that a person will develop a certain disease. The test data may consist of a
collection of patient profiles, with the outcomes of a large number of tests on
each patient, and a bit indicating whether the patient subsequently developed
the disease. One may further assume that whether a patient develops the disease
depends only on the presence or absence of a few symptoms, and all other
symptoms are irrelevant. In that case, a good learning algorithms should output
a hypothesis that is also a function of a small number of symptoms. A hypothesis
can be used to predict whether future patients will develop the disease. If the
hypothesis depends on only a small number of clinical tests, it saves time and
money. In recent work, the investigator has shown a polynomial time PAC
(Probably Approximately Correct) algorithm which learns k-term disjunctive
normal form formulae which depend on at most r variables (where r is unknown and
may be a function of the total number of variables) by creating a disjunctive
normal form (DNF) hypothesis which contains at most poly(r) variables. An
initial goal of this project is (a) to demonstrate a similar result for the
class of decision lists. Additional goals include: (b) the exploration of
different paradigms where extracting relevant information is important; (c) the
discovery of efficient algorithms for the current problems; (d) the development
of a theoretical framework for measuring relevance under which universally
applicable techniques for reducing irrelevant information can be found. In
addition to the research described above, the PI will teach a graduate seminar
on computational learning theory with the expectation of attracting graduate
students to the area.