* 9520909
* Induced Inverse-Microemulsion Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* David Hunkeler, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1996
* USD 71,186.00

Acrylic water soluble polymers are utilized in industries such as paper making
(fines retention), oil recovery (pushing fluids), personal hygiene (absorbent
hydrogels) as well as in environmentally friendly applications such as water
treatment (flocculation). Water based polymers also have emerging applications
in controlled drug delivery, immunoisolation, bioartificial organs
(encapsulation) as well as components of light weight solar cells. In these
applications, the polymer gains its utility from its hydrophilicity, charge
density, and molecular weight. The PI is interested in developing a new process
which enables the synthesis of high molecular weight acrylic water soluble
polymers: Induced Inverse-Microemulsion Polymerization. This enables the
formation of a thermodynamically stable inverse-microemulsion at lower
emulsifier levels than have ever been used before (as low as 2 wt% of the total
recipe). These inverse-microemulsions are transformed from monomeric inverse-
macroemulsions by taking advantage of the inherent features of the reaction,
such as its ex othermicity. The process combines some of the advantages of an
inverse-microemulsion product, such as its stability and ease of chemical
modification of the polymeric backbone, while avoiding the principal
disadvantage: economics. The lower emulsifier level permits the process to
compete with inverse-macroemulsions. The PIs plan a series of synthesis and
characterization studies to investigate and understand induced inverse-
microemulsion polymerization and to evaluate its potential. They plan to develop
mechanistic models which will help maximize the linear molecular weight of the
polymer produced. The project also involves strategic basic research in light
and neutron scattering and birefringence. It is cost shared by more than 50%
from US industry and also fits in well with the PI's existing projects on
environmentally conscious design and life cycle analysis which are focused on
evaluating solvent-free alternatives to existing processes for the production of
water soluble polymers.