* 9520114
* Symposium on Science and Engineering Education in the       21st Century, Cairo, Egypt, April 9-12, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1996
* Amr Abdel Hamid, American University of Cario
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 03/31/1996
* USD 15,224.00

Description: This project supports the participation of a delegation of eminent
US scientists and engineers from academic institutes in a `Symposium on Science
and Engineering Education in the 21st Century` organized by the American
University in Cairo. The meeting scheduled for April 9-12, 1995, has the
following objectives: examining present and future trends in the use of high
technology computer and multimedia applications in basic sciences and
engineering education; identifying curricular changes to meet challenges of
development; examining the state of-the-art and future trends in the theory and
practice in basic science and engineering education; and discussing needs for
life-long learning for continuous human development. Seven US academics who have
long experiences in S&E education and development are invited to participate to
cover the areas of computer science, physics, mathematics, mechanical
engineering, aerospace engineering, biology, and chemistry. Several plenary
lectures will be presented by these scientists and others from Europe and the
Middle East. A number of workshops are planned to demonstrate the latest
software packages in the various scientific disciplines, with emphasis on
interactive dynamic simulation techniques that link and integrate knowledge
across disciplines. The proceeding of the Symposium will be published, and will
include the plenary lectures as well as selected presentations from
participants. Total participants are expected to number 400 to 500 and will
include scientists from Egypt and from other Middle East countries in a wide
range of science and engineering disciplines, and will also include
representative from the industrial and business sectors as well as prospective
employers of scientists and engineers. A selected number of graduate and
undergraduate students. will also be invited.