* 9520832
* Statistical Studies of Molecular Evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Masatoshi Nei, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 08/31/1999
* USD 230,000.00

9520832 NEI DNA sequences are molecular fossils from which one can learn the
history of genes and organisms as well as the mechanism of evolution. For this
reason, a large number of investigators are generating DNA sequences for many
genes from various organisms from bacteria to humans. However, as the amount of
DNA sequence data increases, it becomes difficult to extract the evolutionary
significance from these data without use of proper statistical and computational
methods. Current statistical and computational methods are inadequate to handle
large-scale data and to solve newly arising evolutionary questions. It is also
important to study patterns of nucleotide substitution and other types of DNA
changes to provide a solid biological basis for any statistical and
computational method. Furthermore, evolution of some genetic systems such as
reproductive isolation between species still remains mysterious, and it is
important to study these problems at the DNA level. The first project refines
statistical methods for estimating the number of nucleotide or amino acid
substitutions (evolutionary distance) between different sequences. These
statistical methods are important not only for estimating evolutionary times of
different organisms but also for constructing phylogenetic trees. The second
project is concerned with the understanding of the mechanism of positive
Darwinian selection observed in a number of gamete-recognition genes in mammals,
abalone, and sea urchin and their possible roles in the evolution of
reproductive isolation between different species. This study will contribute to
the understanding of speciation mechanisms at the DNA level.