* 9520977
* US-Japanese Internet Exchanges of Information about the 1995 South Hyogo Prefecture Earthquake
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1997
* Jean Pierre Bardet, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 02/28/1997
* USD 20,048.00

9520977 Bardet On January 17, 1995, a magnitude 7.2 earthquake struck the city
of Kobe in Japan, and inflicted the worst natural disaster to Japan since the
1923 Tokyo Earthquake. Some of the 10,000 buildings toppled by the quake were
modern structures. The modern port of Kobe was completely shut down, mainly due
to massive liquefaction of the soil foundations for its wharves and container
yards. The infrastructure of Kobe, including railways, Shinkansen lines,
expressways, and subways was heavily damaged. There were more than 30 bridge
failures in the Hyogo Prefecture. The lifelines, including electricity, gas, and
water were severely disrupted in the city of Kobe. Such a large scale disaster
confronts engineers with the devastating effects of an intensity 7 earthquake in
a populated area. The damage to Kobe transportation systems rendered access
difficult. Owing to the transportation problems and the large scale damage to
Kobe, foreign reconnaissance teams experienced difficulties in assessing the
earthquake damage. There are many geotechnical lessons to learn from this
earthquake which can be used to avoid similar catastrophes in the US. The
objective of this project is to collaborate with the Japanese reconnaissance
teams in order to collect and release data about the geotechnical features of
the South Hyogo Prefecture Earthquake, using the modern and efficient means of
Internet communication. This new means of communication not only speeds up the
dissemination of critical information, but it also promotes the exchange of
information between US and Japan earthquake engineers. The Japanese Society of
Soil Mechanics and Foundations has agreed to collaborate with the principal
investigator on the translation of the Japanese reports into English, and to put
these translated reports on the GEOTECH Internet subscriber list and Mosaic
Server of the Southern California Earthquake Center. The information will
contain digitized strong motion recordings, map s, aerial photographs, and
photographs taken during field observations. All this information will be made
available to the US earthquake engineering community as rapidly as possible in
order to inform them in a timely manner, and to help them to take appropriate
research actions to learn as much as is possible from the South Hyogo Prefecture
Earthquake. ***