* 9520388
* Virtual Reality Imaging of the Colon
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1995,05/31/2000
* Peter Santago, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Continuing grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2000
* USD 759,918.00

9520388 Vining Colorectal carcinoma is the second leading cause of cancer deaths
in the United States. As with other cancers, studies suggest that early
detection and removal of precursor polyps and small carcinomas reduces
mortality. Visualization of the entire colon by means of X-ray images enhanced
with barium (a barium enema) or colonoscopy (endoscope) improves polyp
detection. Both examinations have poor patient compliance because of associated
discomfort, inconvenience, risk and cost. colonoscopy has an advantage over
barium enema because it serves both as a diagnostic test and a therapeutic
procedure, as polyps are removed upon their discovery. However, colonoscopy is
an invasive examination, does not always reveal significant lesions, fails to
reach the far end (cecum) of the colon in about 15% of patients, sometimes
requires sedation, increases the risk of bowel perforation, and is the most
expensive of all bowel examinations. This proposal describes research to develop
a new approach for Virtual Colonoscopy (VC) examinations as a substitute for the
costly and invasive diagnostic colonoscopy (DC). VC combines helical CT
scanning, 3D reconstruction, and high- performance computing to examine the
entire colon rapidly and to lessen the discomfort for the patient. The aims of
this project are to generate new software for evaluating VC examinations, to
create an algorithm for measuring the colon's wall thickness to highlight areas
of abnormal thickness, to validate the accuracy of VC with the foregoing
modifications, and to determine the cost-savings potential of VC relative to DC.
The project involves a multidisciplinary team of investigators, the results are
to be evaluated in a clinical setting by comparing the results of VC relative to
DC in patients undergoing usual care colonoscopy, and the work plan includes
educational activities to promote a better understanding of the cost- reducing
issue. Successful results from this project would yield significant clinical and
public health benefits by way of the potential for increased acceptance among
patients, and doing so at considerably lower cost and risks. ***