* 9520702
* Dissertation Research: Gene Flow and the Scale of           Fragmentation in Tropical Tree Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* James Hamrick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

DEB 95-20702 Hamrick Deforestation is occurring at an alarming rate in many
parts of the world, especially in tropical regions. Much attention has been
focused on the resultant loss of species diversity, particularly of animals.
Relatively little effort has gone into examining the effects of fragmentation on
the dynamics of tropical tree populations. In contrast to the temperate zone,
most tropical tree species disperse pollen and seeds by means of animal vectors.
Thus, it is likely that habitat fragmentation could seriously impact the
integrity of tropical tree populations if pollinator and seed disperser
associations are disrupted. A lack of dispersal among remnant forest fragments
would lead to genetic differentiation among fragments over several generations
and an increased probability of extinction due to demographic factors associated
with small population size. This combination of factors should lead to a loss of
genetic diversity in the species over time which could compromise its ability to
respond to future evolutionary pressures. This study examines the effects of
habitat fragmentation on gene movement via pollen and seed within and among
remnant forest patches in premontane tropical rain forest in southern Costa
Rica. The study site consists of a 20 hectare fragmented area including three
one-hectare remnant patches plus two one-hectare plots in continuous forest for
control. Molecular genetic markers will be utilized to identify adults and young
seedlings of the study species occurring within the study sites. Genetic
fingerprints will be used to establish patterns of parental relationship between
seedlings and parent-pairs occurring within the study region. Seedlings that
cannot be produced by parents resident on the plot represent instances of long-
distance gene flow. The detailed examination of parent-seedling associations
within the study regions will provide important evidence regarding: the amount
of genetic connectedness among patches; the importance of f ree-standing
individuals in pastures to the local dynamics of patch populations; and the
importance of corridors to the movement of pollen and seeds. These data will
provide an empirical perspective on patterns of gene flow in a heterogeneous
environment and will prmvide necessary information for the conservation of
tropical areas and the design of tropical reserves.