* 9520256
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Optoelectronic Devices, Interconnects, and Packaging
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/1995,05/31/2001
* Nasser Peyghambarian, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 05/31/2001
* USD 341,800.00

9520256 Dagenais This award establishes a joint Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Optoelectronic Devices, Interconnects, and Packaging between
the University of Arizona and the University of Maryland. The Center will focus
its activities in the areas of optoelectronic devices, interconnects, and
packaging. Both universities will join as equal partners. The University of
Arizona will contribute its pioneering experimental an theoretical activities in
nonlinear photonics, optical switching devices, semiconductor laser research,
and interconnects. The University of Maryland will contribute its strength in
the areas of optoelectronic device processing, semiconductor lasers and
semiconductor laser amplifiers, optical interconnects, silicon bench technology,
lasers and semiconductor laser amplifiers, optical interconnects, silicon bench
technology, characterization, and packaging. The merging of the two groups will
lead to a new found synergism as the interaction between Center participants is
built up and as the research goals converge. The participation of faculty
members from each institution in each Centers' projects will strongly be
encouraged. Fourteen companies and Government Agencies are becoming members of
this joint university Center. The initial research agenda at the two research
sites will address: 1) Optic Interconnect Development for Advanced Processing
and Network Systems; 2) Holographic Interconnects for Optical Neural Networks
and Other Applications; 3) Theory of Semiconductor Nonlinearities; 4)
Semiconductor Lasers and All-Optical Switches; 5) Near to Mid-Infrared Optical
Parametric Oscillators; 6) Novel Optoelectronic Devices; 7) Waveguide Waferboard
Project; 8) Semiconductor Laser Amplifiers: Packaging and Applications; 9)
Characterization and Modeling of Acousto-Optic Correlators; 10) Process and
Device Characterization. An undergraduate student will be supported for one year
with funds provided by the Women, M inorities, and Disabled Engineering Research
Assistants Program. The student will be involved in measurements of solid state
dye lasers for preparing compact, low- cost lasers for different regions of the
spectra.