* 9520889
* SGER:  Post-Mast Recruitment and Performance for Rain Forest Tree Indonesia Seedlings
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1995,12/31/1996
* David Peart, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1996
* USD 20,000.00

As the most species-rich communities on earth, tropical rain forests are a
particular challenge to theories of species coexistence. Although many
hypotheses have been advanced, the mechanisms responsible for coexistence in
diverse forests have not yet been clarified. The over- arching goal of this
research is to evaluate evidence for mechanisms of coexistence in rain forest
trees, with focus on the adult and seedling stages. The seedling stage may be
critical in the maintenance of diversity, and direct evidence of dynamic
processes, including density dependence, can be gathered relatively quickly at
the seedling stage, even for long-lived trees. Major fruit-masting events occur
in Bornean rain forests only once every 6-7 years, on average. A major mast is
about to occur, as evidenced by mass flowering of many tree taxa at the study
site over the last few months. Thus, the specific objectives of this research
are to (1) establish the recruitment, survival and growth rates of seedlings
resulting from the mast, and test for the effects of adult conspecific density
on seedling recruitment a nd growth, and (2) test for density dependence among
seedlings in growth and mortality, using observational and experimental studies
on a range of spatial scales. This research will provide a vital understanding
of dynamics in tropical rain forests, with the added benefit of capturing data
during a year with unusually abundant seed production. In addition, this
research will expand our global understand of factors that maintain high species
richness in tropical forests.