* 9520930
* Synthesis and NMR Studies of Linear Polycarbosilanes-CeramicPrecursors and Novel Polymeric Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Thomas Apple, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Seymour Lapporte
* 01/31/1999
* USD 555,075.00

In this project funded in the Special Projects Office of the Chemistry Division
Interrante and Apple will investigate the synthesis, structures, and pyrolysis
of a unique series of polycarbosilanes derived from poly(silaethylene) (PSE),
which is a precursor to the production of stoichiometric silicon carbide. Ring-
opening polymerization (ROP) processes will be investigated and developed into
an effective general route to polycarbosilanes. Both solution and solid-state
NMR spectroscopy will provide information about the molecular and crystal
structures of PSE and other silyl polymers as well as some of their preceramic
and ceramic pyrolysis products. This study will enable the systematic study of
an emerging class of inorganic/organic polymers which effectively bridge the gap
between the all-carbon chain polymers, such as polyethylene, and the inorganic
polymers based on silicon, such as polysilanes ald polysiloxanes. %%% Silicon
carbide is a material with high strength and modulus capable of performing at
high working temperatures in practical applications such as a gas turbine
engine. Silicon oxycarbide is also a target ceramic material which is
potentially a fiber and matrix material in ceramic composites. However, in both
cases excess carbon, which results from decomposition of the organosilicon
precursors, affects both the mechanical properties and oxidative stability of
the end products. This research investigates routes to producing these end
products without the troublesome excess carbon, resulting in ceramics with
superior material properties.