* 9520279
* Seismic Behavior and Design of Connections for CFT Column   Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,01/31/2000
* Le-Wu Lu, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/31/2000
* USD 176,000.00

9520279 Ricles One efficient means of composite construction is the concrete
filled steel tube (CFT) column- wide flange steel beam system. The filling of
the tube increases the stiffness and strength of the system. This form of
construction also produces a very cost effective structural system by combining
the attributes of structural steel (speed of construction, strength, long-span
capability, lightweight) and concrete (stiffness, damping, economy), where the
tube provides a convenient formwork for placing the concrete. One of the key
elements in this type of construction is the structural connection between the
beam and column. As part of a lateral seismic load resistant system the
connection would be expected to be capable of transferring beam forces and
moments to the columns. The behavior of connections is typically complex due to
the inelastic, non- uniform, combined stress states that develop under loading.
There presently is still a lack of knowledge related to the seismic performance
and guidelines for seismic resistance design of CFT composite construction,
particularly for connections. This study will focus on the seismic behavior of
moment connections for CFT square column composite structural systems. The
objectives are to: (1) study the force and moment transfer mechanism between the
beams and a adjacent column, and the influence connection details have on this
mechanism; (2) develop connection details that perform well under seismic
conditions, and are cost effective; and (3) develop design guidelines for
implementing the details in practice. The analytical investigation will consists
of two parts. The first part will involve conducting nonlinear time history
seismic analysis of open CFT column composite systems. The second part will
entail conducting nonlinear finite element ana lysis of the connection in order
to assess the affects various structural details have on the force and moment
transfer mechanism and capacity of the connection. Affects of concrete crushing,
steel tube local buckling, and panel zone deformation on connection performance
will be assessed. The experimental program will involve the construction and
testing of full scale beam column sub- assemblages for seismic loading
conditions. These sub- assemblages will resemble the beam and column members and
their connection in the interior joint region of the prototype theme structure.
Each connection in a test specimen will consist of an innovative design, where
the ductility demand and information on connection details obtained from the
analytical study will be used to formulate these designs. The results from the
experimental and analytical programs will then be used to formulate the design
guidelines. This is a project supported under the year 1 program of the Civil
Infrastructure Systems (CIS) solicitation NSF 94-154. ***