* 9520613
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Reconstruction of the   Simuliidae (Diptera: Culicomorpha) using Mitochondrial DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1997
* David Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9520613 Maddison The Simuliidae black flies are a large group of dipterans
occurring worldwide, but most notorious in the African and American tropics
where various species carry filarial parasites causing river blindness and other
diseases. The taxonomic and phylogenetic relationships of the numerous species
and genera are poorly understood, and the conflicting classifications proposed
over the years hinder effective control strategies. Graduate student John
Moulton, under the supervision of faculty adviser Prof. David Maddison at the
University of Arizona, is analyzing mutational differences in mitochondrial DNA
of numerous taxa of simuliid black flies collected from various parts of the
world. The molecular differences will be used to construct a scheme of
evolutionary connections among the genera and tribes of Simuliidae, and then
these relationships can be compared with and tested against the known
morphological features of the groups. Black flies present interesting scientific
questions about biogeography and character evolution, questions that have
resisted successful attack because of the conflicting taxonomies so far employed
for their classification and identification. Recent morphological work by the
Canadian entomologist Currie now provides a reliable framework for comparing and
contrasting new molecular data from DNA sequence analyses. The integration of
these two approaches should lead to a robust phylogenetic understanding of the
evolution and dispersal of black flies, including those harboring disease
vectors.