* 9520253
* Development of in Vitro Genetic System to Study RNA         Editing
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Laura Landweber, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* karen kindle-hartsuyker
* 03/31/1997
* USD 53,000.00

9520253 Landweber The objective of this research is to develop the use of in
vitro selection as a model system to explore he possible link between RNA
catalysis and kinetoplastid RNA editing. RNA editing is the bizarre and complex
addition or deletion of uridine residues which occurs in the mitochondria of
some of the earliest eukaryotes, the kinetoplastid protozoa. The approach will
be to develop a successful in vitro selection system to analyze the mechanism
and evolution of RNA editing. These experiments will address the antiquity of
RNA editing and the role of RNA catalysts in evolution. One hypothesis is that
RNA editing is an ancient process, and the interaction of several short loci to
produce one final transcript may reflect some of the steps involved in the first
assembly of genes. Specifically, these experiments will test the hypothesis that
RNA editing may have been one of the key players in the RNA world by analyzing
whether each of its steps can be catalyzed by RNA, a characteristic of some of
the earliest hypothesized biological mechanisms. This research will determine
whether the first step of RNA editing, a transesterification similar to other
RNA catalyzed ligation reactions, can be catalyzed by an RNA molecule. Through a
series of in vitro selection experiments, which simulate evolution in a test
tube, the experiments will explore the world of possible primitive RNA editing
enzymes, by selecting the desired catalytic molecules from a pool of random
sequences. Armed with these preliminary experiments, we will then be prepared to
analyze the later steps of RNA editing, with the final goal of evolving a
complete RNA catalyzed RNA editing system in vitro. These experiments will test
whether a molecule capable of editing RNA could have arisen under fairly simple
conditions: a model for the evolution of complex molecular processes.
Ultimately, this will allow one to design new RNA enzymes that can edit RNA of
any specific sequence. %%% The objective od this research is to deve lop the use
of in vitro selection to explore the possible link between RNA catalysis and
kinetoplastid RNA editing. RNA editing is the bizarre and complex addition or
deletion of uridine residues which occurs in the mitochondria of some of the
earliest eukaryotes, the kinetoplastid protozoa. The approach will be to develop
a successful in vitro selection system to analyze the mechanism and evolution of
RNA editing. These experiments will test whether a molecule capable of editing
RNA could have arisen under fairly simple conditions: a model for the evolution
of complex molecular processes. Through a series of in vitro selection
experiments, which simulate evolution in a test tube, the experiments will
explore the world of possible primitive RNA editing enzymes, by seleating new
catalytic molecules from a pool of random sequences. Ultimately, this will allow
one to design new RNA enzymes that can edit RNA of any specific sequence. ***