* 9520752
* Dissertation Research:  The Potential for Evolution of      Arabidopsis thaliana Under low and Elevated CO2 Partial     Pressure
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Boyd Strain, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 07/31/1997
* USD 11,000.00

9520752 Atmospheric carbon dioxide is expected to double within the next 80
years due to burning of fossil fuels and deforestation of tropical rainforests.
Analyses of ancient air trapped within ice have shown that atmospheric carbon
dioxide may have been as low as 50% of the current level approximately 20,000
years ago. We know that many plants increase growth and reproduction when grown
under high carbon dioxide and decrease growth and reproduction when grown under
low carbon dioxide. We know very little, however, about the evolutionary
responses of plants to changing levels of carbon dioxide. That information is
needed to: a) accurately predict plant responses under future scenarios of high
carbon dioxide, b) understand how plants survived during low carbon dioxide
levels of the past and c) determine the processes by which plants evolve in
response to changing levels of carbon dioxide. This research will use the annual
plant Arabidopsis thaliana as a model system to study the evolutionary responses
of plants under low and high carbon dioxide. It will determine whether
individual plants show variation in growth and reproduction under low and high
carbon dioxide and examine the response of populations to selection for
increased reproduction under low and high carbon dioxide. It will test to see
whether such selection produces plants with an adaptive advantage and determine
what physiological and developmental processes are associated with evolution of
plants in response to carbon dioxide. This research will increase our
understanding of the processes by which plants adapt to changing carbon dioxide
levels over geologic time, and improve our ability to predict and understand the
changes that plants may undergo due to human-caused changes in atmospheric
carbon dioxide levels.