* 9520434
* SGER:  A Domain-Model Approach to Reconstruction of 3-D     Environments for Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Linda Shapiro, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

IRI-9520434 Shapiro, Linda G. University of Washington $50,000 - 12 mos. SGER: A
Domain-Model Approach to Reconstruction of 3D Environments for Virtual Reality
This award is in the Small Grants for Exploratory Research mode. Reconstruction
of 3D environments from sensed data is a computer vision problem with important
application to the area of virtual reality and other visual information systems.
The relatively new research area of virtual reality requires 3D models of entire
environments, and presents several significant new challenges for computer
vision, including the ability to deal with multiple moving objects in the scene,
integration of information about color and textures, and the need for close
attention to domain constraints, to improve the reconstruction of a 3-D model of
the environment. The new approach in this research is to use domain knowledge to
simplify and improve the 3D environment-acquisition process. This approach is
knowledge-driven and attempts to understand the physical structure of the
environment and of the individual objects in the environment. This award
supports preliminary research to explore the feasibility of development of
physical domain models that define the physical constraints of a particular
domain. Such models might include information about possible 3D surface classes,
possible materials, surface relationships, common 3D primitive solids,
functional relationships among the 3D primitives, and fixed or constrained
lighting.