* 9520282
* Modeling of RC/SRC Systems with Flexibility-Based Models
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1995,05/31/1999
* P. Benson Shing, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 05/31/1999
* USD 158,738.00

9520282 Spacone The main objective of this project is to develop a set of
realistic models for the nonlinear static and dynamic analysis of composite
frames. A full comprehension of the behavior of composite structures is still to
be achieved. The behavior of composite members involves complex phenomena such
as the partial bond transfer between steel and concrete subjected to cyclic
loadings. The ability to understand and model this behavior is important for the
evaluation of existing civil infrastructure systems as well as for the design of
new structures. A novel frame element formulation based on the flexibility
method of structural analysis will be made: The new formulation is effective in
modeling the nonlinear response of reinforced concrete frames subjected to
seismic inputs. The new formulation offers several advantages over classical
stiffness formulations. The new formulation will be applied to formulate new
member models for composite beams and SRC columns. These models will include the
effects of partial bond between steel and concrete under large element
deformations. It will also consider both nonlinear material and geometric
effects. A small series of experimental tests on SRC columns will be performed
to better understand the behavior of composite columns and to calibrate the new
analytical models. The proposed models will be validated through a set of
correlation tests, using advanced identification- optimization techniques.
Finally, a set of parametric tests on small scale composite frames under both
quasi-static cyclic loadings and input ground motions will be conducted. The
flexibility-based models investigated here in this project will lead to a
reliable assessment of the state-of-health and safety of existing civil
infrastructure systems. The new models can be used as a research and practical
tool for attaining a better understanding of the complicated behavior of
composite frames, wh ich can eventually lead to the development of improved
design procedures. This is a project supported under the year 1 program on the
Civil Infrastructure Systems initiative NSF 94-145. ***