* 9520276
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Coming to Terms: Negotiating a New Abortion Law in Unified Germany
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Jean Comaroff, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 08/31/1996
* USD 8,500.00

9520276 Comaroff A major issue in the reunification of Germany has been the
conflict between the relatively liberal abortion law of the former East Germany
and the relatively conservative abortion law and jurisprudence of the former
West Germany. The conflict is complicated by the need to "come to terms with"
the Nazi past and its disregard for human life. This research uses ethnographic
methods to examine how this legal conflict over abortion is being worked out and
mediated in practice. The co-P.I. will attend political meetings and judicial
hearings concerned with shaping the law and conduct interviews with people
directly involved in the law's formation. In addition, she will investigate--
through interviews, document analysis, and participant observation--how the
revised law's mandate of pre-abortion pregnancy counseling advising women of the
illegal, though unpunishable, status of abortion is being implemented at
pregnancy counseling clinics. This research should enhance our understanding of
how law and practice are shaping an important issue in the democratic
development of unified Germany. %%%% A major issue in the reunification of
Germany has been the conflict between the relatively liberal abortion law of the
former East Germany and the relatively conservative abortion law and
jurisprudence of the former West Germany. This research uses ethnographic
methods to examine how this legal conflict over abortion is being worked out and
mediated in practice. The co-P.I. will attend political meetings and judicial
hearings concerned with shaping the law and conduct interviews with people
directly involved in the law's formation. In addition, she will investigate--
through interviews, document analysis, and participant observation--how the
revised law's mandate of pre-abortion pregnancy counseling advising women of the
illegal, though unpunishable, status of abortion is being implemented at
pregnancy counseling clinics. This research should enhance our understanding of
how law and prac tice are shaping an important issue in the democratic
development of unified Germany. ****