* 9520371
* Energies and Dynamics of Defects in Copper and Aluminum     ULSI Interconnects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2003
* Susan Atlas, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2003
* USD 234,300.00

9520371 Atlas This project is part of the Computational Approaches to Real
Materials (CARM95) program. The Division of Materials Research, Division of
Advanced Scientific Computing, and Division of Mathematical Sciences are all
supporting this research. The investigator is collaborating with researchers at
Sandia National Laboratory and Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the computing
will take place on the University of New Mexico parallel supercomputer located
in Kihei, Hawaii. The project focuses on the microscopic properties of copper
and aluminum grain boundaries and defects, and the impact of substitutional
impurities and vacancies on the chemistry of these intergranular interfaces. The
work is motivated by the failure of Cu and Al interconnects used in
semiconductor chips. These problems arise from a phenomenon called
electromigration in which the electron wind caused by high current densities
results in the formation of voids that diffuse and aggregate along grain
boundaries, ultimately forming cracks in the metal and leading to catastrophic
failure. These calculations represent some of the largest ab initio materials
calculations ever attempted. The investigator is writing the parallel molecular
dynamics code using the portable, parallel C++ class library that she has
developed in collaboration with the Object-Oriented Particle Simulation Project
at the Los Alamos Advanced Computing Laboratory. The defect physics is coupled
across quantum and mesoscopic length scales through successive ab initio
refinements of the interatomic forces used in dynamic simulations. %%% This
project is part of the Computational Approaches to Real Materials (CARM95)
program. The Division of Materials Research, Division of Advanced Scientific
Computing, and Division of Mathematical Sciences are all supporting this
research. The investigator is collaborating with researchers at Sandia National
Laboratory and Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the computing wil l take
place on the University of New Mexico parallel supercomputer located in Kihei,
Hawaii. The project is motivated by the failure of copper and aluminum
interconnects used in semiconductor chips. The project simulates defects in
these materials and how they evolve in the presence of high electric currents,
eventually leading to failure resulting from small cracks. These calculations
represent some of the largest first- principle materials calculations ever
attempted. A better understanding of the atomic-level principles that apply in
the simulations will help to design interconnects that have improved properties.
***