* 9520297
* Direct IR Laser and Double Resonance Absorption Spectroscopy in Split Supersonic Jets:  Vibrational Dynamics of         Novel Molecular Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* David Nesbitt, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* joyce guest
* 07/31/1998
* USD 435,000.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program, David Nesbitt of
the University of Colorado will investigate the potential energy surfaces of van
der Waals molecules using laser based spectroscopic methods. These studies will
concentrate on hydrogen bonded species and multiple rare-gas cluster systems
including HF, HCL, and water. Additional work will focus on the production and
infrared characterization of radical and radical complexes of important
atmospheric components such as the peroxyl radical, and the spectroscopy and
dynamics of prototypical heavy-light-heavy reactive systems such as Cl-HCl and
F-HF. High resolution near infrared light will be used to state-select a cluster
which will be subsequently photolyzed in studies involving reactive and
inelastic scattering. These systems include DCl-HCl and XH-NNO (ONN), and
provide control over cluster size, quantum state, and reactant approach
geometry. The determination of potential energy surfaces provides the
information needed to understand and control the course of a chemical reaction.
Professor Nesbitt's studies will provide quantum state specificity and a
specific reactant approach geometry for an important class of chemical reactions
known as heavy-light-heavy reactions. The information obtained from this work
will be an important step towards using lasers to control of the outcome of
chemical reactions.