* 9520204
* Geotechnical Reconnaissance of the Effects of the January   17, 1995 Hyogo Nanbu Earthquake, Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/1995,05/31/1996
* Nicholas Sitar, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 05/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9520204 Sitar The January 17, 1995, Hyogo Nanbu Earthquake in Japan caused
extensive damage in the port city of Kobe, in adjacent Osaka, and even in more
distant Kyoto. Over 5000 people died, with thousands of dwellings and other
structures destroyed, and with close to 300,000 people displaced. Preliminary
damage estimates place this event as the most costly natural disaster in Japan
in this century. The geologic setting, topography, and the level and the type of
development in the affected area suggest that there is a great similarity to the
San Francisco Bay area, and specifically to the region along the Hayward Fault.
It is also apparent that the geotechnical aspects of the earthquake are quite
significant. Experience from the two most recent California earthquakes, Loma
Prieta and Northridge, shows that it is critical that as much information as
possible be gathered and documented in the immediate aftermath of an event,
since the geotechnical data is often highly perishable. The objective of this
research effort is to perform a geotechnical reconnaissance of the affected
region, and to gather and document as much data associated with the geotechnical
aspects of the earthquake as logistically possible. Particular focus is directed
towards assessing the following: (1) liquefaction and ground compaction, and
associated ground displacement, (2) effect of local soil conditions on ground
surface shaking characteristics and damage patters, (3) seismic response of
natural slopes, (4) the seismic response of earth structures, and structural
fills, (5) the influence of soil conditions on the performance of port
facilities, and (6) the effect of surface rupture on damage to structures and
lifelines. The reconnaissance is being planned in cooperation with the leading
geotechnical earthquake engineers in Japan. The team will promptly report its
findings tot he U.S. research community; especially via new Internet Mosaic
servers at the University of Southern Ca lifornia and the University of
California at Berkeley - servers set up specifically to share information within
the geotechnical earthquake engineering community. ***