* 9520394
* Dissertation Research:  Evaluating the National Estuary     Program:  A Case Study of the Albemarle-Pamlico Estuarine   Study
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Michael Orbach, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 07/31/1996
* USD 3,340.00

Early federal efforts at environmental management were straightforward
regulatory programs under which an agency would set standards that industries
had to meet. However, over time it has become apparent that such narrow
approaches to protecting the environment are insufficient. Stakeholders in
environmental management, including scientists, environmental managers, and the
public, recognize that environmental management involves diverse and often
conflicting values, scientific complexity, and whole ecosystems. People have
different concepts of what is important and how to manage the systems. In
response to this challenge, new institutions have been developed for improving
environmental policy, by integrating these diverse values. One example is the
National Estuary Program (NEP), a federally-funded planning effort in which
regions convene Management Conferences to study and plan for critical estuaries
over a five-year period. One of the first completed National Estuary Programs is
the Ablemarle Pamlico Estuarine Study (APES) in North Carolina. This research is
an in-depth historical case study of APES to determine how effective it was at
incorporating diverse values for the estuarine system. The research uses
document analysis of program minutes, correspondence, budgets and reports;
interviews with key staff and APES Management Conference participants; and a
standardized survey of all participants. Results will include an explanation of
the decision-making process within APES, including how values were elicited,
debated, and incorporated in the APES planning recommendations. The research
will assess how well this innovative institution accomplished NEP goals of
improving the use of science, involving the public and integrating management
agencies. The findings will have application to other environmental management
efforts.