* 9520872
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Second Coming of First Nations:  The Reassertion of Indigenous Voices Through      International and Human Rights Law
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* James Riding In, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 08/31/1996
* USD 7,000.00

9520873 Riding In The last several decades have witnessed a dramatic increase in
the use of international and human rights law to resolve conflicts.
Increasingly, indigenous peoples are turning to international law in efforts to
achieve greater self-determination. This project will involve a preliminary
evaluation of the capacity of international and human rights law to address
these efforts. It will be based on a case study of one American Indian nation's
involvement in the international legal arena as part of a worldwide movement.
The case study will draw upon fieldwork in the local, national, and
international contexts in which this group works. %%%% The last several decades
have witnessed a dramatic increase in the use of international and human rights
law to resolve conflicts. Increasingly, indigenous peoples are turning to
international law in efforts to achieve greater self-determination. This project
will involve a preliminary evaluation of the capacity of international and human
rights law to address these efforts. It will be based on a case study of one
American Indian nation's involvement in the international legal arena as part of
a worldwide movement. The case study will draw upon fieldwork in the local,
national, and international contexts in which this group works. ****