* 9520719
* Disseration Research:  A Biomechanical Examination of the   Evolution of Therapsid Hind Limb Posture
* BIO,IOS
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1998
* James Hopson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John A. Phillips
* 01/31/1998
* USD 11,200.00

9520719 Modern mammals differ from reptiles in having an upright, rather than a
sprawling stance. This research will test the hypothesis that therapsid
dinosaurs, which were ancestral to mammals, were capable of switching between a
sprawling and an upright stance. The biomechanically plausible range of fossil
therapsid limb postures will be calculated from measured limb bone dimensions,
estimated body weights, and model values of limb bone safety factors. The safety
factor of a bone is the ratio between its strength and the maximum stress to
which it is normally exposed. In mammals, safety factors of limb bones range
from two to four. Weights of fossil therapsids will be estimated from
measurements of extant reptiles and non-upright mammals. Three-dimensional
analyses of locomotor forces and limb motion in reptiles will integrate high
speed video, recordings from force platforms during foot contact, and recordings
of limb bone strains. If safety factors of reptile bones match those of mammals,
limb postures for therapsids that yield similar safety factors are biologically
feasible. Postures that yield safety factors outside the acceptable range were
probably not part of therapsid biology. The research will contribute to
knowledge of locomotor biomechanics in living reptiles and locomotor evolution
in reptiles and mammals. The biomechanical approach can be extended to other
extinct tetrapods, and will place objective mechanical constraints on the
reconstruction of fossil animals.