* 9520861
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Interpopulation Crosses:  A         Molecular Genetic Analysis of Selection
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Joan Strassmann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 01/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

Strassmann 9520861 Abstract In species where genetic divergence between
populations has occurred, mating across population boundaries may reduce
reproductive success. Multiple mating may provide an effective defense against
by permitting females to screen out genetically incompatible gametes. This
research will test that hypothesis using a species in which pedigree analysis
and single locus, minisatellite DNA fingerprinting have detected meiotic drive
and female-biased sex ratios. These phenomena are linked to reduced female
reproductive success in mice and Drosophila. The hypothesis will be tested by
investigation of the reproductive consequences of crosses between populations
that have diverged to the point of partial reproductive incompatibility. Hybrids
that combine alleles capable of segregation distortion and/or skewing of sex
ratios with responder loci lacking coevolved insensitivity to such alleles may
produce such incompatibility. Single-locus DNA fingerprinting will determine
whether suppressed intragenomic or nucleo cytoplasmic conflict is unleashed in
hybrids. It will test the prediction that multiple mating enables females to
safeguard their reproductive investment either by shunting resources to viable
embryos, or through cryptic choice of genetically compatible sperm.