* 9520210
* Dissertation Research:  Impact of Factory Employment of     Malay Women on Households in a Village in Malaysia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Richard Scaglion, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 07/31/1996
* USD 8,310.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Pittsburgh studying the effects of industrialization on
households in a Malaysian village. The student will examine the impact of young
women's factory employment on other household members, including the
reorganization of households activities to compensate for losing women's labor,
the potential contributions of cash and goods from the women's wages, the
potential change in the household members' control over resources and abilities
to call upon village social networks for resources. Three groups of households
will be studied: those with a currently factory-employed woman, those with
factory-age women who never worked in factories, and those with former factory
workers who returned to participate in the village economy. This research is
important because aside from improving the US' expertise about this important
part of the world and advancing the social scientific capacity of our society,
the knowledge to be gained will help policy makers design programs to ameliorate
the harmful social effects of this sort of factory employment. As the global
market expands this type of employment will increase in the developing nations,
and advances in our understanding of its social effects in the home-places of
the factory laborers will be important in facilitating beneficial effects of
such employment situations.