* 9520842
* Theoretical and Simulational Modeling of the Deposition and Growth of Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Fereydoon Family, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 282,000.00

9520842 Family This research program develops and applies new theoretical and
simulational modeling techniques to problems in the growth, deposition, and
sputtering of materials. The studies involve both the early stages of growth,
including nucleation of islands and defects in the submonolayer regime, as well
as a study of the evolution and morphology of the surface at long times and long
length scales in various materials growth processes, such as molecular-beam-
epitaxy and ion-beam sputtering and ion-beam sputter deposition. Considerable
effort is being made to continue to identify and better understand far-from-
equilibrium processes in the presence of different types of growth
instabilities. The concepts and the modeling techniques developed in this
project provide us with a deeper fundamental understanding of a wide variety of
materials growth processes that are of great technological importance. %%% This
research program develops and applies new theoretical and simulational modeling
techniques to problems in the growth, deposition, and sputtering of materials.
The studies involve both the early stages of growth, including nucleation of
islands and defects in the regime where the atoms are a single layer thick, as
well as a study of the evolution and morphology of the surface at long times and
long length scales in various materials growth processes. Considerable effort is
being made to continue to identify and better understand far-from-equilibrium
processes in the presence of different types of growth instabilities. The
concepts and the modeling techniques developed in this project provide us with a
deeper fundamental understanding of a wide variety of materials growth processes
that are of great technological importance. ***