* 9520855
* Dissertation Research:  Middle Fort Ancient Villages and    Organizational Complexity in Central Kentucky
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1997
* USD 9,890.00

Dillehay Under the direction of Dr. Tom Dillehay, Ms. A. Gwynn Henderson will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. Her research focuses on prehistoric
sites located in central Kentucky and attributed to the Fort Ancient tradition,
which flourished between 1200 and 1400 AD. Ms. Henderson has extensive prior
experience in the region. The project consists of three phases. First,
literature will be reviewed to locate recorded site information and to note
related environmental data such as water availability and soil fertility. Over
100 sites have been recorded in the region to date. Secondly, intensive
archaeological survey will be conducted, both to verify recorded information and
to locate new sites. At each site, the surface distribution of materials will be
mapped and a controlled collection made. In sites with poor visibility a
combination of screened shovel probes and soil cores will be used to collect
information the size and internal organization of the site. At newly documented
occurrences, larger test units will be excavated. Finally the material collected
will be subjected to a number of analyses. Site sizes, distributions and
ecological associations will be examined. Ceramics and other items of material
culture will be studied to determine both chronology and relations between
sites. On this basis it should be possible to reconstruct the social and
political organization of Fort Ancient groups and to gain insight into how they
interact with their environment. The American midwest is of great interest to
archaeologists because of the large hierarchically organized societies which
emerged there. Impressive monumental architecture exists at sites such as
Cahokia and Moundsville and scientists wish to understand the processes through
which such complexity arose. The Fort Ancient area is of interest because its
inhabitants participated in this general cultural tradition, yet for no clearcut
reason remained at a smaller scale level of organization. M s. Henderson
believes that through careful study of this negative case, new understanding can
be gained of broader societal processes. This research is important for several
reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed
new light on the development of social complexity and assist in the training of
a promising young scientist.