* 9520734
* Dissertation Research: Direct and Indirect Effects of Land  Crab Herbivory on Seedling Community Structure in a Tropical Rain Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* David Allan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1997
* USD 10,035.00

9520734 Allan Since the 1960's ecologists have debated whether communities are
controlled by predators consuming members lower on the trophic chain (top-down),
or by foundational nutrients defining the food chain from the bottom-up.
Although previously polarized, a synthesis of the two approaches has recently
emerged. In line with this more sophisticated analysis, Hunter and Price
asserted that further recognition of the functional heterogeneity inherent
within each trophic level is warranted. Preliminary data from Costa Rica's
coastal forests suggest that the herbivorous land crabs may significantly
influence seedling communities from both trophic directions. Land crabs form
extensive and dense aggregations on the forest floor where they consume certain
species of seedlings and fallen leaves. By selectively consuming seedlings, land
crabs may directly influence seedling community structure from the top-down. By
relocating leaf litter from the soil surface to their subterranean burrows, land
crabs may indirectly influence seedling survivorship form the bottom-up as they
alter the seedlings' chemical and physical micro-environments. The
investigations proposed in this dissertation research will contribute to the
nascent top down/bottom up synthesis by experimentally testing the heterogeneous
influence of land crabs on the seedling community.