* 9520901
* Studying the SSC
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Steven Weiss, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 07/31/1997
* USD 43,695.00

This professional development fellowship will allow the recipient to study and
conduct research in science and technology studies (STS) and science policy at
the Center for the Study of Science in Society at Virginia Polytechnic
University. The primary research project during the fellowship is the
development of a policy history of the Superconducting Super Collider (SSC). The
demise of the SSC project is potent indication that the days of science as an
`endless frontier,` with an indulgent government patron, are over. Furthermore,
the demise highlights many divergent values and attitudes which separate the
physics and policy communities. This research project has begun with an
examination of government documents and the published literature on the SSC. The
fellow will use the fellowship support and travel funds from the Center for the
History of Physics of the American Institute of Physics to work with several
historians and philosophers of science who are studying the history of the SSC
and to conduct oral history interviews of senior physicists who were involved
with the project. The oral histories will enrich the SSC narrative already
described in the literature and permit analysis of the different values and
attitudes which led to its demise. Undertaking this research will allow the
fellow to develop expertise in STS research and policy analysis. An intensive
program of graduate courses at the University will allow him to survey the basic
themes in STS, including the historical and social science research methods
which are a critical part of the SSC research project.