* 9520251
* Relaxor Ferroelectric and Proton Glass Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* George Tuthill, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

9520251 H. Schmidt The PI will investigate properties of partially disordered
materials in particular of proton glass crystals and relaxor ferroelectrics. A
broad range of measurements, such as dielectric spectroscopy from 1 mHz to 1
GHz, third-order dielectric permittivity, hysterisis loops, field heating and
zero-field heating, and Brillouin scattering will be conducted at Montana State.
Neutron scattering and diffraction will be carried out at Brookhaven National
Laboratory. Phenomena to be investigated include smearing of the phase
transition and clustering in relaxor ferroelectrics, nonergodic behavior, phase
coexistence and proton tunneling in proton glasses. Proton glass results will be
interpreted in terms of the bound charge semiconductor model and a phonon-
assisted tunneling model. A diffusion-barrier-limited conductivity model and
other appropriate models will be used to interpret the relaxor ferroelectric
behavior. Monte Carlo simulations of proton glass behavior will also be
performed. %%% Partially disordered crystalline materials, in which atoms of one
type are replaced by those of another type, at random sites in the crystal will
be investigated. The focus is on materials which show unusual response to
electric fields. These include proton glasses, mixtures of ferroelectric
crystals which polarize spontaneously and antiferroelectrics which consist of
oppositely polarized interlocking parts. Relaxor ferroelectrics which have
pronounced mechanical response to an electric field, and are beginning to find
application as sensors and actuators will also be studied. The objective is to
understand the fundamental properties, including the response to electromagnetic
fields of very low to very high frequencies, the effects of heating and cooling,
and the structure of these materials. Attempts will be made to improve upon
existing conceptual and mathemat ical models of these materials. ***