* 9520213
* Synthetic, Structural and Mechanistic                       Metallacyclobutene Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Joseph O'Connor, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 07/31/1999
* USD 306,000.00

In this project which is supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and
Organometallic Chemistry Program, Dr. Joseph O'Connor of the University of
California, San Diego will pursue an investigation of the synthesis, structural
elucidation, and mechanistic aspects of formation and reaction of
metallacyclobutene complexes. Dr. O'Connor has already discovered one method
that should produce a range of metallacyclobutenes of late transition metals
where there is a paucity of examples and even fewer studies of reactivity.
Reactions to be studied include conversion of the metallacyclobutenes to
cyclopentadienes and other five-membered rings, which are useful intermediates
for organic synthesis, by reactions with alkynes and olefins. A novel
photochromic effect that was observed in the substitution reaction of phosphorus
donors in one cobaltacyclobutene complex will be examined by time-resolved
spectroscopic methods. This project involves fundamental investigations of the
synthesis and reactivity of a new class of organometallic compound known as
metallacyclobutenes. The examples of interest for these studies contain late
transition elements. The major objective is the development of new synthetic
methods that may be used in total synthesis of natural products and their
homologs. Some of these may ultimately find application as new pharmaceuticals.