* 9520774
* Dissertation Research: Effective Population Size in         Aquilegia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Brook Milligan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/1997
* USD 9,500.00

9520774 Milligan Effective population size determines the rate of change in
populations due to a wide range of evolutionary forces. These forces include
random genetic drift, natural selection and migration. Accurate estimation of
effective size is central to a wide range of questions in evolutionary biology.
The best way to make accurate estimates of effective size is to include as much
relevant biological information in the estimation process. Many studies have
included such information; nevertheless, important aspects still have been
neglected. A large number of plants possess the ability to produce some or all
of their offspring by self-fertilization. Little is known about the effect of
self-fertilization in determining effective population size. This research will
use a combination of theoretical population genetics, molecular population
genetics, and demography to test the importance of selfing rate in determining
the effective population size. Information on selfing rate and demography will
be used to develop an estimator of effective size. This estimator will be
compared to a long-term historical estimate of effective size based on DNA
sequences. These two independent estimates will then be compared. A complex of
herbaceous perennial plants in the genus Aquilegia, found in the southwestern
United States and adjoining Mexico, will provide the experimental system. This
system is well suited to answering this particular question because Aquilegia
populations in this region are located in well isolated and well delineated
mesic areas. These features make determining population sizes and other
demographic parameters feasible. In addition, many of the molecular techniques
required for this study have been optimized to work in the Aquilegia system.
This research is significant in at least five ways. First, it will lead to the
development of theory pertaining to the evolution of a very large group of
perennial plant populations. Second, it will test this theory using an ind
ependent, long-term, estimate of effective size. Third, the two major datasets
developed, a two-year demographic dataset and a molecular population genetic
dataset, will be useful for a wide range of evolutionary studies not directly
addressed by this research. Fourth, because effective population size is
important in the evolution of small populations, this research will provide
information that may be required by conservation biologists in making successful
management choices. Finally, because this research will provide both current and
long-term estimates of effective size, it may be used to examine how populations
have changed over time.