* 9520982
* Collaborative Research:  Archaeological Investigation and   Paleoenvironmental Context of Mining at the Tsodilo Hills,  Western Kalahari Desert
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/1995,06/30/2000
* George Brook, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 06/30/2000
* USD 55,254.00

Brook In collaboration with Dr. Lawrence Robbins, Dr. George Brook will conduct
archaeological and paleoenvironmental research in the Kalahari Desert of
Botswana. They will focus their work at the site of Tsidilo Hills, a rocky
outcrop which has been inhabited intermittently for tens of millennia. In recent
work, the investigators have discovered 13 prehistoric mines which are cut into
these hills. Preliminary evidence indicates that these may be at least 1,000
years in age and that a number of minerals such as mica schist and coloring
agents were obtained. In this multidisciplinary project the team will map and
photograph all of the mines. They will excavate a series of one meter squares
into the charcoal rich mine floors to recover dating samples and artifacts and
they will also dig in mine tailings. Test excavations will be conducted in a
large painted cave that is located next to one of the mines. A second phase of
the project involves a program of paleoenvironmental study which will permit
reconstruction of climate and climate change during the period that the mines
were in operation. With this data it will be possible to study human-
environmental interaction and examine the extent to which mining activities were
influenced by climatic change. In situ sediment samples will be collected in the
region and sediment texture and chemistry will be determined. Bucket auguring
will be conducted to recover sediment samples in adjacent valleys and thin
sections collected from stalagmites to measure annual layers. My this means it
should be possible to obtain a 2,000 year record of layer thickness, a proxy of
rainfall. This data will provide the longest high-resolution proxy record of
rainfall for southern Africa and should allow the reconstruction of temporal
variation in climate during the period under study. This research is interesting
for several reasons. For the last 2,000 years both hunters and gatherers and
agriculturalist- pastoralist have inhabited the Ka lahari. Anthropologists have
been very interested in the long term relationships between these groups and
wish to know whether the Bushman peoples - claimed by many researchers to be
"pure hunter gatherers" - did in fact function this way. The study of mining
will provide a basis for looking at interaction and trade. In particular it
should be possible to determine which group in fact was associated with the
mining activities. The environmental research will provide an excellent basis
for examining human behavior in a natural context. Many anthropologists have
postulated that changes in the extent and intensity of trade networks served to
buffer environmental change and unpredictability.