* 9520666
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Relative Roles of Phylogenetic and  Contemporary Ecological Forces on Cooperative Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Wayne Maddison, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 11,395.00

Maddison &amp; Burt IBN 9520666 Abstract An important evolutionary issue is
understanding the reasons underlying the existence of altruistic behavior. A
variety of approaches have been used to address this important problem. These
different approaches, or levels of analysis, have led to four different, albeit
complementary, explanations for its existence. The four categories are: (1)
functional consequences or selective advantages, (2) proximate mechanisms or
physiological requirements, (3) ontogeny of parental care behaviors, or (4)
phylogenetic origin and historical patterns. Dr. Maddison and his graduate
student, Mr. Burt will examine the relative roles of phylogenetic and
contemporary ecological factors on the evolution of cooperative behavior by
studying several different species within the same family of birds. These birds
are an excellent choice for an historical analysis given the availability of a
group of 26 different species and the diversity of their social systems. To
accomplish their goals, they will first collect behavioral data from a field
site in Kenya and then carry out a molecular analyses of the DNA. These results
will be used for the phylogenetic reconstruction algorithms to estimate the
evolutionary relationships among the species. This multi-faceted project bridges
the disciplines of morphological and molecular systematics, evolutionary
ecology, and ethology. The outcome of the studies will provide the framework for
deciphering the existence of altruistic social systems.