* 9520989
* A Study of Proto-Planetary System Candidates
* MPS,AST
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Kwang-Ping Cheng, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 10/31/1998
* USD 108,831.00

9520989 Cheng The origin of our own solar system is one of the most fundamental
problems in astrophysics. One way to investigate this problem is to study
systems that are still in the phase of planet formation. Intensive studies of
Beta Pictoris (A5 IV-V) have revealed a dust disk and a dynamic gas envelope
(showing both mass infall and outflow) around the star. The age of Beta Pic
(&lt;200 million years) roughly corresponds to the era of planet formation and
subsequent "heavy bombardment" in our solar system. Therefore, it is likely that
Beta Pic's dust + gas disk is similar to the accretion disk in the primordial
solar nebula. However, it is still not resolved why Beta Pic seems to have such
a dynamic dust + gas disk, with about 100-200 mass infall events each year. The
understanding of the accretion mechanism in Beta Pic, and of the relationship
between the debris disk and its circumstellar gas, is far from complete. Is this
a young planetary system still undergoing formation, or is it the remnant of a
dusty proto-stellar accretion disk in its clearing phase? Other systems similar
to Beta Pic with debris disks and circumstellar gas need to be identified and
studied to answer the questions. The detection of circumstellar debris around
nearby A type stars, such as ,Beta Pic, provides an unparalleled opportunity to
explore possible proto-planetary systems that could resemble our own Solar
System at an early stage of evolution. Therefore, a search for proto-planetary
system candidates will be completed. The ultimate goal of this study of these
systems is to ascertain if they, as a group, represent some phase of planet
formation. Three major objectives will be pursued: (1) Identify nearby main-
sequence A type stars that have circumstellar dust, using the Infrared
Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) Faint Source Survey (FSS) data. Although it is
very difficult to detect dust disks by direct imaging, one can infer the
presence of circumstellar dust by the det ection of excess infrared wavelength
emission that is consistent with thermal radiation from the orbiting grains. (2)
Obtain high-resolution visible and ultraviolet wavelength spectra of the volume-
limited A-star sample to study the presence, ionization, and kinematics of the
circumstellar gas. These high-resolution spectra can be used to detect narrow
circumstellar gas absorption spectra features and the amount of circumstellar
gas in the line of sight will be inferred. The visible and ultraviolet
wavelength circumstellar absorption lines will be compared to each other to test
whether the evaporation of cometary-like bodies is responsible for the variable
redshifted lines seen in spectra of Beta Pic and several other Beta Pic-like
stars in the volume-limited A-star survey. (3) Test the hypothesis that gaseous
accretion is occurring in the inner regions of the debris disks of these
planetary system candidates. These systems might have physical properties
similar to those of the primordial solar nebula. The study of the dynamic nature
of these proto-planetary system's circumstellar environments will provide
valuable insight into the formation of planetary systems.