* 9520554
* Theoretical Solid State Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Marvin Cohen, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2001
* USD 1,340,000.00

9520554 Cohen This grant supports a long-range, broad based research program in
condensed matter physics and materials science. The research projects cover the
fields of semiconductors, metals, surfaces, defects, superconductivity,
materials under pressure, clusters, fullerene-based materials, nanotubes, and
many-body effects in solids. The major objective is to use quantum theory to
explain and predict the properties of materials. Emphasis is placed on using
realistic models, close collaborations with experimentalists, investigations and
suggestions for producing novel and useful materials, development of new
theoretical approaches, and predictions related to electronic and structural
properties of solids. %%% This grant supports a long-range, broad based research
program in condensed matter physics and materials science. The research projects
cover the fields of semiconductors, metals, surfaces, defects,
superconductivity, materials under pressure, clusters, fullerene-based
materials, nanotubes, and many-body effects in solids. The major objective is to
use quantum theory to explain and predict the properties of materials. Emphasis
is placed on using realistic models, close collaborations with experimentalists,
investigations and suggestions for producing novel and useful materials,
development of new theoretical approaches, and predictions related to electronic
and structural properties of solids. ***