* 9520381
* Dissertation Research: Population Structure in Ponderosa    Pine
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Jeffry Mitton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 6,850.00

9520381 Mitton Effective management of plant populations (either for economic or
conservation purposes) requires an understanding of the genetic differences
among populations, since these differences may reflect adaptation to the local
environments in which each population lives. Much of our understanding of
population differentiation has been derived from the study of protein genes.
This proposed research will make use of recent DNA technologies to compare the
findilgs from protein genes to other types of gene, in natural populations of
ponderosa pine. The data collection is straightforward, and consists of
measuring the amount of genetic differentiation between populations in a north-
south transect through the range of ponderosa pine from the Southwest. Genetic
differences are measured by determining the frequency of DNA types ("alleles")
in each population under study, from samples of needle tissue brought back to
the laboratory. This study will advance our understanding in two ways. First, by
comparing patterns of genetic differences between different types of genes,
older findings can be tested. Theory predicts that the size of genetic
differences among populations will be determined by the amount of migration and
interbreeding between them. Since the amount of migration is the same for all
genes, all loci should show the same magnitude of difference between
populations. If not, then genes which "don't fit" are likely to be affected by
some other factor, such as selection to adapt to local conditions. Second, the
study will compare those genes inherited from both parents (most genes) with
those inherited solely from one parent. Pines provide a unique opportunity to do
this in that chloroplast DNA is inherited paternally (through the pollen), while
mitochondrial DNA is maternally inherited (through the seed). By comparing the
relative differences between populations for genes with these contrasting
inheritance patterns, the investigators can measure the relative amount of mig
ration by both seeds and pollen. It is important to understand this, because
only seed migrants can found new populations, while migrant pollen is restricted
to movement between existing populations.