* 9520789
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Research and Discovery     in the Southern Oceans
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Gerald Geison, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 06/30/1996
* USD 8,960.00

Geison/Kellman: Doctoral Dissertation Research With the Hubble Space Telescope,
the Super-conducting Super Collider, the Human Genome Project and LIGO, we
frequently think that "Big" science is a product of the 20th century and
principally in the area of physics or astronomy. A science with the longest
history of "big" science, however, is oceanography. Even today, NSF and NOAA
must spend millions of dollars to construct oceanographic vessels and equipment.
Expeditions remain extremely expensive. Yet nations have invested in major
ocean-going scientific expeditions for at least three centuries. The ostensible
reason for these expeditions is the advance of knowledge and the concomitant
economic development that comes from scientific knowledge. Yet even today, these
voyages serve political and commercial as well as scientific purposes. Ocean
margin drilling, for example, not only advances our understanding of the ocean
floors but tells us what minerals may be on the ocean floor that our companies
might "mine" and supports our positions in the negotiations over Law of the Sea
treaties. Mr. Kellman, under the direction of Dr. Geison, is examining the wave
of French scientific voyages that charted the Pacific and southern oceans. His
focus is an analysis of the scientific projects planned in Paris and carried out
on board, using the wealth of unpublished logbooks and other manuscript sources.
He is exploring the meaning of science for these voyages, looking for the way
individual disciplines, as well as general methodology interacted with the
various forces behind the expedition. He sees these voyages in the greater
context of the political, commercial and philosophical aims of French overseas
exploration and development. The scientific results of these voyages often
reflect the diversity of forces behind them. In natural history, a new focus on
the varieties of humans led to the emergence of anthropology. In hydrography and
geography, new methods and standards of mathematical r igor were adopted. A new
ethos of quantification and precision served as both a motivation and a result
of these expeditions. This project will give a new sense to the term "scientific
voyages" and show how "science" came to stand for a particular approach and set
of methods, equally useful to the academies, to the state, and to commerce.