* 9520662
* Dissertation Research: The Importance of Mixed Reproductive Strategies on Plant/Pathogen Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Keith Clay, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 07/31/1997
* USD 7,000.00

9520662 CLAY Parasites may be important evolutionary agents for the maintenance
of genetic diversity and reproduction in many species. Plants can either self-
fertilize or outcross with another plant. The latter produces greater genetic
variability than self-fertilization. Although many plants can use both
mechanisms, the conditions in which mixed systems are advantageous are not well
understood. Danthonia spicata is a grass that can reproduce through outcrossing
and selfing flowers. When infected with the fungus Atkinsonella hypoxylon, the
development of outcrossing flowers is prevented and a fungal structure that
bears infective spores develops in its place. The fungus can also spread by
infecting the seeds produced through selfing. This parasite strategy of
preventing outcrossing has been observed in other systems and might be
advantageous for the parasite to reduce genetic variability of host plants or
because more plant resources are available for fungal reproduction. This project
will investigate whether the fungus A. hypoxylon acts to maintain the mixed
reproductive system in the host D. spicata, and how the host's reproductive
system affects the success of the parasite. The advantage of each fungal
transmission mode (contagious spread or infection of host seeds) is of interest
because each mode is associated with different levels of parasite effect on the
host and can lead to different disease spread patterns. Comparison of the host
success through selfing and outcrossing in the presence of pathogens will shed
light on the importance of maintaining genetic diversity in plants. This
information is important for constructing conservation policies for minimizing
disease damage in endangered species. It will also be of potential value for
developing better agricultural practices to alleviate pathogen damage to crops.