* 9520887
* Planning Meeting for Industry/University Cooperative        Research Center for Computer-Aided Devices for Diagnosis and Surgical Intervention Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Bartholomew Nnaji, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 02/29/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9520887 Nnaji This award is providing funding for a planning grant proposal to
study the feasibility of establishing an Industry/University Cooperative
Research Center for Computer-Aided Devices for Diagnosis and Surgical
Intervention Systems at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst. Medical
imaging diagnosis and surgical intervention systems are common technologies for
doctors. Today, there is no integrated imaging technologies that can present
both the bone and soft tissue structure in three dimensions. Medical industries
have shown a great interests in the development of intelligent imaging systems
that can provide more realistic, three-dimensional presentations of organs,
segments of organs or groups of organs. In a typical plastic surgery, doctors
normally perform the operations manually. When a skin graft or flap is necessary
for reconstruction of a damaged area, the surgeon must estimate the contour,
area, and volume of the tissue required to ensure success of the reconstruction.
CAD/CAM and Robotics technologies developed by engineers and scientists are very
useful tools to develop the next generation surgical intervention system.
CAD/CAM technology based on geometric reasoning that can be employed to estimate
precise dimensions of damaged areas and match skin and tissue portions to be
extracted from another part of the body. Robotics technology can be integrated
in controlling and sensing the surgical operations adaptively. Research projects
proposed for industrial members consideration for the envisioned Center are; 1)
a Surgical Virtual Reality Machine, 2) A Sensor Equipment Scalpel, 3) Computer
Aided Medical Imager (CAM Imager), 4) Spine Curvature Analyzer Using Laser, 5)
Automated Burn Debridement, 6) Automated Congential Birthmark Treatment, 7)
Recreation of Exact Duplicate Tissue Defects, 8) Automation Tissue Expansion, 9)
Planner for Burn Reconstruction, 10) Tissue Engineering, 11) Charge-Coupled
Device (CCD) application in Small - Field Digital Mammography, 12) Radiologist's
Diagnostic Aid in Detection of Microcalcification Precursors of Breast Cancer,
13) Digital Mammographic Cassette, 14) Digital Breast Specimen Radiography for
Improved Biopsy, and 15) Prototype of a Stereoscopic Mammography System. The
Principal Investigator/Center Director is a recognized authority in his field
and has assembled an interdisciplinary research team of researchers from the
University of Massachusetts at Amherst and the Brigham and Woman's Hospital (a
teaching affiliate of Harvard Medical School). A planning meeting with
interested companies was held on January 20, 1995. The Program Manager
recommends the University of Massachusetts at Amherst be awarded $10,000 for one
year to conduct a planning activity.