* 9520438
* SGER:  Production Planning Models for Companies with        Remanufacturing Capability
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Reha Uzsoy, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* georgia-ann klutke
* 06/30/1996
* USD 4,079.00

9520438 Uzsoy This research is aimed at addressing the problem of
remanufacturing of a product at the end of its life cycle. It is a research that
is aimed at integrating issues on preserving environmental quality and at same
time maintain economic manufacturing. In particular, the research will pursue
the development of a model of a production system with remanufacturing
capability which can be used to explore the effects of different demand
patterns, production and disposal costs, and government actions on the economic
viability of remanufacturing policies. Remanufacturing involves the refurbishing
and/or partially rebuilding a product returned from the market at the end of its
life to give it the functionality of a new product. This research is exploratory
in nature. The basic components of the model to be developed will include
product staging, disassembly, sorting, cleaning, repair, and assembly. With
respect to assembly operations, manual assembly is assumed. The model also
assumes that both remanufacturing and new assemblies are carried out
simultaneously in the same facility. When fully developed, the model will be
used to determine a minimum cost procurement and production plan. Output from
the model will include (1) the quantity of a product to disassemble, (2) the
quantity of each component to reuse or dispose of, (3) the quantity of each
product to remanufacture, and (4) the quantity of new components and products of
each type to make in order to satisfy market demand. The problem of
environmental degradation resulting from improper disposal of products that have
reached the end of their life cycles is increasingly being recognized in many
parts of the world. Whereas the proposed research will not eliminate the
problem, it does, however, lessen the impact by developing a methodology to
integrate the reuse of old components into manufacturing. The impact on
environment, resource usage and conservation, and manufacturing cost savings to
be derived from the research can be q uite significant. The models to be
developed will pave the way for the realization of complete models that can be
used by companies to evaluate the costs and benefits associated with integrating
environmental concerns into manufacturing decisions and processes.