* 9520759
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Morphology & Cladistic   Biogeography of Verres (Coleoptera: Passalidae; Proculini)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* James Liebherr, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9520759 LIEBHERR This award will contribute support to the doctoral
dissertation research of a student at Cornell University. That project involves
the phylogenetic analysis of relationships among species in the beetle genus
Verres (Insecta: Coleoptera: Passalidae: Proculini) and its affinities to other
closely related genera. Characters from both adult and larval morphology will be
employed and the resulting "tree" of relationships will be utilized to test
historical biogeographic hypotheses about geological relationships of land areas
in Mexico and Central America. Funds awarded will support travel for the student
to visit and study type specimens at major European museums, travel to conduct
collecting and field studies in Mexico and Guatemala (the student is
independently applying for travel support from Cornell University to enable
field work in Panama and Costa Rica), and scanning electron microscopic
examination of ultrastructural features of these beetles. Members of the beetle
family Passalidae are extremely important components of tropical forest
ecosystems. These beetles excavate galleries in dead wood where they brood their
young socially. Their biology parallels that of termites in many respects; both
are major decomposers living in colonies that have many associations with fungi,
nematodes and other decomposing "invertebrates." A clear understanding of
relationships among these beetles will allow testing of interesting hypotheses
about origins of social, behavior, mutualistic associations with other
organisms, biogeography, etc.. %%% This award will contribute to the training of
a young insect systematist at a time when training of a future generation of
systematic expertise, especially for insects and other invertebrate groups, is
reaching crisis proportions. The studies of this student will contribute to our
knowledge of the biodiversity of an important group of decomposer organisms in
tropical forest ecosystems. ***