* 9520820
* Dissertation Research: Predicting Extinction in Isolated    Populations of (Ochotona princeps)
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Alan Hastings, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1996
* USD 3,404.00

9520820 HASTINGS Population biologists have developed models of population
growth that are designed to predict the fate of fragmented populations, but
these models have not been tested. Such tests require data on the original
conditions and the ultimate fates of real fragmented populations. If a set of
populations that were fragmented in the past can be identified, and we can use
models to predict whether each should be persisting today, a comparison of
observed and predicted persistence can determine model reliability. According to
fossil evidence, a set of at least 14 populations of pika (a small mammal) was
isolated on mountaintops in the Great Basin at the end of the last ice age
(about 7500 years ago). Since then, some of these populations have gone extinct.
Pika live in a habitat created by freeze-thaw processes. With the retreat of the
glaciers and the rising snowline, pika habitat within each mountain range was
fragmented. Many aspects of this animal's ecology allow reasonable estimates of
the condition of these populations when they were originally fragmented. Thus,
models to predict the persistence of these populations can be developed. The
proposed research will gather the data necessary to develop these models. The
spatial distribution of pika habitat fragments on each mountain range and the
movement of individuals between habitat fragments will be calculated. These data
will be applied to models similar to those used in current conservation. Natural
landscapes are being fragmented by development, often adversely affecting native
populations. In order to plan development that it is compatible with the
persistence of natural populations, we must be able to reliably predict
population persistence under various patterns of habitat fragmentation.