* 9520776
* Photoemission Spectra, d-Wave Superconductivity and Other   Properties of High-Tc Electronic Models
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Elbio Dagotto, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1998
* USD 153,000.00

9520776 Dagotto The broad goal of this project is to carry out a comparison
between calculations using models of strongly correlated electrons and
experimental results in high-temperature superconductors, both in the normal and
superconducting states. Computational techniques (exact diagonalization and
quantum Monte Carlo) address the many-body correlations of the electronic
systems. In part, the investigators are testing the assumptions of an
explanation of angle-resolved photoemission and transport data that they
recently proposed. They are using their model to calculate photoemission
spectra, which they will then compare with experiments. If successful, these
projects will clarify several aspects of the anomalous properties of high
temperature superconductors. These investigators are collaborating with others
at the National High Field Magnet Laboratory in Tallahassee, Florida, who are
investigating these materials in strong fields both theoretically and
experimentally. %%% The broad goal of this project is to carry out a comparison
between calculations using models of strongly interacting electrons and
experimental results in high-temperature superconductors, both in the normal and
superconducting states. The community recognizes the investigators as experts in
the computational techniques that address the many-body correlations of the
electronic systems. In part, the investigators are testing the assumptions of an
explanation that they recently proposed for experiments that involve (a) the
emission of photons (such as light) from these materials and (b) the transport
of electrons. Using their model, with its assumptions, they calculate what the
experiments would give if their models were correct and then compare with
experiments to test how close their model is to real materials. If successful,
these projects will clarify several aspects of the anomalous properties of high
temperature superconductors. These investigators are collaborating wit h others
at the National High Field Magnet Laboratory in Tallahassee, Florida, who are
investigating these materials in strong fields both theoretically and
experimentally. ***