* 9520575
* Dissertation Research: Avian Nest Predation by Raccoons:    Linking Raccoon Foraging Ecology to Patterns of Predation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Joel Brown, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 07/31/1997
* USD 6,000.00

9520575 Brown Nest predation has long been recognized as the cause of the
majority of failed avian nesting attempts. Because of its impact on reproductive
success, nest predation has been hypothesized to structure avian communities and
contribute to suspected population declines of many species. This research uses
and extends the methodology of foraging theory and the framework of predator-
prey interactions to investigate the foraging ecology of a dominant mammalian
nest predator, the raccoon. The research links the foraging behavior of raccoons
to the direct impact of nest predation, and indirect interactions among nesting
birds. Specific objectives include: 1)quantifying the impact of nest predation
on three woodland bird species, 2) determining the indirect interactions
mediated by shared predation, and 3) investigating the habitat associated risks
of foraging in raccoons and the consequence for nesting birds. This research
will enhance our basic understanding of the direct and indirect impact of nest
predation on bird populations, as well as the role of nest predation in
structuring avian communities. Results will also be applicable to issues related
to ecosystem management and conservation of biodiversity. These may be
especially important given the recent decline in the population sizes of many
bird species.