* 9520315
* Molecular Dynamics Simulation of Materials Processing       Using Linear-Scaling Tight Binding Models
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Paulette Clancy, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/1999
* USD 484,000.00

9520315 Teter This award is one made through the FY95 Computational Approaches
to Real Materials competition. Funding is provided through the Divisions of
Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced Scientific Computing, as
well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in the Mathematical and
Physical Sciences Directorate. The research combines algorithm and code
development with materials theory to address important materials problems for
which computational breakthroughs can produce large payoffs. As such, the
research spans the strategic initiatives in High Performance Computing and
Communications and Advanced Materials and Processing Phase transformation and
electronic structure properties of realistically modeled crystalline and
amorphous materials will be studied using a new tight binding molecular dynamics
code. This new technique represents a compromise between computationally
infeasible ab initio techniques and faster - but less accurate - methods that
employ classical potentials. The tight binding molecular dynamics method has
non-orthogonal basis functions and handles electrostatic interactions. This will
allow the study of inhomogeneous systems such as amorphous materials and
interfaces, as well as ceramic materials which have significant ionic character
in their bonding. The method will build on previous linear scaling techniques
which are explicitly parallelizable. The codes will be implemented on the
Cornell SP-2. This new technique will allow the study of a variety of physical
systems and processes, inaccessible by previous methods, such as solid/liquid
and solid/solid phase transformations, defect diffusion in materials and
amorphous materials. Besides Cornell, the team includes participants from
Corning, Los Alamos National Laboratory, Oxford University, AT&T Bell
Laboratories, IBM and DEC. %%% This award is one made through the FY95
Computational Approaches to Real Materials competition. Funding is provide d
through the Divisions of Materials Research, Mathematical Sciences and Advanced
Scientific Computing, as well as by the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
in the Mathematical and Physical Sciences Directorate. The research combines
algorithm and code development with materials theory to address important
materials problems for which computational breakthroughs can produce large
payoffs. As such, the research spans the strategic initiatives in High
Performance Computing and Communications and Advanced Materials and Processing
The research will involve a complementary team who will apply fundamental
aspects of materials physics to understand and simulate the large scale
processing of materials. Such processing phenomena as solid/solid phase
transformations and solid/liquid phase transformations will be modeled. In
addition, the simulations will be large enough so that the effects of defects
and their kinetics will be studied. The use of new algorithms and their
implementation on massively parallel computers enable these ambitious
calculations to be done. The results will be a major contribution to the design
and processing control of new materials. ***