* 9520873
* The Legal Mediation of Scientific and Cultural Values in the North Dakota Indian Reburial Dispute
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* Kathryn Milun, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Doris Marie Provine
* 07/31/2000
* USD 45,000.00

9520873 Milun This project investigates how the American legal system has shaped
the conflict between scientific and historical interests and the interests of
Native Americans with regard to Indian burial sites and the examination of
skeletal remains held in scientific and historical collections. It uses the
North Dakota dispute as a case study, but will seek to connect the North Dakota
situation to national and international legal concerns. The dispute involves
civil rights, property law, and concepts of Indian sovereignty, and has been
pursued in both the legislative and judicial policy arenas. The investigation
will use ethnographic and language analysis methods to analyze data gathered
from interviews with key participants in the reburial conflict, legal documents,
and media reports on the dispute. The project should advance theoretical work on
civil rights, the legal treatment of scientific values, and the debate in
anthropology on the embedding of local conflicts in larger conflicts of
interests and institutions. %%%% This project investigates how the American
legal system has shaped the conflict between scientific and historical interests
and the interests of Native Americans with regard to Indian burial sites and the
examination of skeletal remains held in scientific and historical collections.
It uses the North Dakota dispute as a case study, but will seek to connect the
North Dakota situation to national and international legal concerns. The dispute
involves civil rights, property law, and concepts of Indian sovereignty, and has
been pursued in both the legislative and judicial policy arenas. The
investigation will use ethnographic and language analysis methods to analyze
data gathered from interviews with key participants in the reburial conflict,
legal documents, and media reports on the dispute. The project should advance
theoretical work on civil rights, the legal treatment of scientific values, and
the debate in anthropology on the embedding of local conflicts in large r
conflicts of interests and institutions. ****