* 9521406
* The Modelling of Thermodynamically Difficult Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Stanley Sandler, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2000
* USD 345,000.00

9521406 Sandler Experimental measurements are very time consuming, and it is not
practical to measure the thermodynamic properties and phase behavior of all
substances and mixtures, that are of importance for chemical and pharmaceutical
processing, for environmental and safety engineering, and for other aspects of
chemical processing. Therefore, it is important to have accurate prediction or
at least correlation methods. This proposal deals with research on the
development of predictive models the thermodynamical properties and phase
equilibria of industrially important, but complex mixtures. Three different
types of mixtures will be considered: hydrogen-bonding fluids, protein solutions
and colloidal systems. Hydrogen-bonding fluids are poorly described by current
group contribution methods as documented in this proposal. The reason is that
the extent and strength of hydrogen bonding is strongly influenced by functional
groups on a molecule adjacent to the hydrogen-bonding groups. We have shown this
both experimentally and from ab initio quantum mechanics calculations. We are
now proposing to develop a new generation of prediction methods based on a
combination of group contribution methods for the generalizable dispersive
forces, and molecule-specific quantum chemistry calculations for hydrogen
bonding. Protein solutions and their purification are important in many bio-
processing applications. The research being proposed here involves the use of
molecular thermodynamic and statistical mechanical modeling and computer
simulation to develop predictive models for the partitioning of proteins in
aqueous two-phase systems and for protein precipitation. Colloids lie between
the macroscopic and microscopic regimes of matter, and are of interest because
their behavior influences many emerging technologies in chemical, biochemical,
and pharmaceutical processing. There are two scales of phase behavior in liquid-
in-liquid colloidal systems. At the macroscale is liquid-liquid phase
separation, or macroscopic phase equilibrium. The microscale behavior is the
formation of microstructures in some (or all) of the separated phases. Many
important characteristics of liquid colloids are dictated by the microstructures
that form. However, to investigate the microstructure, one first needs to have
an understanding of the macroscopic phase behavior as this identifies the phase
boundaries within which microstructures are formed. Thermodynamic modeling of
such systems has been rather simple, and has not captured the temperature and
pressure dependence of the macroscopic phase boundaries of liquid colloidal
systems. Here we are proposing research on the modeling of macroscopic phase
behavior of liquid-in-liquid colloids using modern thermodynamic methods to
provide a more accurate description of the changes in the macroscopic phase
boundaries of colloidal systems with variations in temperature, pressure and
composition. ***