* 9521921
* Geodetic Observation of Surface Displacements from the Great Bolivian Deep Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Timothy Dixon, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* James H. Whitcomb
* 07/31/1996
* USD 31,500.00

9521921 Stein This research will take advantage of an extraordinary opportunity
to use space-based geodesy to study a deep earth process. On 9 June 1994, the
largest deep earthquake ever seismologically recorded occurred 650 km beneath
Northern Bolivia. Its extraordinary size is illustrated by the fact that ground
motion was felt as far away as Seattle and Toronto, 9000 km from the epicenter.
This earthquake has become the focus of intensive seismological study, because
the physical process permitting seismic failure at these extreme depths is a
long-standing unresolved question. Although geodetic studies have never been
previously used to study a deep earthquake, they are practical in this case. The
earthquake is so large that centimeter-level static displacements above the
hypocenter appear likely, based on both seismological observations and
theoretical calculations. Through good luck, the Principal Investigators
established a geodetic network in Bolivia and measured it using the Global
Positioning System only a month before the earthquake. Hence a resurvey of the
network would yield the first direct observation of static displacements
following a deep earthquake. The comparison of geodetic and seismological
results would be especially valuable because the physical process causing deep
earthquakes is still unknown, but is most likely very different from that for
shallow earthquakes. In particular, because the leading but controversial model
for the mechanism of deep earthquakes is that they result from solid state phase
changes, there may be significant differences between coseismic and long term
deformation. Time is of the essence, because the geodetic network was
established to measure the expected steady-state deformations associated with
shortening across the Andes. As a result, the more time that passes, the poorer
the chances of separating the effects of the earthquake from the tectonic
shortening. Moreover, the cost to measure the earthquake effects can be reduced
significantly by cooperation with a German group who plan measurements in
Bolivia in May, 1995. Although the German study, which was planned before the
earthquake, would by itself be inadequate to resolve the earthquake
displacement, a modest investment in additional measurements would permit joint
achievement of the goal. This research is funded under the Small Grants for
Exploratory Research program and is a component of the National Earthquake
Hazard Reduction Program. ***