* 9521945
* US-Indo Cooperative Research: Phase Selection in Ceramic    Oxides under Non-Equilibrium Conditions, Award in US and    Indian Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,09/30/2001
* Carlos Levi, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 09/30/2001
* USD 17,177.00

9521945 Levi Description: This proposal is for a US-Indo research collaboration
between materials scientists Carlos Levi of the University of California, Santa
Barbara and Vikram Jayaram of the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. The
project is entitled "Phase Selection in Ceramic Oxides Under Non-Equilibrium
Conditions." The investigators will study the evolution of oxide microstructures
in ceramic oxides synthesized under conditions wherein thermodynamic equilibrium
is highly constrained. The program will focus on relatively simple binary and
higher component systems using techniques with proven potential to bring about
substantial metastability. Compositions produced in this manner will be heat
treated to study the hierarchy of states by which the non- equilibrium structure
evolves towards a more stable one. The primary objective is to enhance the
understanding of phase selection processes, their relationship to fundamental
forms of metastability, as well as their impact on microstructure evolution
through subsequent transformations. Scope: The PIs have extensive experience in
this area and have collaborated productively in the past. The bulk of the
experimental work will be carried out at the Indian Institute of Science. The US
collaborator will provide guidance in the design of experiments and analysis of
results, as well as access to atomization and characterization facilities at the
UC, Santa Barbara. The research is expected to generate a mutually beneficial
interaction with the ongoing research on the synthesis of structural ceramics
and functional inorganic oxides at the NSF Materials Research Laboratory at UC.
This project will provide a unique international opportunity for a US Post- doc
to participate in the experimental research at the IISc in Bangalore. *** This
research will investigate small signal stability of electric power systems as
affected by the addition of High Voltage DC (HVDC) lines and control devices
such as Static Var Compensators (SVC), Power System Stabilizer (PSS) and other
Flexible AC Transmission System (FACTS) devices. The objective will be to
develop an overall linearized model to include the above mentioned devices and
to examine their relative influence on dynamic stability. This research is
important in determining the causes of low frequency oscillations and voltage
collapse. Both of these are operating problems faced by utilities in both
countries. Prof. M.A. Pai, University of Illinois Urbana will collaborate with
Profs. D.P. Sen Gupta & L.R. Padiyar, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore.
The research team is exceptional. Prof. Pai is an internationally recognized
leader in the use of direct methods for power system stability, Sen Gupta and
Padiyar have done state-of-the-art system studies involving FACTS and adaptive
PSS. Scope: This research will address a problem in the area of power systems
that is of importance in the U.S. and India. While there is much accumulated
experience in the U.S., the Indian academic institutions are very good at
keeping up with state-of-the-art, and the power industry there quite mature in
terms of their absorption of technology. The results expected from this
collaboration include research papers, course development at the University of
Illinois, and an advanced level monograph emanating from the research. ***