* 9521699
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Converting the Industrial  Assets of Cold War Science
* SBE,SES
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Ann Markusen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 11/30/1996
* USD 5,000.00

Doctoral Dissertation Research: Converting the Industrial Assets of Cold War
Science Under the direction of Dr. Ann Markusen, Mr. Jonathan Feldman is
examining the barriers and opportunities for conversion in firms which primarily
serve the military. The most successful defense projects are led by managers
able to forge links among engineering experience, insiders and exposure to
outside commercial experiences such as civilian production culture. Defense
cutbacks and supporting regimes spark diversification in these firms. Defense
procurement creates capacities for civilian market entry through economies of
scope, such capacities for diversification can be extended by reorganizing
resources through separatimn, the development of common systems and the creation
of institutions which facilitate technology transfer among divisions. Such
institutions include systems for forging cooperation within the firm. Successful
projects which exploit these strategies benefit from learning by doing,
relatedness between new products and old defense or newly acquired commercial
capacities and the existence of a collaborative system which forces engineers to
design for civilian needs. The collaborative system often is linked to external
users who help build markets for defense firms. To test the hypotheses and
develop a theory of the changing institutional requirements of developing
defense nurtured financial, research and manufacturing capacities for civilian
use, Mr. Feldman is studying a number of defense firms and case studies of
defense contractors and their key civilian projects.