* 9521494
* Research Planning Grant:  Feasibility Studies on Ductile    Regime Grinding
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Michele Miller, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 11/30/1997
* USD 17,905.00

9521494 Miller Ductile regime grinding is the term used to describe grinding
high performance materials like ceramics, so that the material removal mechanism
is primarily deformation, not brittle cracking with the attendant sub surface
damage. This type of material removal has been studied and documented,
particularly for grinding lenses. However, general adoption by industry requires
innovative ways to improve productivity while minimizing surface damage. This
research planning grant will investigate ways to improve material removal rates,
and identify performance requirements for applications other than ceramics. Two
ways to improve material removal rates will be investigated experimentally. The
first will use optimized abrasive wheels with small grits for the small chips
characteristic of ductile regime grinding, and large grits to prevent loading.
The way to enhance material removal will use ultrasonic excitation to
mechanically change the grit size. A literature review and industrial visits
will be used to identify performance requirements for non-optics applications.
Successful completion of this project will lead to higher productivity in
processing ceramics suitable for a wider class of applications. This award will
also encourage the diversity needed in the manufacturing research community. ***