* 9521883
* PEET: Monographic and Phylogenetic Investigation of the     Fossombroniineae (Hepaticophyta)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Raymond Stotler, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 613,271.00

9521883 Stotler Recognizing the need for enhancing taxonomic expertise in the
study of liverworts (Division Hepaticophyta of the Kingdom Plantae) Profs.
Raymond Stotler and Barbara Crandall-Stotler of Southern Illinois University
propose to apprentice students through involvement in a worldwide monograph of
the "simple thalloid" taxa of the suborder Fossombroniinae of the Metzgeriales.
A broad program of traditional and modern studies will focus on the several
hundred species expected to occur within this taxonomic framework, including:
(1) morphometric analyses with computer imaging systems to assess variability in
gametophytic and sporophytic features of these small, often epiphyllous plants;
(2) starch gel electrophoresis of proteins to measure levels of genetic
variability within and among populations of several species; (3) spore bank
studies to determine coexisting species assemblages in nature, and to measure
genetic differences between these co-occurring taxa; (4) DNA sequencing of
chloroplast and nuclear genes, in cooperation with Prof. Brent Mishler at the
University of California-@erkeley, to measure mutational differences between
taxa and construct phylogenies; (5) field work in the U.S. including Puerto
Rico; and (6) construction of a WorldWide Web link to computer databases on
hepatics maintained at the institution. Training of graduate and undergraduate
students will combine formal course work at the University and in tropical sites
in Puerto Rico with laboratory and museum studies, including studies in
Mishler's lab at UC-Berkeley. Computerization of various data-gathering and
data-analyzing tasks is fully integrated throughout the five years of the
project, and will enhance the prompt dissemination of information on these moss-
like plants.