* 9521562
* Dissertation Research:  Tiger, Tiger, Burning Out?  The     Science, Policy and Politics of Tiger Preservation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* David Braybrooke, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 08/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

This dissertation research will examine sources of conflict and dynamics of
change in international species protection policy, by examining Project Tiger,
an effort to save the Bengal tiger by the government of India, the World Wide
Fund for Nature (WWF), the World Conservation Union (IUCN), and a cadre of
wildlife biologists and ecologists from India, the Smithsonian Institution, and
the Species Survival Commission (SSC). The award will allow the dissertation
student to spend eight months in India collecting administrative, archival and
interview information from three Project Tiger sanctuaries. The early 1970s saw
the exclusion of villagers from new tiger sanctuaries, a policy consistent with
the views of many ecologists and with established forestry policy in India. This
strategy caused conflict among the groups that make preservation policy as well
as between villagers, park wardens, and tigers. Over time, the policy was
reevaluated and new strategies and policies have emerged. This research uses a
logic of rule analysis in conjunction with an issue-processing approach to
understand the dynamics of policy change. It sees policy failure as the result
of conflict over principles, with the desire to resolve conflict providing a
catalyst to change the principles so as to allow changes in policies and
institutions. The project identifies and examines situations where rules
conflict and then change so as to allow resolutions to develop. It provides a
picture of a stage by stage process where changes in the description of a
problem and the solutions to that problem can be identified and tracked, helping
to identify not only the shifts in policy but also the locations where changes
in institutions might be expected to occur. Understanding these dynamics can
challenge or support theoretical perspectives, illuminate the relationships
between the state and society in the context of policy change, increase
understanding of the role of scientific advisors in policy reformulation, and
advance knowledge of institutional change.