* 9521819
* PEET: Inventory, Systemetics, and Phylogeny of Sea Anemones: Training of Modern Systematists and Electronic Dissemination of Data
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2001
* Daphne Fautin, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 794,840.00

9521819 FAUTIN Sea anemones are important members of marine ecosystems. They
occur at all depths, from deep-sea vents to coral reefs, where they can displace
or replace hard corals under some conditions. In fact, studies of anemones in
this latter context are important for understanding the effects of global change
on corals and coral reefs. Dr. Fautin is one of only five systematists in the
world dealing with sea anemones and she is the only one in North America. She
will remedy this situation by training one MS student, two PhD students and a
post-doctoral fellow. A database of anemones of the world will be developed,
including digitized images of species and electronic keys that can be utilized
by non-systematists as well as systematic researchers. Both morphological and
molecular data will be utilized in the monographic treatment of these organisms.
This award will support the training of new practicing systematists dealing with
sea anemones. Our knowledge of this neglected element of marine biodiversity
will be markedly increased and the information resulting from this project
should be of use to researchers studying marine community ecology, population
biology, global change, biogeography, etc.. Knowledge of relationships among
species for this group has potential economic value as well, since sea anemones
have been a focus of research involving bioprospecting for pharmaceuticals, such
as anesthetics.