* 9521653
* Conference/Workshop - International Research on Advanced    Composites in Construction (IRACC)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Antonio Nanni, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 08/31/1996
* USD 45,706.00

9521653 Naomi In July 1994, a national workshop addressing Research on Advanced
Composites in Construction (RACC) was held in Washington, DC under NSF
sponsorship. This workshop was a planned activity aimed at integrating specific
research tasks dealing with characterization, manufacturing, testing procedures,
standards, and analysis/design criteria relative to the use of advanced
composites materials in construction. It is important that this type of activity
be expanded to the international level to make government funding agencies aware
of the needs and progress in this area of research and development, to seek new
forms of international collaboration, to address international standardization
and coding issues, and to allow researchers to review national priorities in
light of international achievements. A conference/workshop on International
Research on Advanced Composites in Construction will be held in Bologna, Italy,
during the Spring of 1996 addressing the following five areas: non- prestressed
reinforcement for concrete; prestressed reinforcement for concrete and cables;
structural shapes; structural FRP systems; and repair systems. Technical experts
from Europe, Japan, and the Americas will be invited to this activity. The
U.S.&gt; delegation will consists of ten researchers Central and South America
will be represented by five researchers. Managers of national and international
funding agencies will also be invited. Conference/workshop presentations and
recommendation on the program will be collected in a document for distribution
to universities, professional societies, industry, and government. ***