* 9521148
* SGER:  The Gribben Buried Forest:  A Unique Opportunity for Exploratory Research
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* David Foster, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1997
* USD 39,609.00

Ten thousand years ago the global climate was highly dynamic and the vegetation
of North America was undergoing the most rapid reorganization of the post-
glacial period. Spruce forests that once dominated much of interior North
America were decreasing in extent as the climate rapidly warmed. One such forest
was recently exposed by a mining company in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan. The
Gribben forest was buried in-place by glacial sediment and remains intact, with
completely preserved plant material, litter, humus layers, and soil profiles.
Wood from this site was recently radiocarbon dated at approximately 10,000 years
old. The site is part of an active mining operation and will be destroyed in the
summer of 1995. The objectives of this exploratory research are to (1) sample
the buried trees, litter and soil, (2) answer fundamental questions about paleo-
forest composition, structure, growth and dynamics, and (3) archive samples and
distribute data to the broader scientific community so that this unique
opportunity to understand a 10,000 year old forest and its environment is not
lost to science. This Small Grant for Exploratory Research will provide a unique
opportunity to learn about the composition, structure, and dynamics of forest
vegetation immediately after the glaciers receded from this area. The data will
allow a direct test of assumptions of much of the conceptual framework
underlying forest ecology and paleoecology.