* 9521845
* Theoretical Studies of Classical and Quantum Coherent Vortex States in Arrays of Mesoscopic Superconductors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Jorge Jose, Northeastern University
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 189,000.00

9521845 Jose A variety of systems will be investigated theoretically which
impact modern condensed matter physics. Problems to be studied relate to glassy
behavior in superconductors, macroscopic quantum coherent phenomena,
superconductor- insulator transitions, and coherent oscillatory vortex patterns.
These problems can be studied experimentally in a unique OcleanO way in
artificially fabricated Josephson junction arrays. Different types of collective
vortex ordering in these arrays will be investigated both in the classical and,
mostly, in the quantum regime. The dynamic response of Josephson junction arrays
will be modeled by a Langevin equation for the phases of the superconducting
order parameter and by MaxwellOs equations for the self- induced fields.
Research will also be extended on the response of mesoscopic systems with
specially designed geometries that have chaotic solutions in the classsical
limit. These theoretical problems are motivated by experiments and by the desire
to expand our understanding of previous theoretical predictions for the
existence of novel coherent vortex states. The theoretical techniques to be used
include large scale classical and quantum Monte Carlo simulations,
renormalization group techniques, classical dynamical systems theory, many-body
techniques, path integral methods, pseudo-spectral methods, and other
theoretical approaches deemed necessary. Algorithms will be developed for
serial, vector and parallel platforms. The results of this study are likely to
impact the field of quantum effect electronics. %%% A theoretical and
computational study will be made of strongly interactiong microelectronic
arrays. These arrays are excellent models for a variety of physical systems
including high temperature superconductors. They also exhibit chaotic behavior
in certain regimes. Besides possessing model behavior, these arrays also serve
as actual devices which incorporate quantum effects at the microelectronic scal
e. ***