* 9521076
* U.S.-Indo Cooperative Research Logic Programming:           Analysis, Transformations, and Principles, Award in Indian  Currency
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1998
* R. K. Shyamasundar, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 03/31/1998
* USD 6,600.00

9521076 SHYAMASUNDAR Description: This proposal will provide linkage support for
a collaboration between Deepak Kapur, Department of Computer Science, State
University of New York, Albany and R.K. Shyamasundar, Theoretical Computer
Science Group, Tata Institute of Fundamental Research (TIFR), Bombay, India. The
focus of this project is the study and analysis of logic programs with emphasis
on termination of sequential and concurrent programs. The initial theoretical
investigations will concentrate on proving termination of a logic program for a
query, developing semantic- preserving transformations to improve efficiency of
logic programs, and identifying conditions under which the occur-check can be
omitted in a logic programming language interpreter. Software tools will be
developed to implement theoretical results and are expected to promote the
design of elegant and efficient logic programs. Scope: The P.I.s are well-known
senior scientists with complimentary research interests. Kapur and his group are
accomplished in the area of automated deduction and term rewriting systems and
have developed an extremely powerful theorem prover, Rewrite Rule Laboratory.
Shyamasundar is well- known for his research in theoretical computer science,
particularly in the area of logic programming and semantics of real-time and
concurrent programming. Computer science is an area of exceptional strength in
India and many mutual benefits can be expected to result from this
collaboration. ***