* 9521496
* Thermal Adaptation in Polar Macroalgae
* O/D,OPP
* 06/15/1995,10/31/1999
* Valrie Gerard, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 10/31/1999
* USD 205,858.00

Gerard 9521496 The genetic adaptations that enable certain plant species to
survive and grow in polar environments where temperatures are near or below 0oC
year-round are poorly understood. Low- temperature adaptation is complicated in
terrestrial plants by freezing, desiccation and stomatal conductance, and in
marine phytoplankton by a variable and unpredictable physical environment. Polar
macroalgae provide an experimental system that is not subject to these
complications and that is well- suited to the study of cold-adaptation in
plants. Cold- adaptation is particularly well developed in Antarctic macroalgae,
in which rates of photosynthesis and growth at OoC are comparable to rates
achieved at 10-15oC by temperate species. The proposed research uses endemic
Arctic and Antarctic seaweeds to answer the question, "What adaptations do polar
algae possess that enable them to assimilate carbon and grow rapidly at very low
temperatures?" The research focusses on carbon-metabolism characteristics of
three closely related polar-temperate pairs of brown algae: Arctic Laminaria
solidungula and temperate Laminaria saccharina; Antarctic Desmarestia anceps and
temperate Desmarestia aculeata, and Antarctic Himantothallus grandifolius that
is related to Desmarestia aculeata and D. anceps, but is morphologically similar
to Laminaria saccharina. Carbon-metabolism processes (photosynthesis,
respiration and light-independent carbon fixation) that are important in cold-
adaptation will be identified in sporophytes of each species pair acclimated to
the same temperature. Specific mechanisms of adaptation will be determined by
comparing components of the photosynthetic apparatus as well as contents,
activities and thermal properties of key enzymes involved in photosynthesis,
respiration and light- independent carbon fixation. Comparisons of multiple
species pairs and a broad suite of carbon-assimilation parameters will provide a
comprehensive analysis of the mechanisms of low- temperature adaptation in algal
species endemic to both the Arctic and Antarctic Oceans and increase an overall
understanding of low temperature adaptation in all plants.