* 9521405
* Adaptive Identification and Control of Dynamical Systems    Using Neural Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Kumpati Narendra, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Werbos
* 06/30/1999
* USD 419,303.00

The fundamental processes involved in controlling a dynamical system include the
mathematical modeling of the system, identification based on experimental data,
processing of the outputs, and using them in turn to synthesize control inputs
to achieve desired behavior. The aim of automatic control is to achieve the
latter rapidly, accurately, and in a stable fashion. The problem of controlling
a known linear plant with multiple inputs and multiple outputs is a difficult
one. When the parameters of such systems are unknown, the problem is
considerably more difficult, and adaptive control is needed. The difficulty is
substantially grater when the plant is known but nonlinear. When the plant is
nonlinear with unknown characteristics, we have a nonlinear adaptive control
problem which is truly formidable. In numerous application in new areas such as
space technology, manufacturing, and robotics, as well as established areas such
as process control and aircraft control, such problems are arising with
increasing frequency. The proposal deals with theoretical and practical aspects
of the control of such systems using neural networks. The first part of this
work will deal with the representation problem of non linear systems and the
existence of controller for them. In the second part, questions related to the
choice of neural networks as identifiers and controllers will be addressed. The
third part will deal with the important question of stability. In the fourth
part, a detailed study of control using multiple models will be carried on.
Empirical studies carried out in the past three years suggest that such a
control methodology based on multiple models is needed to cope efficiently with
rapid changes in the environment. The four part of the proposal represents four
of the important aspects of nonlinear adaptive control using neural networks.