* 9521882
* PEET: Diatom Systematics and the Great Lakes Diatom Flora
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,02/28/2001
* Eugene Stoermer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 763,398.00

9521882 Stoermer For a large, diverse, and ecologically important group of
aquatic microorganisms, the algal diatoms, taxonomic expertise is limited in the
United States, and only a few institutions host major natural history
collections that facilitate research and training. Dr. Eugene Stoermer of the
University of Michigan supervises one of the major laboratories devoted to the
study of diatoms, with emphasis on the species-rich flora of Great Lakes diatoms
(estimated at 2000 species) and their taxonomic relatives in North America and
abroad. He has been a pioneer in the application of computer-assisted
morphometric analyses to the study of size and shape in diatoms, and to related
problems of their growth, geographic distribution and dispersal, ecological
coexistence, fossilization and geological persistence, and evolutionary
relationships. For the next five years he and his colleagues and students will
be engaged in the study of the Great Lakes diatoms and their worldwide
relatives, with the goals of clarifying taxonomic relationships at species,
genus, and family ranks; constructing reliable identification keys based on
features not subject to environmental modification during the growth of diatoms;
constructing hypotheses of phylogenetic relationships among selected groups of
diatoms, and integrating these inferences with data from the fossil record; and
databasing records of natural history collections of diatoms, at University of
Michigan and in other major collections. Under the PEET program, the research
includes training of new diatom taxonomic experts, at graduate and postdoctoral
levels over the five years. Colleagues at the California Academy of Sciences and
the Philadelphia Academy of Natural Sciences are cooperating in the research and
training. In addition, Dr. Stoermer and his students will participate annually
in the diatom courses offered at the Iowa Lakeside Laboratory, a popular venue
for summer field courses in diatom studies. Results of research and of specimen
databasing activities are to be made readily accessible electronically over
Internet, and with a WorldWide Web page devoted to diatom systematics, evolution
and ecology.