* 9521457
* U.S.-Korea Seminar on Reduction of Natural Disaster in      Water Environment, Seoul, Korea, July 17-21, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Nani Bhowmik, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 11/30/1996
* USD 44,459.00

9521457 Bhowmik This a ward provides funds to permit Dr. Nani Bhowmik, Head,
Hydrology Division, Illinois State Water Survey, to conduct with Dr. Il Won Seo,
Professor of Civil Engineering, Seoul National University, a U.S.-Korea Joint
Seminar on the Reduction of Natural Disasters in Water Environments. This award
will support the participation of ten U.S. scientists/engineers and two U.S.
graduate students, each of whom will present scientific papers. The reduction of
natural disasters in water environments is a matter of great concern in many
parts of the world. In the United States, the need for minimizing such natural
disasters has been given special attention following the great flood of the
Mississippi, Missouri, and Illinois Rivers in 1993. Because of the 1993 flood,
interest in the scientific and engineering aspects of disaster prevention or
reduction due to flooding also has grown in other countries, as well. Prevention
and reduction of disaster due to the failure of dams and other causes also is of
interest. The joint seminar will provide an opportunity for U.S. participants to
exchange scientific information with Korean scientists and engineers on problems
in the field of this joint seminar. The participants from both countries are
recognized experts whose presentations will be of mutual interest and benefit.
This project is relevant to the objectives of the U.S.- Korea Cooperative
Science Program which seeks to increase the level of cooperation between U.S.
and Korean scientists and engineers through the exchange of scientific
information, ideas, skills, and techniques and through collaboration on problems
of mutual interest and benefit. Korean participation is supported by the Korea
Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) with the cooperation of the Korea
Water Resources Corporation (KOWACO) and the Korea Institute of Construction
Technology (KICT). ***