* 9521685
* Dissertation Research:  High-Speed Laser Scanning           Fluorescence Microscope.  Improve Spatial Resolution,       Scanning Field Size and Sensitivity
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Peter Saggau, Baylor College of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

This proposal documents an instrumental improvement important in the
dissertation research of Andrew Bullen. This research examines the conduction
and integration of electrophysiological signals in the dendrites of cultured
mamrr~ CNS neurons using fast optical recording techniques. Andrew is a student
at the University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine who is undertaking his
doctoral research at Baylor College of Medicine in order to exploit the unique
instrumental resources available in the laboratory of Dr. Peter Saggau. The
primary instrumental resource used in these investigations is a novel High-Speed
Laser Scanning Fluorescence Microscope previously developed in Dr Saggau's lab.
The bandwidth of this system (200,000 points/second) is considerably greater
than existing scanning microscopes. This bandwidth is achieved through the
incorporation of acoustic-optic deflectors as its only scanning mechanism. This
instrument was previously used to record from brain slices (Saggau et al.,
1990). This microscope has been further developed for simultaneous multisite
recording from two fluorescent indicators in the dendrites of mammalian CNS
neurons. These modifications have allowed studies of neuronal integration within
a single cell and investigations of signaling between cultured neurons (Bullen &
Saggau, 1994). These studies employed voltage-sensitive dyes and calcium
indicators, but other probes are planned for future experiments. Notwithstanding
its fast scanning rate and large bandwidth, the current system has several
limitations that have been highlighted by these recent experiments. These
limitations include modest spatial resolution, small scanning field size and
poor signal-to-noise ratio in fine neuronal processes. A simple improvement is
proposed to overcome these limitations and further enhance the performance of
this instrument. By replacing the existing acousto-optic deflectors with
equivalent devices able to produce more spots (70 vs 10 spots) over a larger
initial deflection angle (40 mrad. vs 5 mrad.), the scanning field size will be
significantly enlarged and the relative spatial resolution improved. The
absolute spatial resolution will also be increased because the net spot size
will be smaller (2 ~m vs 10 llm). Furthermore, the smaller spot size will
enhance the signal- to-noise ratio and allow events of smaller magnitude to be
resolved. These irnproved deflectors will also provide homogenous illumination
and thereby facilitate a uniform signal-to-noise ratio throughout the scanning
field. The proposed change can be implemented without compromising the existing
bandwidth of the system or any major structural alterations. In summary, a minor
change to an existing High-Speed Laser Scanning Fluorescence Microscope is
proposed. This modification will make this instrument more sensitive and able to
sample a larger area with greater spatial resolution. The impact of these
features will allow simultaneous mulitsite optical recordings of small events
from fine neuronal structures. Measurements of this nature were not previously
possible and should significantly advance the understanding of information
processing in the dendrites of mammalian CNS neurons. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)