* 9521744
* PEET: Systematics, Ontogeny and Ecology of the Family       Acaridae (Acari: Astigmata)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,06/30/2002
* Barry OConnor, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2002
* USD 565,816.00

9521744 OCONNOR Mites are an extremely diverse invertebrate group (Chelicerata:
Arachnida: Acariformes) including terrestrial, aquatic, free living and
parasitic forms. This award will support monographic research in the mite family
Acaridae which contains some 90 genera and includes the most important mite
pests of stored food products as well as species responsible for house dust
allergies. Dr. OConnor is a well recognized mite systematist and highly
qualified for training a new generation of researchers. This award will support
the education and training of two United States graduate students and three
postdoctoral associates who will return their systematic expertise to Japan,
Costa Rica and Australia. Research results will be made available in published
and electronic form and a practical guide to mite pests of stored products and
house dust will be produced. This research will contribute to our knowledge of
the biological diversity of mites, a group of organisms in great need of
systematic attention, and new systematists capable of further research with
these organisms will be trained. The results of this research have clear
implications of both medical and economic importance. Beyond that, further
research concerning the complex development or life cycles of these mites and
their dispersal by phoresy or hitchhiking on insects will be enhanced.