* 9521848
* Planning Activities: Development of the Ohio River          Environmental Station
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* James Thorp, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* None
* 02/28/1999
* USD 22,600.00

Freshwater ecologists in the U.S.A. have long emphasized the study of lentic and
small lotic ecosystems; and as a consequence, research has rarely been conducted
on large rivers. Indeed, about 96% of all lotic studies have involved headwater
creeks to a few medium-sized rivers, despite the fact that big rivers are
perhaps the most crucial, surface-water ecosystem for humans throughout the
world in terms of water supply and transport. Although aquatic ecologists
generally acknowledge that much more research is needed on large rivers, this
has been difficult to accomplish because of: (a) major logistical problems and
expenses associated with large river research: (b) inadequate foundation data on
which to base sophisticated research proposals to funding agencies (especially
NSF; and (c) the severe shortage of field stations on large rivers as
operational centers for research and sites for long-term environmental
monitoring to support descriptive, theoretical, and experimental studies. The
University of Louisville recently purchased riverfront property located
approximately one hour from the main campus (upstream from Louisville in
Westport, KY) on which to establish the Ohio River Environmental Station (ORES)
and has received a gift from a national corporation to aid in the renovation or
construction of research facilities. The institution wishes to make ORES a
preeminent site for large river research on regional, national, and
international levels, especially as the research relates to management of
navigable regulated rivers. ORES is located at an ideal site where the Ohio
changes from a river with a naturally- constricted channel to a fllodplain
river. To further these goals, this project will support planning and design of
ORES. The project will sponsor a workshop at the University of Louisville to (1)
refine the mission of ORES; (2) discuss the organization, physical design, and
equipping of ORES; and (3) develop plans for the establishment and impl
ementation of an international consortium of large river laboratories and field
stations. Three faculty members from the Biology Department at the University of
Louisville will join 5 aquatic ecologists from other North American universities
and 2 aquatic scientists from overseas research laboratories at this workshop.
Based on additional information gathered by the P.I. and advice from
participants in the workshop, the master site plan, mission, and strategic
objectives of ORES will be finalized. The University of Louisville will then
contract with an architectural firm for the final design of the Ohio River
Environmental Station site and buildings.