* 9521914
* Carnegie Mellon Center for Integrated Study of the Human    Dimensions of Global Change
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1996,09/30/2006
* Granger Morgan, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2006
* USD 11,595,744.00

As part of an NSF Consortium for Research on the Human Dimensions of Global
Change, this award supports the Center for Integrated Study of the Human
Dimensions of Global Change. The Center activities, coordinated through
Carnegie-Mellon University, will be conducted by more than thirty researchers
from fourteen institutions located in seven countries around the world. The
mandate of this Center is the systematic integration of global change research.
Such a systematic integration can reveal new insights from the existing body of
knowledge, help identify the neglected issues, and promote the necessary
research. While integrated analysis will form the core of the Center's efforts,
this analysis will be supported with basic and applied research on selected
issues of substance, theory, and methods. This work will involve: Descriptive
and behavioral studies which aim to understand how humans perceive and behave in
their environment, and normative and analytical studies which aim to
characterize forces of change in the environment and evaluate alternative policy
options. In addition to research, the Center will be active in facilitating
better communication between the public, students, decision-makers, and
researchers. In summary, the Center will: 1) Provide a single research framework
within which to analyze and compare a variety of different aspects of global
change; 2) Be a dynamic source of new research ideas and a stimulus for basic
research activity on the human dimensions of global change; 3) Advance the state
of the art of integrated research and modeling; 4) Facilitate greater
collaboration between social and natural scientists on a cross-institutional and
cross-national basis in the context of a shared analytical environment; 5)
Provide an important vehicle for discourse on global change issues between
researchers, the public, and key decision makers around the world; and 6)
Provide innovative educational services to citizen groups, schools,
universities, and decision-makers.