* 9521687
* PEET: Monographic Studies of the Coccidia of the World
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2001
* Donald Duszynski, University of New Mexico
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 690,738.00

9521687 DUSZYNSKI Domestic and zoo animals as well as wild animal populations,
including various invertebrates, can be devastated by the disease known as
coccidiosis, which is caused by a diversity of intracellular intestinal
parasites known collectively as the Coccidia (Protista: Apicomplexa:
Eimeriorina). The taxonomy of this economically important group is complicated
and in disarray because of complex life cycles which for many species have not
even associated the different life stages. Drs. Duszynski and Upton are
recognized systematic authorities for these parasites. They will produce a
monographic treating the world fauna of coccidians that develops a standard of
description and type designation and clarifies nomenclatural problems. Results
of their work will be made available electronically as well as in published
form. And they will train both graduate and undergraduate students to become
badly needed systematic researchers with these poorly known organisms. This
award will contribute to our knowledge of the biodiversity and relationships of
these single celled, parasitic organisms and support the graduate education and
training young systematists capable of further research with these organisms.
The project has potential to provide information relevant for management and
control of these serious disease causing organisms as well as contributing
knowledge of relationships of lineages important for basic research in studies
of host coevolution, biogeography, ecology, etc..