* 9521046
* Design and Evaluation of Algorithms for Storage Reclamation in Object Databases
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Benjamin Zorn, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/1999
* USD 344,445.00

A problem for an object database management system (ODBMS) is the reclamation of
storage for persistent, secondary-memory objects that are no longer accessible.
Although excellent reclamation algorithms have been developed for transient,
primary-memory objects, these algorithms have been shown to be inappropriate for
use on secondary-memory objects in object databases. This project investigates
new algorithms for ODBMS storage reclamation. The critical aspects of secondary-
memory reclamation are teased apart into a set of distinct policy areas.
Rigorous trace-driven simulations of the algorithms are performed to gain an
understanding of the relative performance of alternative policies within each
area as well as an understanding of the interplay of policies across areas.
Prototype implementations of the most promising algorithms are integrated into
an existing ODBMS. This project makes three primary contributions to the ODBMS
research, development, and user communities. First, a set of new reclamation
algorithms appropriate for object databases is defined. Second, performance
evaluations of the algorithms are used to reveal the circumstances under which
the algorithms should be considered for adoption within a particular ODBMS or
application. Third, a catalog of benchmark and live-application traces is
created to establish an empirically founded characterization of application
behavior that can be used far beyond evaluation of reclamation algorithms.