* 9521755
* PEET: Partnerships in Aleocharine Systematics (Coleoptera: Staphylinidae): Phylogeny of Basal Lineages and Identification of North American and Mexican Genera
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* James Ashe, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 788,364.00

9521755 Ashe The rove beetle (family Staphylinidae) subfamily Aleocharinae,
which currently comprise over 900 genera and 12, 000 species throughout the
world, is currently the most taxonomically difficult large group of beetles
(Coleoptera). However, aleocharines are abundant, and often dominant, components
of the biological diversity of many microhabitats in both temperate and tropical
regions throughout the world, and their abundance and diversity suggests that
they may have substantial ecological impact. Aleocharines have diversified along
many evolutionary pathways and offer outstanding opportunities for addressing
fundamental questions in evolutionary biology and about the origin and
modification of behavior, ecological associations, and their roles in ecosystem
structure and function and patterns of biological diversity. The ability to
address these issues is hampered by the inability of even the most experienced
staphylinid worker to identify genera and higher taxa of aleocharines and the
virtual lack of information about evolutionary relationships of aleocharines,
especially at higher taxonomic levels. To address these problems, and to provide
for training of the next generation of systematists, this project will: 1)
provide comprehensive training for a Postdoctoral associate, and two graduate
students, 2) provide identification guides to the genera od Aleocharinae of
North America and Mexico, 3) make the character and image database available on-
line through an Internet connection and 4) produce an analysis of evolutionary
relationships of the higher taxa of basal lineages of aleocharines. %%% The
project's outlines will provide access to basic systematics and basal phylogeny
that could encourage additional research on the wide variety of aleocharine
systematics, evolution and ecology, and the role that these beetles play in
ecosystem structure and function, that previously could not be addressed. The
training aspects will produce knowledgeable specialists in the Staphylinidae, as
well as excellent modern systematists that will be highly competitive for future
positions. ***