* 9521918
* A Proposal to Support A Center for the Study ofInstitutions, Population, and Environmental Change
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2006
* Elinor Ostrom, Indiana University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2006
* USD 11,839,506.00

As part of an NSF Consortium for Research on the Human Dimensions of Global
Change, this award establishes a Center for the Study of Institutions,
Population, and Environmental Change (CIPEC) at Indiana University. CIPEC's
primary focus is on a systematic, long-term study of deforestation and
afforestation processes as mediated by institutions. Three broad questions serve
as central organizing themes for research: (1) How is human behavior at
household and community levels linked to regional and global change phenomena?
(2) How can macro-scale physical processes observed and modeled at a global
level be linked to meso and micro human organizational and decision-making
processes? (3) How do institutional arrangements influence the direction and
size of the impact of human driving forces, such as population and
transportation networks, on forest ecosystems and global change? These broad,
overarching questions are addressed by specific projects that combine the
efforts of social scientists, ecologists, and physical scientists working
together on sustained, over-time research conducted in carefully selected sites
using the best methods from the physical, biological, and the social sciences.
The Center draws on expertise from four existing Indiana University centers: The
Anthropological Center for Training and Research on Global Environmental Change
(ACT), the Workshop in Political Theory and Analysis, the Midwestern Regional
Center of the National Institute for Global Environmental Change (NIGEC), and
the Population Institute for Research and Training (PIRT). CIPEC also addresses
the national need of training doctoral-level environmental social scientists in
rigorous disciplinary methods and the development of interdisciplinary skills.
The Center has an international commitment to the training of mid-career
scholars and professionals from a number of countries in recognition of the
global nature of environmental change. CIPEC will produce new discoveries and
new knowledge that will both expand our understanding of the human dimensions of
global change and influence the direction of research in the larger HDGC
community. In addition, CIPEC will foster both interdisciplinary research and
multidisciplinary training in the human dimensions of global change.