* 9521398
* Tight Polyhedral Relaxations for Discrete and Continuous    Nonconvex Problems with Applications to Production,         Distribution, and Design Problems
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Hanif Sherali, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 05/31/1999
* USD 210,000.00

9521398 Sherali This research is focused on the formulation and development of
new solution techniques for discrete and continuous nonconvex programming
problems. The research will revolve around a new Reformulation-Linearization-
Technique (RLT) that has been developed for generating tight linear programming
relaxations that can be used not only to construct exact solution algorithms,
but also to design heuristic procedures for large classes of discrete
combinatorial and continuos nonconvex programming problems. For linear mixed-
integer 0-1 problems, a new hierarchy of relaxations is presented that provides
a framework for constructing a spectrum of continuous relaxations spanning from
the linear programming relaxation to the convex hull representation. The
hierarchy provides opportunity to exploit special structures such as
generalized/variable upper bounds, covering, partitioning, packing constraints,
and sparsity. The basic constructs of the scheme can also be extended to devise
globally convergent procedures for continuous, nonconvex, polynomial programming
problems. To effectively cope with the higher dimensional, large-scale
representations that are typically generated by the RLT procedure, various
constraint and variable/column generation strategies and Lagrangian dual
approaches are suggested for investigation. The developed algorithm will be
tested on a host of problems drawn from distribution, design, telecommunication,
production, and location-allocation problems. The importance of having tight
linear programming relaxations to enhance the effectiveness of algorithms for
solving integer programming problems has long been recognized. The potential
impact of the outcome of this research is to provide a tool (the RLT) that can
help unify concepts, generate new polyhedral results, and design effective
algorithms along with provable good heuristics for hard, discrete and
continuous, nonconvex problems that arise often in practice. This may lead to
the development of general, pract ical, RLT implementation strategies and
promote its understanding sufficiently so as to facilitate its assimilation into
public domain software. Common usage of such software will significantly improve
the efficiency of usage of the technique. This will produce savings in cost in a
host of applications.