* 9521282
* Drilling Induced Seismicity in Middle Valley and Escanaba   Trough
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Mark McDonald, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 12/31/1999
* USD 316,597.00

9521282 Webb This group from Scripps Institution of Oceanography at the
University of California at San Diego will conduct a seafloor experiment to
determine the size of the plumbing system beneath submarine hot springs on the
Juan de Fuca Ridge and Gorda Rise, offshore from Oregon, Washington and British
Columbia. They will deploy ocean bottom seismometers at two sites where the D/V
JOIDES Resolution will drill holes in the vicinity of hydrothermal systems.
JOIDES Resolution is the vessel chartered by an international consortium for
basic research on marine geology; the lead agency in the program is the National
Science Foundation through its Ocean Drilling Program. The deployments will
begin before drilling, and will last for about two months post-drilling. It is
anticipated that tiny earthquakes and flow within the fractured rock beneath the
seabed will be recorded by the seismometers, and that this will allow location
of events related to opening the subsurface hot reservoir to sea water.
Mechanisms causing seismic noise are expected to be 1) cracking due to thermal
stress, 2) acquathermal pressure fracturing resulting from reservoir temperature
change, and 3) hydrofracturing due to the hydraulic head associated with the
difference in density between cold seawater and hot pore fluids. The
investigators expect to differentiate among these mechanisms based on the
character of the seismic signature recorded on their instruments. They also
expect to place constraints on the size of the reservoir based on the
distribution of recorded events. This will provide the first direct measurement
of a submarine hydrothermal reservoir, and will be an important step in
understanding the properties of these widespread ocean ridge features. ***