* 9521773
* PEET: Monographic Research in the Diptera
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2002
* Darlene Judd, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 514,535.00

9521773 MATHIS Relative to other groups of "higher" insects, the order Diptera,
the flies, have been little studied. This is especially unfortunate because the
order contains many vectors of human and animal diseases, important crop pests,
and even beneficial parasitic insects that have been effectively utilized in
biological control of other insect pests. This PEET award will train badly
needed new systematic specialists in three families of Diptera, the Rhagionidae,
Tanyderidae, and Aulacigastridae. Training will encompass a postdoctoral
associate and undergraduate student involvement, as well as training two
graduate students. Monographic treatments ranging from a family revision to
generic and specific level revisions are predicted. The results of these
researches will be databased and made available electronically in addition to
formal publication. The results of this research award will contribute to our
knowledge of elements of the biodiversity of an important order of insects. The
award will support the training of new practicing systematists proficient in
modern methods of systematic analysis and capable of conducting further research
on other groups. Results of this particular research have potential
applicability to human health issues and agriculture as well as to various areas
of basic biological research involving these flies in all their life stages,
such as ecology, ecosystems research, population biology, etc..