* 9521714
* Collaborative Research:  On Estimating Behavior Determining Income When Response Is Subject to Error
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,01/25/1999
* Christopher Bollinger, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 01/25/1999
* USD 63,423.00

The rate of participation in programs that provide an economic `safety net` has
been widely used as a bellwether of program adequacy. Improved design for income
maintenance programs requires consistently-estimated models of behavior leading
to participation in the program. Estimates of participation probabilities from
households surveys are biased by response error; hence, estimates of behavioral
models of participation are also biased. This fact motivates the research.
Administrative-level records have been matched to survey data from the Survey of
Income and Participation Program (SIPP). Extent of response error and models of
response error conditioned on economic and demographic variables can be
estimated from the match. Models of program participation can then be correctly
estimated, accounting for response errors. The initial focus of this research is
on two programs: Food Stamps (FS) and Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC). Improved models of participation in these programs will afford better
understanding of populations not currently reached by the program. Implications
of program policy changes then can be more accurately predicted with the result
that more efficient program designs can be developed. The methodologies
developed from this research can be generalized to other subjects and afford a
way for many applications to adjust for error in household surveys.