* 9521237
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Career and Family Patterns  among Female Executives in Finance-Related Occupations
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1996
* Andrew Abbott, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 07/31/1996
* USD 4,500.00

This is an award under the Grants for Improving Doctoral Dissertation Research
Program. The research will study career and family patterns of female executives
in finance-related fields. Existing theories explaining why women make up a
small proportion of higher management are reconsidered through an approach that
takes into account the combination of events that make up turning points in
women's lives. These turning points either sustain women in a career trajectory
or redirect them in other directions. Detailed interviews from 58 senior female
executives and 23 women who began promising careers in the same field but did
not continue at the same pace or left entirely will be analyzed using optimal
matching techniques, a form of sequence analysis. %%% This research will
contribute to sociological understanding of the interrelations among work,
family, and gender equality. Innovative methods of analysis will be refined so
that they can be of use to social scientists studying career mobility. Findings
will also be helpful to policy-makers concerned with ways to increase equality
in the work place and to strengthen family relations. In addition to the
scientific gains to be achieved by the research, this award will materially
assist a highly promising student in completing research for the Ph.D.
dissertation. Thus it contributes to the future scientific manpower of the
nation and the thorough training of the next generation of social scientists.