* 9521353
* Density Functional Theory of Electronic Structure
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* John Perdew, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/1998
* USD 230,000.00

9521353 Perdew This grant is being made to support theoretical research on the
electronic structure of atoms, molecules and solids. The goal of the research is
to improve methods and concepts of the density functional and pseudopotential
theories through the following projects: (1) The exchange-correlation hole
around an electron, describing the tendency of electrons to stay apart, is
somewhat transferable from one system to another. For an electron gas of uniform
density, the hole will be analyzed by spin and by interelectronic spatial
separation. (2) An Oon-top holeO explanation will be given for the success of
the local spin density and generalized gradient approximations in OnormalO
systems. Exact or nearly exact holes in atoms and molecules will be used to test
the strengths and weaknesses of these approximations. (3) Systematic local spin
density and genralized gradient approximation calculations will be undertaken
for the elemental solids. Local spin density and generalized gradient
approximation energies will be analyzed by reduced density gradients. (4) To
complete the liquid drop model for a charged metallic cluster, the quantum
contribution to the size effect for the ionization energy will be evaluated. (5)
A local electron-ion pseudopotential, combining simplicity with realism, has
been constructed from solid state electron densities, Tests and applications
will include calculation of phonon frequencies and OuniversalO phase diagrams
for simple metals under pressure. (6) In a quest for Ochemical accuracy,O hybrid
methods will be developed by combining density functionals for short-range
correlations with wavefunction methods for long-range. (7) The density gradient
expansion of the kinetic energy will be tested and convergently resummed,
leading to a simple Oorder-NO method of electronic structure calculation. %%%
Numerical and analytical techniques will be used to develop, test and apply new
methods to calculate the properties of the electr onic structure of atoms,
molecules and particularly, solids. The results of this work could have a wide-
ranging impact on researchers using these methods to calculate a wide variety of
material properties related to the electronic structure. ***