* 9521023
* Dynamics of Extensional Convergent Margins and the Origin of Supra-Subduction Zone Ophiolites: Hypothesis Testing in the Tonga Forearc
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Sherman Bloomer, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 07/31/2000
* USD 429,205.00

9521023 Bloomer This project by Dr. Sherman Bloomer of Oregon State University
supports a research cruise and subsequent data analysis aimed at understanding
the development of the Tonga subduction system in the southwestern Pacific. This
convergent margin is hypothesized to represent a simple end-member of such
subduction systems, where rapid convergence and a simple plate margin geometry
allow testing of a series of hypotheses regarding geologic evolution of the
"forearc" system. The program will include detailed seafloor imaging to study
fault distribution, geophysical studies (seismic reflection, gravity and
magnetics) to examine subsurface architecture, and extensive rock sampling to
examine the development of the arc system geochemically. Of particular interest
will be the distribution of serpentinite diapirs and evidence of hydrothermal
fluid migration in the arc system. This project is supported in collaboration
with award 9521039 to Dr. Dawn Wright, also at Oregon State University, whose
support comes under the NSF Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) Program.
That award provides support for Dr. Wright over four years to develop new,
interdisciplinary courses in the marine and geological sciences, to promote
scientific careers to undergraduate and high school students, and to carry out a
two-pronged research program in different aspects of marine geophysics. The
first part of the proposed research focusses on the study of the geophysical
development of the Tonga forearc, and Dr. Wright will participate in the field
program, and she will have principal responsibility for post-cruise analysis of
the geophysical data collected during the project. ***