* 9521752
* PEET: Systematics of Amphipod Crustaceans in the Families   Crangonyctidae and Hadziidae
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2002
* John Holsinger, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 342,304.00

9521752 HOLSINGER Amphipod Crustacea are a very diverse group of invertebrate
animals with both freshwater and marine members. In both aquatic environments,
these animals, often present in large population numbers, are important elements
of food webs. Yet, as with many invertebrate groups, the amphipods include many
undescribed species, are in need of revisionary or monographic systematic
analysis, and have few systematic specialists capable of conducting such
research. Dr. John Holsinger is a recognized taxonomic authority for amphipods.
With this award he will address monographic systematic revisions of groups in
two families of amphipods. The award will also support the training of graduate
students in the systematics of Crustacea. Databases will be developed for the
specimens examined as well as interactive electronic identification keys. These
keys will be of value to people concerned with environmental quality because the
amphipods that are the focus of this study inhabit subterranean waters and can
serve as indicators of groundwater quality for the aquifers they inhabit. The
results of this research will contribute to our knowledge of an important
element of Crustacean biodiversity. New practicing systematists will be trained
to assume research with these organisms in the future and practical electronic
keys to species will be produced that should be of utility to researchers and
managers concerned with monitoring water quality.