* 9521392
* Low Energy Ion Scattering and Scanning Tunneling Microscope Studies of the Nucleation and Growth of Islands on Surfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* R. Stanley Williams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 270,000.00

9521392 Williams The phenomena of nucleation and growth of metals and metalloid
islands (Ni, Ag, In, Sn, Sb, and Te), on semiconductor surfaces (Si) will be
investigated. Techniques of Time-of Flight Low Energy Ion Scattering will be
used to measure the coverage of the surface islands during material deposition
to obtain kinetic information. Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM) will provide
spatial information such as shape, size and densities of the islands, which can
be related to thermodynamic properties of the system. The experimental data will
be compared with computer simulations to determine growth mechanisms and
physical parameters, especially surface diffusion constants and line tensions
for different adsorbates. Materials with a broad range of properties and
behaviors have been selected. STM will also provide information on the size
dependence of the electronic property of the islands and the unique properties
of supported clusters. %%% The ultimate objective in this research is to
understand the kinetic and thermodynamic processes of nucleation and growth so
that the formation of an optimized structure of dots, lines, and/or planes can
be guided through control of deposition parameters such as flux, fluence and
substrate temperature. The selected Materials have a broad range of properties
and behaviors. Techniques of Time-of Flight Low Energy Ion Scattering will
provide information on the coverage of the surface islands during material
deposition to obtain kinetic information. Scanning Tunneling Microscopy (STM)
will be used to study spatial information such as shape, size and densities of
the islands, which can be related to thermodynamic properties of the system. The
experimental data will be compared with computer simulations data to determine
growth mechanisms and physical parameters, especially surface diffusion
constants and line tensions for different adsorbates STM will also p rovide
information on the size dependence of the electronic property of the islands and
the unique properties of supported clusters. ***