* 9521521
* GOALI:  High Performance Transferred Electron Oscillators   for 100-300 GHz
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Stephen Jones, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 12/31/1999
* USD 356,249.00

9521521 Jones The millimeter- and submillimeter-wave range has long been of
vital interest to radio astronomers and atmospheric scientists, and is becoming
increasingly important for commercial applications such as automotive collision
avoidance systems and surveillance radar. Unfortunately, the development of
millimeter- and submillimeter-wave systems has been slow and costly. At present,
the most serious challenge for millimeter- and submillimeter wave circuit
designers is the realization of reliable, moderate power low noise and compact
solid state sources. This proposal addresses these issues by focusing on the
investigation of high performance Transferred Electron Oscillators for 100-300
Ghz. The goals of this three year research program are 1) Theoretical and
experimental investigation of novel GaAs, InP, and GaN Stable Depletion Layer
Transferred Electron Devices for improved 150-300 Ghz operation in second-
harmonic cavities, 2) Advanced computer-aided design of Transferred Electron
Devices and the associated second-harmonic oscillator cavities, and 3) Design,
construction and testing of high reliability, digitally controlled, second-
harmonic TEO systems. This project will involve a variety of research areas,
including millimeter- wave solid state device theory, device fabrication,
advanced computer-aided design of nonlinear circuits and oscillator system
design. The research effort is an Academic-Industry collaboration under the
Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) program. The
University of Virginia researchers will work in close collaboration with J.E.
Carlstrom Company, Litton Solid State, Santa Clara, CA. This GOALI program will
enable collaboration with the two leading corporations selling advanced TEO
systems. Future progress in the development of millimeter- and submillimeter-
wave systems for scientific and commercial applications will depend critically
on the availability of reliable and compact solid state sources, and
implementation of this research program will be an important step toward this
goal. ***