* 9521548
* Electronic Structure of Planar One-Dimensional              Conductors and Precursors and Metalloprotein Models         via Polarized Specular Reflectance Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Ronald Musselman, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 11/30/1999
* USD 149,389.00

The Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry program will provide a
grant to Franklin and Marshall College for Dr. Ronald Musselman to determine
polarizations of intense electronic transitions related to conductivity in new
materials and to bonding in metalloprotein models using a unique Polarized
Specular Reflectance microspectrophotometer. This is a renewal proposal
describing a highly collaborative effort with Dr. Steven Watkins of Louisiana
State University, Dr. Don Ellis and Dr. Brian Hoffman of Northwestern
University, Dr. H. J. Keller of the University of Heidelberg, Dr. Alberto
Flamini of the National Research Council of Italy, and Dr. Edward Solomon of
Stanford. The work at Franklin and Marshall College will involve six
undergraduate students who will participate in making the measurements and in
doing the calculations on a variety of complexes that are of chemical and
biochemical interest. This program will help to refine the theoretical treatment
of conductive square-planar metal complexes, and of their molecular precursors.
A series of structurally related square planar metal complexes will be
synthesized allowing systematic comparisons to be made between experiment and
theory and thus enhancing our understanding of the electronic properties of
these types of compounds. This program will address the fundamental nature of
the interaction of light with new materials. The materials of interest range
from electronically conducting materials to systems with biological significance
such as enzymes. Often the characteristics of these materials which make them
intrinsically interesting also cause them to completely absorb the light
normally used to probe the nature of the system. The unique feature of this work
is the ability to probe these systems using a reflectance technique (specular
reflectance) which provides information closely related to that normally
obtained by absorbance methods. Experimental measurements will be performed and
the results will be interpreted using sophisticated calculations in order to
gain fundamental new insights into the behavior of such systems. Specific
knowledge concerning the nature of the chemical bonding in these systems will
result from this work, and it has implications for understanding how electrons
are transmitted within and how light interacts with conducting materials.