* 9521731
* Chemical and Bacterial Reactions at the Surfaces of         Environmentally-Important Metal Sulfide Minerals:  Linking  Atomic and Field Scales
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Jillian Banfield, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 08/31/1998
* USD 324,940.00

This award in the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry Program is
jointly supported by the Divisions of Earth Sciences, Chemistry, and Chemical
and Transport Systems Engineering. Jillian F. Banfield, Geology Department, and
Robert J. Hamers, Chemistry Department, of the University of Wisconsin-Madison
will investigate at an atomic level the nature of reactions occurring at
interfaces between aqueous solutions and surfaces of metal sulfide minerals.
They will use a multidisciplinary approach, incorporating biological, geological
and chemical factors, and integrate results from a wide array of experimental
methods, including STM, XPS, and confocal microscopy. Parallel field and
laboratory studies will be conducted. Surfaces formed as a consequence of
natural inorganically- and organically-mediated weathering will be compared to
synthetically-weathered minerals to explore the applicability of laboratory-
based studies to natural systems. The goals of the investigation are to
determine the mechanisms and rates of dissolution, precipitation, and ion
adsorption at metal sulfide surfaces; the effect of electrochemical oxidation
and reduction on surface morphology; the role of impurities in modifying rates
of electrochemical processes at surfaces; and the role of bacteria in
controlling surface microstructural characteristics and dissolution rates.
Chemical weathering of minerals is the process by which rocks are converted into
the constituents of soils and sediments. Sulfide minerals such as galena,
sphalerite, and chalcopyrite are mined as sources of important elements, such as
lead, zinc, and copper, releasing the metals and acidifying water. The increase
in acidity accelerates weathering of other minerals. Understanding the
dissolution and crystallization behavior of metal sulfides, by chemical and
bacterial routes, is important to developing predictive models of metal
speciation and bioavailability. The goal of this study is to improve
understanding of natural systems and to develop accurate laboratory tests and
predictive models.