* 9521925
* PEET:  World Monograph of the Therevidae (Insecta:          Diptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* David Yeates, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 715,000.00

9521925 Irwin The Therevidae (Insecta: Diptera: Asiloidea) is a speciose group
of flies inhabiting particularly fragile, xeric environments. The family
radiated in warm desert regions of the world, and its species are particularly
abundant in Australia, western North America, southwestern South America, the
Mediterranean area, and southwestern Africa. Larvae are voracious predators of
soil-dwelling arthropods. Thus, these flies are critical to the functioning of
natural and managed systems, are potential control agents of fossorial pests,
and are probable indicators of environmental heterogeneity and productivity.
Yet, worldwide, the family Therevidae is among the poorest known and least
understood of the flies because the larvae are difficult to locate and the
adults are secretive, frequenting habitats rarely sampled. The family contains
an estimated 3,000 species worldwide, of which fewer than one-third have been
described. The poor state of knowledge of this family is a major constraint to
its potential use for protecting agriculture and for gauging habitat health. %%%
This grant proposes to further the task of comprehensively elucidating the world
Therevidae. The team that has been assembled is talented, complementary in
function, and well integrated in approach. The grant will create and manipulate
comprehensive databases of specimen character, collection, and geographic
information, produce monographic treatments of genera, initiate a higher level
classification of the family, organize and disseminate knowledge contained in
databases and monographs to targeted clientele, and educate five next-generation
Diptera systematists through a combination of formal and informal training,
including participation in field expeditions. Molecular character sets will test
and extend hypotheses derived from morphological character analyses. Diskettes
and CD-ROMs that contain descriptions and expert keys will be disseminated to
museum curators. A larger audience will be targeted for more ge neralized
information through a home page on WWW, where anyone with access to the Internet
can browse and learn about the Therevidae. ***