* 9521739
* Synthesis, Crystallographic, and Magnetic Properties of     Interstitial and Substitutional Hard Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,06/30/2000
* Gary Long, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2000
* USD 330,000.00

9521739 Long The goal of this project is to learn how to produce practical
magnets based on R2Fel7 materials by adding a combination of substitutional and
interstitial elements. The proposed work involves both synthesis and
characterization studies using magnetic, neutron diffraction, and Mossbauer
spectroscopies. Samples will be prepared by arc or induction melting, followed
by annealing. Magnetic measurements will be used to determine the bulk magnetic
properties of the resulting materials. Rietveld refinement of neutron
diffraction data will be used to determine the crystallo- graphic and magnetic
properties of the materials, including site occupancies of the substitutional
and interstitial elements and the magnetic moments at each magnetic atom site.
Mossbauer spectral analysis will be used to obtain detailed microscopic
information about the magnetic properties and local electronic environment at
each iron site. A Wigner-Seitz cell analysis of each crystallographic site will
be used to determine the relationship between the site's microscopic
crystallographic and magnetic properties and the corresponding bulk properties
of the magnets. %%% The discovery in the early 1980's of the rare earth-iron-
boron magnets revolutionized the permanent magnet industry. These materials
offered a significant improvement in magnetic properties over the previous best
permanent magnetic materials, at about half the cost in terms of energy stored
per unit mass of material. However, the Curie temperature of the rare earth-
iron-boron magnets is less than 60% of the Curie temperature of the previous
best permanent magnets. Substitutional additions unfortunately did not
substantially increase the highest Curie temperature of the compounds and their
practical utility. The goal of this project is to learn how to make practical
magnets based on R2Fel7 materials by the addition of a combination of
substitutional and interstitial elements. The right combina- tion of elements
sho uld greatly improve the thermomagnetic properties of such materials. ***