* 9521086
* Quantitation of the Concentration of Detritus Associated    with Marine Planktonic Communities
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Peter Verity, Skidaway Institute of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 06/30/2000
* USD 279,656.00

9521086 Verity Non-living particulate organic matter, called detritus, plays an
important role in the cycling of carbon and macronutrients in water column
environments, especially in the ocean. Assessments of carbon bound in detrital
particles typically exceed estimates of carbon from plankton and are second only
to dissolved organic carbon. Detritus is a highly dynamic medium which provides
a substrate for microbial respiration of dissolved organic carbon and its
transformation into particular organic carbon and a substrate for abiotic
condensation of exopolymers, secreted from bacteria and phytoplankton. However,
the ability to quantify detritus in situ has remained an unresolved problem. The
proposed research will investigate variability in particulate detrital carbon
(and nitrogen):volume ratios using controlled laboratory experiments.
Quantification will be conducted using a newly developed fluorescent labeling
technique followed by imaging cytometry. Laboratory-derived data will be
compared to field data from natural plankton communities in continental shelf
waters. This work will allow accurate determinations of particulate detrital and
plankton stock sizes, a necessary prerequisite to resolving the dynamic
interchange of organic carbon and nitrogen between non-living and living
resources, especially the downward flux and trophic transfer of such materials.
***