* 9521944
* PEET:  Filamentous Ascomycetes and Monographic Studies on   Sarcoscyphineae Fungi
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2002
* Michael Donoghue, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 708,690.00

9521944 Pfister Despite their ecological importance in decay and decomposition
of organic matter and their occasional pathogenicity in plants and animals,
fungi as a group remain poorly known, with few specialists able to identify the
taxonomic entities or to pursue further biological investigations. One
especially difficult complication lies in the fact that fungal organisms may
live and reproduce asexually, through specialized spores, for years, without
showing evidence of the sexual reproductive or "fruiting" structures that make
possible accurate taxonomic identification and phylogenetic analysis. Dr. Donald
Pfister at Harvard University, a mycologist with a long and productive record of
research on ascomycete fungi, is teaming with colleague Dr. Michael Donoghue,
with interests in theoretical aspects of systematic and phylogenetic research,
in a study of filamentous fungi placed in the suborder Sarcoscyphinae. These are
largely wood decomposers or saprobes, although some are known plant pathogens;
many species are estimated yet to be described, especially from tropical
environments. A major emphasis of their five-year program is on the integration
of traditional morphological studies with two additional lines of evidence:
molecular analyses of DNA sequences of fungal samples, and laboratory culturing
to asqess mating behavior between geographic isolates. Training in both
practical and theoretical aspects of fungal systematics will involve
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as postdoctoral associates.
Colleagues in South America will also participate in the work. The University
provides superb laboratory and collections facilities, and computerization is a
hallmark of all aspects of the research, including specimen databasing,
taxonomic and phylogenetic analysis, and Internet linkage to major fungal
resources.