* 9521821
* The Role of Fluctuating Asymmetry in Mate Choice
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Allen Moore, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* None
* 07/31/1999
* USD 80,000.00

9521821 MOORE Our research asks whether females discriminate among males on the
basis of the male's ability to withstand stresses during development. This
ability is reflected in the degree of fluctuating asymmetry in characters that
have bilateral expression. We will use a combination of experimental
manipulations, genetic experiments, and correlation studies of the cockroach,
Nauphoeta cinera, to address several issues: 1) is female choice of mates or
male-male competition influenced by the degree of asymmetry; 2) is the ability
to reduce asymmetry genetically determined; and 3) do environment and degree of
inbreeding influence the importance of fluctuating asymmetry? This research will
provide information that will help minimize the mating disadvantages of
individuals reared in biological control and endangered species programs. These
programs rely on establishing breeding populations of target species. To be
successful we must know how individuals from controlled breeding programs fare
in competition for mates in a natural habitat. Many of the practices use to rear
insects for release in these programs, such as inbreeding, result in increased
fluctuating asymmetry. Our research will provide information on how mating
patterns are affected by female discrimination against the degree of asymmetry.