* 9521664
* Anomalous Dispersion Enhanced Nonlinear Optical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Kenneth Singer, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Gernot S. Pomrenke
* 09/30/1999
* USD 213,757.00

9521664 Singer The PI proposes to demonstrate and study anomalous dispersion
optimized Cerenkov phase-matched second harmonic generation and to investigate
its effect on cascaded third-order nonlinearities. Theories of Cerenkov phase-
matched second harmonic generation in waveguides indicate that intrinsic phase-
matching when coupled with Cerenkov phase-matching leads to large enhancements
in second harmonic generation efficiency, and more recently, have suggested that
large phase-shifts in cascaded nonlinearities can occur. Simulations indicate
large enhancements in efficiency even with incomplete intrinsic phase-matching.
The use of Cerenkov phase- matching in combination with an appropriate intrinsic
phase- matching scheme eliminates critical fabrication or material properties.
Anomalous dispersion has been shown to be an effective intrinsic phase-matching
technique in organic solutions, and recently in polymeric waveguides. The use of
anomalous dispersion along with the Cerenkov process also overcomes the effect
of absorption in anomalous dispersion phase-matching by guiding the second
harmonic light in the cladding. We will demonstrate this type of phase matching
and study its dependence on fabrication and material parameters in electric-
field-poled polymeric waveguides. The structures rely on a poled nonlinear
optical layer composed of a polymer doped with a recently developed anomalous
dispersion nonlinear optical dye. Both slab and channel waveguide structures
will be investigated. The nonlinear phase shift of the fundamental light will
also be studied. Anomalous dispersion may represent an important enhancement
mechanism for nonlinear optical interactions which depend on phase- matching
properties. This would lead to more efficient photonic devices for application
in optical data storage and processing. ***