* 9521471
* Dissertation Research: Regional Archaeology of the Department of Santa Rosa, Guatemala:  A Study of Precolumbian        Settlement, Land use, and the Pacific Coast of Guatemala
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Norman Hammond, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1996
* USD 11,960.00

Under the direction of Dr. Norman Hammond, Mr. Francisco Belli will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological survey and test
excavation in the Santa Rosa region of southern Guatemala. The defined area
encompasses ca. 700 km. sq. and includes four different environmental zones,
identified on the basis of elevation, gradient, soil types, vegetation cover and
annual rainfall. Research will proceed in four stages. An extensive survey will
cover all regions to provide an overall picture of the archaeological remains in
the region. In the process selected surface material will be collected and sites
mapped. On this basis it will be possible to determine the size and age of the
site, site function and distribution of activity areas. A second stage will
involve intensive systematic survey by means of a stratified random sample of
transects 250 m. in width and variable length. On this basis it will be possible
to generalize and reconstruct the distribution and density of sites across the
entire research area. Again, surface collections will be made and sites mapped.
In a third stage, a 10% sample of sites will be test excavated. One or two test
units will be placed in each site to determine site function and chronology.
Finally, these data will be entered into a Geographic Information System and
analyzed to determine distributions and to see how these changed over time. On
this basis it will be possible to gain insight into the underlying processes
involved. Prior archaeological work in this region has indicated the presence of
a long history of occupation which extends from an early hunting and gathering
period through historic times. However systematic survey and mapping has not
been conducted. It is clear that southern Guatemala participated in processes
noted elsewhere in Middle America and underwent increases in cultural complexity
and elaboration over time. Many archaeologists, including Mr. Belli, wish to
understand how cultural elaboration and development occurs and this region which
contains abundant archaeological sites and which lies at the periphery of the
Mayan region provides an excellent context in which to address this question.
Mr. Belli wants to determine whether it is local factors or external influences
which drive this process. This research is important for several reasons. It
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will apply a powerful
tool - Geographic Information Systems analysis - to this data and will assist in
the training of a promising young archaeologist.