* 9521512
* Recruitment Processes in Estuarine Fishes:  Pattern, Scale, and Ontogenetic Trends
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2001
* Edward Houde, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 09/30/2001
* USD 669,703.00

9521512 Houde This project is a five-year program to investigate variability in
survival and growth rates during the early lives of two species of estuarine
fishes in Chesapeake Bay. Processes operating during early life are hypothesized
to generate recruitment variability and the fluctuations in abundance that
typically occur in marine and estuarine fish stocks. Objectives of the research
are to determine the temporal and spatial patterns, and the scales of
variability in survival and growth rates of fish eggs and larvae. The role of
ontogeny and trends in stage- specific survivorship during development also will
be emphasized. Two species with contrasting life histories, the bay anchovy
Anchoa mitchilli and the white perch Morone Americana, will be studied. Bay
anchovy spawns throughout the mainstream of the Chesapeake Bay, while spawning
by white perch is confined to tidal tributaries. consequently, the dynamics of
the two species are dependent upon dispersive or retentive mechanisms,
respectively. The dynamics properties of early life stages will be investigated
at local and regional scales, and will include detailed examination of how
features and hydrography (e.g. fronts, maximum turbidity zone) affect potential
for survival. Field surveys, drifting mesocosms, laboratory experiments, and
individual-based modeling approaches all will be included. ***