* 9521017
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Data and the Evolution of  Sonchus (Asteraceae: Lactuceae) in the Canary Islands
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Daniel Crawford, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9521017 Crawford The diversity of plants and animals on oceanic islands has long
fascinated naturalists, and continues to pose challenging questions about
evolution and biogeography. Graduate student Seung-Chul Kim under the guidance
of faculty adviser Prof. Daniel Crawford at Ohio State University is studying
the numerous speaies of woody sunflowers of the group Dendrosonchus on the
several islands of the Canaries in the mid-Atlantic Ocean. Morphological
features of these plants have been analyzed by other taxonomists, who have
concluded that some 17 species of Dendrosonchus inhabit various parts of the
Canary Islands chain. Worries about the reliability of various morphological
characters and the possibility of parallel evolution of particular growth forms
provide a rationale for searching for additional, new characters to test current
taxonomic and phylogenetic notions about these plants. The study will emphasize
the collecting and analyzing of DNA sequence data from fresh and herbarium
material of all Dendrosonchus species and of several potential mainland African
relatives, in order to use mutational differences as a gauge of evolutionary
relationships among the species. The study of Macaronesian Dendrosonchus will
integrate morphological comparisons, DNA sequence differences in nuclear and
chloroplast genes, and protein electrophoretic assessments of genetic
variability within and among populations. The goal is to construct a robust
phylogenetic tree for the many species of Dendrosonchus and to examine their
geographical distributions and morphology in order to understand the island-
based evolution of these plants.