* 9521481
* U.S.-National Committee for CODATA
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Paul Uhlir, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* William Blanpied
* 06/30/1996
* USD 34,375.00

; R o o t E n t r y F l C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l l l ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; *** INT-9521481 Uhlir The globalization of since is occurring
in parallel with a rapid extension in the speed and sophistication of
information and data handling technologies, and in their uses for scientific
purposes. Developments in these areas permit the planning and execution of large
scale scientific programs. Such programs, in turn, frequently require
sophisticated data handling and processing techniques. In view of the
multilateral character of many large scale scientific programs, the handling,
processing, and transmission of scientific data has become a major international
enterprise in its own right, one that is vital to those scientific programs. The
Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) is a non-governmental,
multilateral body affiliated with the International Council of Scientific Unions
(ICSU). The principal objective of CODATA is to facilitate worldwide
communication on problems relevant to scientific data. Like other members of the
ICSU family, CODATA is comprised of non-governmental National Member
Organizations. The National Academy of Sciences (NAS) fulfill s that function in
the United States. This award will provide partial support to the NAS to
continue to manage U.S. participation in CODATA, including partial payment of
dues to CODATA and partial support of the activities of the U.S. National
Committee. Additional support is also being sought from several other federal
agencies: DOE, NASA, NIH, and NIST. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r
m a t i o n ( &amp; D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT *** Elena R. Padron Elena
R. Padron @ W l @ @ W l @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e j j j j j j j R 1 4 T
5 R j R j j j j ~ j j j j 3 *** INT-9521481 Uhlir The globalization of since is
occurring in parallel with a rapid extension in the speed and sophistication of
information and data handling technologies, and in their uses for scientific
purposes. Developments in these areas permit the planning and execution of large
scale scientific programs. Such programs, in turn, frequently require
sophisticated data handling and processing techniques. In view of the
multilateral character of many large scale scientific programs, the handling,
processing, and transmission of scientific data has become a major international
enterprise in its own right, one that is vital to those scientific programs. The
Committee on Data for Science and Technology (CODATA) is a non-governmental,
multilateral body affiliated with the International Council of Scientific Unions
(ICSU). The principal objective of CODATA is to facilitate worldwide
communication on problems relevant to scientific data. Like other members of the
ICSU family, CODATA is comprised of non-governmental National Member
Organizations. The National Ac