* 9521249
* Elimination of All-Optical Cycles in                        Wavelength-Routed Optical Wide Area Networks
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Jonathan Heritage, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* James W. Mink
* 07/31/1999
* USD 283,256.00

9521249 Mukherjee A transparent (wide-area) wavelength-routed optical network
may be created by using wavelength cross-connect switches connected together by
fiber to from an arbitrary mesh structure. The network is accessed through
electronic stations that are attached to some of these cross-connects. Such a
wavelength-routed optical network is being studied and demonstrated as a part of
ARPA-sponsored programs at Bellcore (ONTC and MONET). The wavelength cross-
connect switches may be implemented using acousto-optic filters (AOTFs) or WDM
multiplexer/demultiplexer-based technologies. The wavelength cross-connects may
or may not include a wavelength-translation functionally. These wavelength
cross-connect switches have the property that they may configure themselves into
unspecified states. Each input port of a switch is always connected to some
output port of the switch whether or not such a connection is required for the
purpose of information transfer. Due to the presence of these unspecified
states, there exists the possibility of setting up unintended all-optical cycles
in the network (viz. a loop with no terminating electronics in it). IF such a
cycle contains amplifiers (e.g., Erbium-Doped Fiber Amplifiers (EDFAs), there is
a possibility that the net loop gain is greater than the loop loss. The
amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise from amplifiers can build up in such
a feedback loop to saturate the amplifiers and result in oscillations of the ASE
noise in the loop. Such all-optical as defined above (and hereafter referred to
as "white" cycles) must be eliminated from an optical network in order for the
network to perform any useful operation. Furthermore, for the realistic case in
which the wavelength cross-connects result in signal cross-talk, there is a
possibility of having closed cycles with oscillating cross-talk signals. We will
investigate both the network-routing layer and the physical layer solutions to
this problem. At the network-routing layer, , w e will examine algorithms that
set up new transparent optical connections upon request avoiding the creation of
such cycles in the network. These algorithms will attempt to find a route for a
connection and then (in a post-processing fashion) configure switches such that
white cycles that might get created would automatically get eliminated.
Furthermore, for the more realistic case in which the cross-connects result in
cross-talk, we propose call-set-up algorithms that minimize the possibility of
cross-talk cycles. At the physical layer, we will study various device-related
issues that arise in transparent wavelength-routed optical networks. The
physical layer study will directly influence the network-routing layer work
stated above. Specifically, we propose (1) to provide device characterization
and usable computer models of present and future optical devices such as optical
amplifiers, optical wavelength cross-connect switches (with and without
wavelength translation), and fiber links including connector models to network
theorist so that "ideal" network models may be upgraded to "realistic" network
models; (2) to explore potential solutions in the physical layer to problems
identified by network demonstrations and network analysis; and (3) to identify
viable alternative optical devices, particularly amplifiers and switches, whose
physical properties will directly benefit the implementation of transparent
optical networks. We will feed back the results of this work so as to directly
benefit the ARPA-sponsored ONTC (Bellcore, BNR/NT, Columbia University, Hughes,
LLNL, Rockwell, UTRC) and MONET (AT&T, Bellcore, Pacific Telesis, Bell Atlantic,
Bellsouth) consortia. ***