* 9521749
* Dissertation Research:  A Settlement Pattern Survey of      Prehistoric and Historic Sites in the Izalco Region of      Western El Salvador
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Andrews Under the direction of Dr. E. Wyllys Andrews, Ms. Kathryn Sampeck will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will conduct archaeological
research in the Rio Ceniza Valley region in Western El Salvador. The zone is
virtually unknown archaeologically, although its colonial economic importance
resulted in a great deal of documentation. Ms. Sampeck will examine the late
preconquest and early conquest history of the region. Before the arrival of the
Spanish, the area was the center of one of the most powerful regional states in
southeastern Mesoamerica. The power and prosperity of this "Izalco Pipil polity"
was likely due to its prominence in the cacao trade, with cacao functioning as a
kind of money in pre- Hispanic economy. The Pippil were probably producing not
only for local use but for a broader market. With the incorporation of the
region into the Spanish empire, Izalco was propelled into the global economy.
The agricultural system was drastically altered as local inhabitants shifted to
the cultivation of indigo for a world market. Ms. Sampeck wishes to examine the
social changes which accompanied this shift. To accomplish this she will conduct
an extensive survey of the region and collect surface material. This will be
followed by selected excavations. The ceramic, lithic and other cultural
materials collected will be analyzed to allow reconstruction of social
organization and changes which occurred over time. Small scale societies respond
to both local and global pressures and archaeologists have suggested several
ways in which groups may respond to such often conflicting demands. The Izalco
region provides an excellent situation within which to examine this issue
because archaeological and ethnographic data document the transformation from a
strictly local society and economy to one which is rapidly enmeshed in a much
broader world. The research will provide data of interest to Middle Americanist
archaeologists and assist in the trainin g of a promising young scientist.