* 9521605
* An Observational Investigation of Mass Loss in Evolved      Stars Using Millimeter Interferometry and Mid-IR Wavelength Imaging
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Margaret Meixner, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 10/31/1997
* USD 20,000.00

9521605 Meixner Mass loss has a profound effect on the final evolution of
intermediate mass stars. Unfortunately, the physical mechanism driving the
extreme mass loss rates on the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) is not understood.
Dr. Margaret Meixner of the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, will
conduct an observational investigation of the nature of the mass loss in evolved
stars using imaging techniques in two wavebands: millimeter wavelength (3 mm),
and mid-IR wavelength (8-25 microns). The carbon monoxide emission millimeter
wavelength (transition J=1-0) imaging project utilizes the Berkeley-Illinois-
Maryland millimeter wavelength array (BIMA) and the NRAO 12m telescope for
observations, and a detailed radiative transfer software code for the analysis
of the data. The expected results will include more accurate determination of
mass loss rates and characterization of the large scale halos (radii about 70
arc seconds) which are found in all evolved stars; and compact (less than 4 arc
seconds) fast molecular gas regions, which are found in transition objects such
as proto-planetary nebulae (PPNe) and hold a clue to the AGB to planetary nebula
(Pne) transition process. The mid-IR wavelength imaging project involves the
analysis of high resolution (less than 1 arc second) mid-IR wavelength images of
55 circumstellar dust shells (CDSs) surrounding AGB stars, PPNe and young Pne,
will be carried out using an axially symmetric radiative transfer dust code.
Moreover, the mid-IR wavelength project includes further observations of PPNe
and extreme AGB stars at similar and longer wavelengths and at high angular
resolutions (about 0.1 arc seconds) using two mid-IR wavelength array cameras
(MIRAC and the Keck LWIRC). The results from this mid-IR wavelength imaging
project will provide insight into the origin of axially symmetric morphological
structures commonly found in Pne and insight into the evolutionary stage at
which this axial symmetry arises. Dr. Me ixner has three activities planned that
will lay ground work for the future research. Firstly, an observing run is
planned with the MIRAC team in June 1995 to observe approximately one dozen
PPNe. Secondly, a new axially symmetric computer software dust code will be used
to model several mid-IR images of PPNe and Pne from the current sample; thereby
demonstrating the application of this code. Finally, carbon monoxide wavelength
emission data cubes of three objects will be constructed using a new
interferometry technique called mosaicing; thereby demonstrating the feasibility
of this technique.