* 9521783
* PEET: Biogeography, Morphology, and Molecular Systematics of Cumaceans:  Training Taxonomists for the 21st Century
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Leslie Watling, University of Maine
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 525,443.00

9521783 Watling The crustacean order Cumacea is largely unknown for large areas
of the worldOs oceans and continental margins. Cumaceans are small crustaceans,
allied with amphipods, isopods, and several other groups, all of whom carry
their young about in a brood pouch. In many shallow marine habits they are
important food items in the diets of young fish. Virtually nothing is known
about the evolutionary history of the group. There is also uncertainty
associated with many of the characters used in the taxonomy of cumaceans, a
feature which characterizes several other groups of small crustaceans,
therefore, principles developed for this group may be used to unravel similar
problems in other taxa. The taxonomic objective of this research is to monograph
the cumacean fauna of AmericaOs shores and those in the southeastern Pacific,
and to test hypotheses regarding utility of taxonomic characters and
biogeographic history of the group. In addition the project will train the next
generation of crustacean systematists in both morphological as well as molecular
methods of systematics through the production of taxonomic monographs. A final
objective is to provide for the electronic storage and archiving of this
taxonomic data. %% The significance of the project is to provide a better
understanding of the taxonomy and evolutionary relationships among this little
known but ecologically important group of crustaceans. In addition the research
will produce broadly trained scientists well schooled in classic monographic as
well as molecular methods of systematics. ***