* 9521719
* Toward a Research Agenda and Infrastructure Development in  Computer Assisted Diagnosis and Therapy; Spring 1996;       Bristol, England
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1995,12/31/1996
* Takeo Kanade, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 12/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9521719 Kanade An international workshop "Toward a Research Agenda and
Infrastructure Development in Computer Assisted Diagnosis and Therapy" is to
held in the Spring of 1996 and will be convened at a conference center near
Bristol, England. The goals of the workshmp are to: 1) Produce an inventory, at
an international level, of the medical, engineering, and computer science
research in medical robotics, computer assisted diagnosis and therapy, and
virtual reality in medicine and telemedicine. 2) Develop a five year research
agenda and development plan, and 3) Elucidate measures that could promote the
establishment of an infrastructure to facilitate the development of the field.
The workshop report is to be widely disseminated in electronic and printed
formats, and a printed report of the project recommendations will be produced.
The project has important implications to NSF and other research grant-making
agencies, as well as the nation's research community, for planning research
programs and the allocation of limited resources in this area. The workshop
organizers have high competence in organizing and directing large scientific
meetings. The planning process for the workshop involves an innovative technique
wherein the workshop participants will contribute to the preparation of a "pre-
workshop document" to facilitate deliberations and conclusions during the three
day meeting. Much of the planning process is to be conducted using INTERNET to
hold "virtual" meetings of the workshop Executive Oversight Committee. NSF funds
will support only the U.S. participants. Expenses of attendees from other
countries will be borne by their own institutions or government agencies.
Biomedical engineering research in medical robotics and their interventional
procedures holds high promise for the development of the technologies needed to
provide new capabilities to diagnosticians and therapists, to the reduction of
patient morbidity and mortality, and, in certain cases, to lowering the cost of
health care. The workshop is expected to contribute significantly to progress in
this area of research and technological development. ***