* 9521645
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Advanced Manufacturing and Packaging of Microwave, Optical and      Digital Electronics
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/1995,06/30/2002
* Roop Mahajan, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 06/30/2002
* USD 330,000.00

EEC-9521645 Mahajan CAMPmode (Center for Advanced Manufacturing and Packaging of
Microwave, Optical and Digital Electronics), is establishing an NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center (I/UCRC) to conduct
interdisciplinary research in computer-aided designs, packaging and
manufacturing technologies needed for high quality, low cost production of
microwave/millimeter-wave, optical and digital electronic systems. The MIMICAD
Center was established in 1988 at the University of Colorado as an NSF
Industry/University Cooperative Research (I/UCRC) to provide a knowledge base
for microwave/millimeter-wave integrated system design methodologies and CAD
tools. Working cooperatively with a number of defense oriented companies and
government organizations, the Center has been successful in fulfilling its
stated purpose. Over the last few years, however, the Center has been undergoing
a change, just as its sponsoring companies have been. There is a perceptible
shift in the defense industry from military to commercial applications. As a
result, a predominantly defense oriented R&amp;D base in microwave electronics
must evolve into one with more balance between commercial and defense
applications. A significant growth is expected in the commercial applications
which would require a synergistic interaction of microwave/millimeter-wave
technologies with high speed digital and optical electronics. However,
effectiveness in gaining a market share in these markets depends on the ability
to produce not only cost effective designs but very importantly high quality,
low cost packaging and manufacture of these electronic systems. To meet these
evolving needs, MIMICAD members have merged with another industry consortium to
form a new Center, CAMPmode. This will facilitate closer cooperation between
design, packaging and manufacturing research. This will broaden the expertise
base and provide enhanced value to customers in digital electronics, optics and
RF communica tion markets. The Center will provide enhancements in curriculum
through development of cross-disciplinary courses, and provide students valuable
research training in this important technical area. As part of the NSF-I/UCRC
proposal, the Center requests support from NSF towards a female undergraduate
student in Electrical and Computer Engineering. The student will conduct
research in the computational electromagnetics research group.