* 9521039
* CAREER: Crustal Cracking along Multi-Segment Portions of    the Juan de Fuca Ridge and its Relation to Ridge            Segmentation
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Dawn Wright, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Shor
* 08/31/1999
* USD 79,958.00

9521039 Wright This project is supported under the NSF Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) Program. It provides support over four years for a new
Oregon State University faculty member, Dr. Dawn Wright, to develop new,
interdisciplinary courses in the marine and geological sciences, to promote
scientific careers to; undergraduate and high school students, and to carry out
a two- pronged research program in different aspects of marine geophysics. The
first part of the proposed research focusses on a study of the geophysical
development of the Tonga forearc, a region formed in response to ocean crust
subduction and characterized by uplift of volcanoes and deep ocean crustal
material west of the Tonga trench in the western Pacific Ocean. This study will
be carried out in collaboration with Dr. Sherman Bloomer, Chair of the Oregon
State University Department of Geoscience. The second focus of Dr. Wright's
research will be the investigation of crustal faulting and fissuring along the
Juan de Fuca Ridge, a highly active ocean spreading center located offshore
western North America from northern California to Canada. This part of the
project will include the integration of several existing data sets of side-scan
sonar and photographic data along the spreading axis to define the distribution
and characteristic of cracks developed in response to the stresses involved in
ocean crust formation. Understanding the distribution, length and shape of these
cracks will improve our understanding of the mechanisms involved in sea floor
spreading; study of the Juan de Fuca Ridge expands on Dr. Wright's study of the
processes of crack formation on the East Pacific Rise, a faster-rate spreading
center further south in the eastern Pacific. The Juan de Fuca Ridge region is a
highly active area seismically, with numerous earthquake reported annually. Dr.
Wright will be working on this project in collaboration with researcher at the
Hatfield Marine Center in Newport, Oregon, and will integrate her study of crack
distribution with the ongoing study of earthquakes on the Juan de Fuca carried
out at Hatfield Center. The research program on Juan de Fuca Ridge tectonics
will be integrated into new courses developed for graduate and undergraduate
education, and will allow a hands-on introduction to research techniques to
students at Oregon State University.