* 9521735
* An Integrated Compiler-Runtime Approach to                  Software Distributed Shared Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Willy Zwaenepoel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Mukesh Singhal
* 03/31/1999
* USD 175,000.00

This research effort focuses on an integrated compiler-runtime approach to
support software distributed shared memory (DSM). The goal is to achieve
performance close to hand-tuned message passing programs while still presenting
the user with a shared memory programming model. The work is primarily directed
towards "networks of workstations", but it is also applicable to dedicated
distributed memory machines like the IBM SP-2. Notwithstanding advances in the
design and implementation of software DSM systems over the last few years,
message passing has remained the most commonly used method for programming
distributed memory machines, because message passing systems, in general,
perform better than DSM systems. This proposal addresses this issue by building
an integrated compiler-runtime DSM system, including the optimization of
explicitly parallel shared memory programs through compiler analysis.
Specifically, the ability of the compiler to predict access patterns, rather
than merely react to them as the runtime system does, will allow prefetching and
aggregation of messages, and will avoid unnecessary data movement and
consistency actions. The work will be based on the TreadMarks DSM system
developed at Rice. The proposed work will contribute to the better utilization
of networks of workstations and, more generally, distributed memory machines for
parallel computing. Earlier work on TreadMarks has already contributed to that
goal, in that it has produced one of the most advanced runtime systems for DSM,
that has been used by other researchers for work in computational genetics,
mixed integer programming, and seismic modeling. ***