* 9521659
* RUI: Electronic, optical and dynamical properties of novel  semiconductor materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Devki Talwar, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/1998
* USD 109,560.00

9521659 Talwar Recent advances in the growth of semiconductor quantum-wells and
superlattices have made it possible to design and fabricate novel photonic
devices for a wide variety of applications. These photonic devices are
critically important for optical fiber communication systems, optical computing,
optical interconnects; data transmission and signal processing. In order to keep
pace with an expanding need, the electronic, dynamic and optical properties of
the materials used in such devices must be suitably characterized (both
theoretically and experimentally), tailored, and improved. The purpose of the
present proposal is to provide a comprehensive theoretical and experimental
framework of characterizing how temperature molecular beam epitaxial (MBE) grown
III-V (LT III-V) compounds, multiple quantum-wells (MQWs) GaAs/A1GaAs,
Si/Si1-xGex, and strained layer InAs/InAs/InGaSb superlaticces (Sls). By
involving undergraduate students in this project, we will focus on three major
tasks: (I) Identifying the presence of intrinsic defects in LT III-V materials
using local vibrational mode spectroscopy and Greens function theory. (ii)
Studying theoretically the band structure, dark current, absorptance,
photoconductive gains and correlated noise in MQWs and Sls to assess the
dependence of sensor performance on the quantum well infrared photodetector
device design. (iii) Measuring the absorption coefficient, on MQWs and Sls
samples using a high resolution Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectrometer.
This research, which includes a continuing collaboration with scientist from
Wright Patterson AFB, will greatly enrich the education of our undergraduate
students who will be working with the project leader towards their independent
study projects or senior theses option in a newly approved Applied Physics
program at Indiana University of Pennsylvania. ***