* 9521983
* Nitrification in Aquatic Sediments:  Interactions with      Methane and Hydrogen Sulfide
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* James Hollibaugh, San Francisco State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rodger W. Baier
* 09/30/1996
* USD 36,127.00

9521983 Joye Nitrification, a central process in the nitrogen cycle, may
significantly alter partitioning of the regenerated nitrogen flux between
release from sediments to the water column as ammonium versus loss as dinitrogen
gas via coupled denitrification. Nitrogen release from freshwater sediments
consists of comparable amounts of dinitrogen gas and ionic forms, suggesting
that coupled nitrification-denitrification is more efficient in freshwater than
in marine environments. This team of investigators will examine the effects of
methane and hydrogen sulfide, which differ in concentration and distribution
between marine and freshwater environments, on nitrification. They hypothesize
that co-metabolism affects the spatial and temporal distribution of
nitrification in aquatic sediments, particularly in freshwater environments.
They will examine the role of competitive (substrate) interactions and the
effect of variations in the oxidizing bacterial community composition (presence
of nitrifying vs. methane-oxidizing bacteria) on nitrification. They also
hypothesize that hydrogen sulfide, a potent inhibitor of nitrification, may
affect the spatial and temporal distribution of nitrification in marine
sediments. Understanding the relationship between bacterial community
composition, bacterial physiology and geochemically-driven changes in physiology
will improve our understanding of nitrogen cycling in sediments and will provide
a conceptual framework for improved predictive models of coupled nitrification-
denitrification.