* 9521984
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Material Handling/Logistics Institute
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* H. Donald Ratliff, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 12/31/1996
* USD 55,000.00

EEC-9521984 Nemhauser This award provides funding for a one year extension to
capitalize on the success and help expand the impact to other U.S. manufacturing
industries through the Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for
Material Handling/Logistics Institute at Georgia Institute of Technology. The
continuing funding will support the basic research program in the Center. The
Center will continue to develop research activities and to advance the state-of-
the-art understandings on Logistics through several major core fundamental
research activities: 1) Logistics networks (including supply chain,
transportation, and material handling networks); 2) Logistics environments
(including urban, rural, and international logistics and ergonomics, and
environmental issues of logistics); 3) Logistics information and decision
technology (including logistics information systems and computational
logistics). In addition, the Center will continue to develop testbed research
projects in cooperation with its company members to conduct the proof-of-
concept implementation and prototyping. Additional funding is provided for a
woman undergraduate student to work on two problems related to engineered
storage areas: 1) location assignment for components that should be clustered
near specific workstations within a workcenter due to their unique usage, and 2)
commonality of usage for a component focus stored in multiple workcenters.