* 9521974
* Dissertation Research:  The Development of Hunter-Gatherer  Sedentism in the Santa Barbara Channel Region, California
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Michael Jochim, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 12/31/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Jochim Under the direction of Dr. Michael Jochim, Mr. Douglass Kennett will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological
research in a 17 kilometer square area of Santa Rosa Island located in the Santa
Barbara Channel region of California. Work to date indicates a long settlement
history which covers a period of almost 10,000 years. Mr. Kennett will survey
this region and sample all environmental zones from the coast to the piedmont
areas. Once sites have been identified, a selected sample will be excavated.
Analysis of faunal and artifact assemblages will provide data regarding site
function within the island's larger settlement system and also provide insight
into subsistence and technological change through time. Stable oxygen and carbon
isotopic analysis of marine shell from midden deposits will be used to
reconstruct changes in the marine environment and the season of shellfish
harvesting. These data will be used in combination with other archaeological
indicators of seasonality and mobility to reconstruct patterns of human
settlement and their change over time. Because they are so clearly
circumscribed, and because of their culture history, the Channel Islands provide
an excellent controlled situation to study the emergence of complex society.
Over their prehistory, one can trace changes from small egalitarian social
groups to larger more sedentary aggregations characterized by specialized craft
manufacture and emerging hierarchical organization. This same pattern has been
observed in many parts of the world and archaeologists wish to understand the
underlying processes responsible. Mr. Kennett has proposed a number of
alternative models and wishes to collect data to test them. He postulates that
climatic change may be involved and one strength of this project rests on the
fact that chemical analysis of faunal data will permit detailed environmental
reconstruction. This research is important for several reasons. It will sh ed
new light on the development of complex sedentary societies. It will provide
insight into the prehistory of the United States and assist in the training of a
promising young scientist.