* 9521558
* Absolute State-Selected Cross Sections for Ion-Molecule     Reactions of Importance in Planetary Ionospheres
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Cheuk-Yiu Ng, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 08/31/1999
* USD 249,094.00

Many aeronomic techniques depend on knowledge of the cross section for reactions
involving singly ionized atomic oxygen. In this project, these cross sections
will be measured using a triple-quadropole double octopole (TQDO) mass
spectrometer. Significant technical advances have been made in the application
of this technique for absolute, total, state-selected cross section
measurements. In previous work conducted by the investigators, state-selected
beams of ionized oxygen with high purities and intensities were prepared for
scattering experiments by controlling the collision energies for dissociative
charge transfer collisions of singly ionized helium, neon, and argon with
molecular oxygen in a radio frequency (RF) ion guide gas cell, and by applying
appropriate effective ion trapping potentials to the RF octopole ion guide. The
method also makes use of a differential retarding potential method for improving
the kinetic energy resolution of the ionized oxygen reactant ions that are
produced by the reactions of molecular oxygen with helium, neon, and argon.
Absolute total cross section measurements for the ion-molecule reactions of
atomic oxygen with molecular nitrogen, oxygen, hydrogen, carbon dioxide, carbon
monoxide, and water are made down to thermal energies using the simple
electrostatic aperture of the TQDO apparatus, even though the reactant ions are
formed originally with a broad kinetic energy distribution. The investigators
will continue these cross section measurements and develop new experimental
schemes for absolute cross section measurements of ion-atom reactions relevant
to planetary ionospheres.***