* 9521811
* PEET: Taxonomy and Co-evolution of Trichomycetes (Gut- Inhabiting Fungi) and their Chironomidae (Diptera) Hosts
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Robert Lichtwardt, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2002
* USD 732,754.00

9521811 Lichtwardt Fulgi and insects constitute large, species-rich groups for
which there are few taxonomic specialists, the more so for those organismal
groups in aquatic or marine environments. This imaginative PEET project brings
together expertise on both fungi and selected insects, to study an intriguing
group of Trichomycete fungi that are symbiotic in the guts of primitive flies
like Chironomidae and in crustaceans and millipedes. Dr. Robert Lichtwardt is an
authority on Trichomycete fungi; his entomological colleague Dr. Leonard
Ferrington is a specialist on Chironomidae flies. Together they have assembled a
team of colleagues at the University of Kansas and at the USDA laboratory at
Peoria, Illinois, along with foreign colleagues, to pursue research on the
taxonomy, phylogeny, and potential coevolution of gut-dwelling fungi and their
insect hosts. Some of the fungi are known to be lethal to mosquito larvae, while
others have recently been shown to invade the ovarian tissue of the host insect,
where they can subsequently disperse as "cysts" during egg-laying behavior by
the female. In so doing, they are suspected of reducing significantly the
reproductive output of the host insects, which include blackflies. The research
will build upon museum collections of the organisms and new collections made in
the course of extensive field work, and will integrate traditional morphological
characters with new molecular data from DNA sequencing and protein isozyme
analyses. Training of graduate and postdoctoral students emphasizes laboratory
and museum work as well as field collecting, and includes visits to the USDA-
Peoria laboratory for training in modern DNA sequencing of fungi.
Computerization of all aspects of research, including specimen databasing and
construction of interactive identification keys, will enhance the timely
dissemination of results from the University of Kansas' World Wide Web server.