* 9521793
* Nonadiabatic Molecular Dynamics in Condensed Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1999
* David Coker, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 10/31/1999
* USD 324,900.00

David Coker is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his research in nonadiabatic molecular dynamics in
condensed systems. Coker is combining nonadiabatic switching formalism with
surface hopping theory to study energy redistribution between quantum and
classical subsystems. This has resulted in a new approach for treating
nonadiabatic dynamics in condensed phase systems. Additional new methods will be
developed for simulating systems with few nonadiabatic quantum degrees of
freedom in the presence of a classical bath degrees of freedom. Applications
which explore nuclear nonadiabaticity include: 1) studies of the effects of
solvent density on the nonadiabatic rotational dynamics of hydrogen molecule in
solution and the influence they have on rotational Raman linewidths; 2) the
influence of nonadiabatic dynamics and tunneling on transport of hydrogen
molecule in ice; and 3) studies of solution phase intermolecular proton transfer
reactions and the effects of solvent polarization and planarity on tunneling and
nonadiabaticity of proton dynamics. Electronic nonadiabaticity in solution phase
reactions will be studied by the introduction of a semi-empirical valence bond
approach called diatomics in molecules. This approach will be used to study
early time nonadiabatic dynamics after photoexcitation of diatomic iodine,
diatomic iodine anion, and methyl iodide in various molecular solvents. Since
most industrial synthetic processes occur in solution, it is important to gain
an increased understanding of the influence which solvent has on fundamental
chemical processes in solvated systems including molecular transport, proton
transfer, and electronic excitation. This theoretical research will lead to an
improved understanding of the factors which influence chemical reactions in
solution.