* 9521985
* The Fundamentals of Admicellar Polymerization
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Jeffrey Harwell, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 03/31/2000
* USD 275,000.00

Abstract - Grady - 9521985 A process called admicellar polymerization has been
developed which can be used to form a very thin layer of polymer on a surface
via a surfactant template. In this process a polymer is formed in the
hydrophobic region of a surfactant bilayer absorbed on the surface. Through a
cooperative research effort between PPG Industries and the Institute of Applied
Surfactant Research at the University of Oklahoma, it has been shown that
admicellar polymerized styrene-diene copolymers formed on a commercial
precipitated silica significantly improve the properties of the silica as a
filler for a rubber which serves as a model for automobile tires. Silica-filled
tire treads may have advantages over normal carbon black filled tire treads,
such as lower heat buildup and improved resistance to chipping/chunking. Silica-
filled treads can also have a lower rolling resistance leading to better fuel
economy and reduced emissions of greenhouse gases, while also having improved
traction on wet pavement. These tires have not been popular because use of a
costly organosilane coupling agent and increased mixing times are required.
Admicellar polymerization might offer a mechanism for producing a silica-filled
tread with these same performance advantages, yet a coupling agent is not
required. The objectives of this research are to: (1) develop a kinetic
expression for admicellar polymerization, (2) understand the effect of polymer
composition on the improvement in filler properties, and (3) determine the
relationship between silica pore structures and admicellar polymerization. To
address the first objective, model surfaces will be used to isolate the kinetic
problem from the pore diffusion problem. Since admicellar polymerization
superficially resembles emulsion polymerization, Smith-Ewart kinetics will
provide the theoretical starting point. The second objective is motivated by the
fact that a silica modified with a styrene-diene copolymer has better filler
properties than a silica modified with either homopolymer. The third part of the
project will explore pore structure effects using controlled pore-size
precipitated silicas in combination with scattering and liquid adsorption
measurements to quantify changes in pore size.