* 9521003
* Application of the Solvatochromic Comparison Method to      Chromatographic Retention and Selectivity
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Peter Carr, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 08/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

This project, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program, is
directed towards the renewed study of solvation and retention mechanisms in
reversed phase liquid chromatography (RPLC). During the tenure of this eighteen
month standard grant, Professor Carr and his students at the University of
Minnesota will expand their research in solvatochromism towards the
characterization of separation processes in supercritical fluid and micellar
systems. Gas chromatographic stationary phases will be designed with functional
groups that participate in hydrogen bonding, acid base, and dipolar interactions
with various polar and nonpolar test solutes. These interactions will be
quantified using headspace gas chromatography in conjunction with linear
solvation energy relations and Kamlet-Taft solvation parameters. This approach
will be applied to the understanding and prediction of analyte retention in
supercritical fluid chromatography and micellar electrokinetic capillary
chromatography. Unlike magnetic and optical spectroscopic techniques which allow
the calculation and correlation of spectral energy parameters with analyte
structure, the prediction of retention profiles in reversed phase chromatography
is complicated by lack of a definitive theory which can correlate molecular
interactions between species in solution with the partitioning of analyte
between mobile and stationary phases. Professor Carr and his students at the
University of Minnesota have been leaders in development of the solvatochromic
theory, which in concert with empirical chromatographic and spectroscopic
measurements, attempts to quantify retention behavior in separation science.
These pursuits will be expanded to the characterization of new forms of
chromatography targeted towards environmental and industrial applications.