* 9521001
* Multiscale Preconditioning of BEM Equations for             Electrostatic Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1998
* Peter Levin, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 44,044.00

ECS-9521001 Levin The objective of this project is to create sparse
approximations of the fully populated boundary element matrices that one obtains
using integral formulations like charge simulation or surface charge simulation.
These well known numerical schemes are used to find the electric field on and
near high voltage devices like guard rings, insulator strings, and transformers.
The sparse approximations are formed by a similarity transform of the
coefficient matrix. The cost of the one employed here is of optimal order N .
Nonetheless, the benefits of computing with a sparse matrix typically do not
justify the costs of creating it unless the problem has multiple right hand
sides (that is, one wants to simulate multiple excitation modes). This project
will attempt to quantify the advantage of wavelet-based similarity transforms
and suggest practical ways in which they can be employed. The proposal suggests
that for large problems with thousands of unknowns there may be an immediate
advantage in working in the wavelet basis because of the dramatic reduction in
disk access; the costs of the transform might be recovered more quickly than
previously thought. Additionally, there are attractive ways of economically
creating sparse approximations of the inverse matrix. These are the best kinds
preconditioners for iterative solvers like generalized conjugate gradients and
GMRES. Preconditioners can dramatically reduce the number of iterations required
to achieve a particular tolerance. So, not only do sparse approximations reduce
the cost of each iteration (linearly by the sparsification), they can be used to
reduce the number of iterations as well. Investigating different preconditioning
alternatives constitutes the second objective of the proposal. Of course the
most interesting possibility offered by wavelet bases is that of creating a
sparse coefficient matrix without suffering the expense of the similarity
transformation. The third part of the project will be devot ed to integrating
these bases into a previously existing boundary element package and producing
the sparse systems directly. 3