* 9521698
* Kinetics Models for Supercritical Water Oxidation Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* John Barker, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2000
* USD 309,439.00

Hazardous organic compounds present in aqueous waste streams can be rapidly and
safely converted to CO2 and H2O through homogeneous oxidation reactions. When
the reaction conditions exceed both the critical pressure and critical
temperature of water, this oxidative treatment process is referred to as
supercritical water oxidation (SCWO). SCWO is promising new technology for waste
destruction, and it is attracting increasing attention for possible applications
such as water purification as part of a life-support system for manned space
missions, and the destruction of military hazardous waste, mixed wastes, and
wastes from the chemical, petroleum, and pulp and paper industries. The design,
optimization, and control of an SCWO process requires knowledge of the governing
reaction kinetics. The PIs will conduct parallel experimental and modeling
studies to determine these governing kinetics. One part of the work involves
developing phenomenological reaction models for the SCWO of real pollutants.
They will determine global rate laws for reactant disappearance, CO2 prod
uction, and byproduct formation and destruction by correlating the large sets of
experimental data. They also plan to develop a mechanism-based reaction model
for SCWO chemistry and perform the experiments necessary to validate the model,
which will be based on individual elementary reaction steps and their associated
kinetics. They plan to develop reliable mechanism-based models for the oxidation
of increasingly complex organic compounds individually and as mixtures by these
techniques.