* 9521649
* PEET: Revision ofthe Cirolanidae (Crustaceae: Peracarida:   Isopoda), with Monographs on Selected Genera and a          Phylogenetic Analysis of the Family
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Richard Brusca, College of Charleston
* Continuing grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1998
* USD 326,439.00

9521649 BRUSCA Isopod Crustacea are a very large and diverse group of
invertebrate organisms that need both systematic, monographic revision and
training of additional researchers. The two investigators being supported by
this award work on the family Cirolanidae (Crustacea: Peracarida: Isopida) and
are the only systematic specialists for this group in the United States. They
have engaged the collaborative efforts of a European worker at the University of
Copenhagen, who is the only other active worker on this group in the world.
Together they will coordinate an excellent training program, engaging students
from the undergraduate through postdoctoral level. It is anticipated that five
generic revisions will be produced by student trainee workers and that they,
collectively with the senior researchers will produce a phylogenetic analysis
and generic level revision of family. The research and education of one
postdoctoral trainee and three graduate students will be supported and five
undergraduate students will be involved and, hopefully, become interested in
research and subsequent graduate studies in Systematic Biology. Results of all
research efforts will be published. In addition, electronic dissemination of the
research results, including data matrices, keys with digitized images of key
characters, and bibliographic, specimen, species-level and genus-level databases
will be developed and made available tia Internet. Our knowledge of the
biodiversity in this family of isopod crustacea will be markedly enhanced. New
young scientists will be trained in modern methods of systematic research. And
information will be made available that should be of utility in many other areas
of research dealing with this group of organisms whose members include
scavengers, predators, and even parasites of fish.