* 9521805
* Studies of Size-Selected Semiconductor Clusters Using       Negative Ion Photodetachment
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Daniel Neumark, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/1999
* USD 378,404.00

9521805 Neumark The aim of this research is to learn about how the properties of
semiconductor clusters evolve over a large size range, spanning the molecular
limit (10 atoms or less) up to the nanocrystalline regime (1000 atoms or more).
The proposed experiments are specifically aimed at probing the electronic and
vibrational spectroscopy of these clusters as a function of their size. The
experiments will be conducted using two negative ion photodetachment techniques:
photoelectron spectroscopy, for medium resolution (10 meV) survey work, and
anion zero electron kinetic energy (ZEKE) spectroscopy for much higher
resolution studies (0.2-0.3 meV). These techniques combine size-selectivity with
reasonable spectral resolution and hence are ideal for spectroscopic studies of
clusters over a wide size range. %%% The spectroscopy of size-selected clusters
offers an unprecedented opportunity to understand how the properties of matter
evolve from the molecular to the bulk limits. This type of work is appealing
from the perspective of fundamental chemistry and physics, since we can learn
how the molecular orbitals and vibrational frequencies of small molecules evolve
into the electronic bands and phonons in extended crystalline structures. From a
more applied point-of-view, small clusters have been implicated in the problems
that arise in the plasma processing of semiconductors, and larger semiconductor
clusters are beginning to show promise for use in electronic devices. Further
characterization of the energetics and structure of the species involved in
these applications is therefore highly desirable. This proposal is specifically
aimed at mapping out the electronic and vibrational spectroscopy of
semiconductor clusters over a wide size range, from less than 10 to more than
1000 atoms. To conduct this work, one requires experiments which combine size-
selectivity with reasonable spectral resolution. This will be accomplished using
two negative ion photodetachmen t techniques: photoelectron spectroscopy and,
for higher resolution work, anion zero electron kinetic energy spectroscopy.