* 9521389
* Studies in Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/2000
* J. David Neelin, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 07/31/2000
* USD 654,140.00

Abstract ATM-9521389 Neelin, J. David University of California, Los Angeles
Title: Studies in Ocean-Atmosphere Interaction This research aims to contribute
to understanding climate phenomena that arise by interaction between ocean and
atmosphere, and the mechanisms that produce them. Methods developed under the
previous NSF grant will be applied but with a change in emphasis in several
areas: 1) A new approach will be used for the tropical atmospheric modeling
component, based on a method designed to parlay theoretical developments from
the previous grant into a new type of nonlinear model. Analytical results for
vertical structure that apply under certain convective conditions are used as a
basis for numerical models that are valid more generally, but retain high
accuracy for low cost near convection regions. This is combined with an
efficient treatment of long-wave radiation. More importantly, the models are
easy to analyze for insight into the atmospheric side of three-dimensional
ocean-atmosphere feedbacks. 2) Investigations into the role of ocean-atmosphere
interaction in maintaining the tropical climatology were begun under the
previous grant leading to the "climatological version of the Bjerknes
hypothesis". This suggest that three-dimensional feedback between trade winds,
ocean circulation and gradients of sea surface temperature (SST) are important
to the climatological configuration of warm and cold SST regions. The PI will
expand this work and attempt to bridge the gap between this hypothesis involving
relative SST values and work by other investigators on the processes regulating
absolute SST values. 3) Work on modes of tropical interannual variability was a
mainstay of the previous grant. The theoretical component of this continues but
with less emphasis relative to the above topics. Instead method applied
previously to the tropics are to be adapted for midlatitude coupled variability,
with the aim of providing a the oretical counterpart for numerical modeling
efforts underway by other investigators. This work is important because it seeks
new knowledge relevant to our ability to model and predict climate.