* 9521603
* Production Costing and Planning for Multi-Area and          Distributed Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Benjamin Hobbs, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Chanan Singh
* 08/31/1996
* USD 60,000.00

Hobbs 9521603 Existing planning tools do not calculate expected production costs
while considering transmission limitations. Further, present frameworks for
comparing distributed resources against transmission and distribution (T&D)
investments and centralized resources lack a theoretical basis for the
appropriate development and use of marginal cost information. We propose the
following research efforts to fill those gaps: * Development and demonstration
of methods for assessing the effect of transmission limits upon expected costs.
The methods would exploit a multiarea probabilistic production costing framework
incorporating DC and AC network representations. Existing probabilistic
multiarea methods, aside from inefficient Monte Carlo approaches, do not include
DC or AC flow models. This work would be of benefit to utilities by allowing
them to assess the long run implications of resources and transmission decisions
for production costs while rigorously considering transmission limitations and
the entire range of possible load and equipment states. It could also benefit
non-utility providers of electric power, large power consumers, and regulators
by providing them a means of better understanding the spatial cost structure of
the bulk power market. * Creation of a theoretically defensible yet practical
framework for using such information for evaluating resources and transactions.
Decomposition methods would be used to develop theoretically optimal approaches
for coordinating models for generation planning, bulk power system operation,
and transmission and distribution planning. Guidelines and procedures would be
defined for theoretically correct calculation of marginal costs and coordination
of models. This effort would be especially valuable to the many electric
utilities who are beginning to evaluate the merits of dist ributed versus
centralized generation and demand-side resources. Some utilities are presently
testing ad hoc procedures involving coordination of distribution planning
methods with bulk power planning and power flow models. ****