* 9521879
* Palaeoanthropological Investigations of the Middle Stone Age in the Middle Awash Valley of Ethiopia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/2002
* J. Clark, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 02/28/2002
* USD 227,227.00

9521879 BROOKS The Middle Stone Age is a period when anatomically modern humans
replaced more archaic forms. Recent research findings in Africa have shown that
economic activities of humans in this time may also have been associated with
crucial behavioral changes. Excavation of Middle Stone Age sites is limited,
however, and long sequences with good faunal preservation are rare. This project
will continue work by an interdisciplinary team of archeologists,
paleontologists, geologists, and geochemists at Middle Stone Age and Acheulean
sites in the Aduma-Bouri regions of the Middle Awash Valley of Ethiopia.
Continued excavations will focus on evidence of human economic activities in
association with fossil lake shores and deltaic deposits. Parallel work will
continue on the relatively little-known Middle Stone Age industries of the Aduma
region and the later Acheulan sites at Bouri in order to establish a
chronological and paleoenvironmental relationship between the sequences of these
two regions. Research will include stratigraphic, paleolandscape, and
paleoenvironmental reconstruction of the Aduma region and establishment of an
absolute chronology using several techniques. The project will be coordinated
with the work of a team led by T.D. White that is working sites about 30 km to
the north. This project will continue what already has been a productive network
of sites in central Ethiopia. The excellent preservation of materials has
generated new insights into the evolution of marine-related industries. Of
special significance is the potential to gain new insights into the behavior
transformation of early humans from independent actors into communal entities
who work together and employ relatively sophisticated tools.