* 9521890
* Environmental Regulation and Labor Demand
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Eli Berman, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel H. Newlon
* 07/31/1998
* USD 146,688.00

This research will investigate the effects of environmental regulation on the
demand for labor. The changes that these regulations induce in the technology of
production will affect labor demand in the manufacturing sectors of the
developed world and in the rapidly growing manufacturing sectors of the
developing world. Worldwide growth in manufacturing output and trade has
prompted concern for the effect of economic growth on environmental quality.
Regulatory stringency is expected to increase in both the developed and the
developing world. Arguments against regulation are often framed in terms of a
tradeoff between jobs and environmental quality. The investigators argue that
existing estimates of the effect of investment in pollution abatement on labor
demand are conflicting and subject to a number of biases. Estimates of job loss
provided by economists are likely to be biased downwards, as much of the
observed investment is conducted in anticipation of regulatory change by firms
who face low compliance costs. Estimates of job loss provided by firms are
likely to be biased upwards, as they ignore the effect that the same regulatory
changes will have on their competitors prices for output. This project will
provide estimates of the effect of regulation on labor demand free of these
biases. The selection bias will be treated by using regulatory as instrumental
variables, thus restricting attention to firms forced to invest in pollution
abatement by regulatory changes. The upward bias in firms' estimates is
addressed by separately estimating the output elasticities of labor demand and
the marginal rate of technical substitution between pollution abatement capital
and labor. Data on state and local regulatory changes will be combined with
plant level data on pollution abatement investment and on employment from the
Census of Manufactures to provide estimates. To ensure that the instruments have
explanatory power, additional data will be collected on s harp changes
associated with two regulatory programs: The South Coast Air Quality Management
District in Southern California and the Delaware River Basin project. Estimated
effects will inform policy makers about how large the tradeoff really is between
environmental quality and manufacturing jobs. ***