* 9521423
* Industry University Cooperative Research on High Yield      Syntheses of Activated Carbons
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Michael Antal, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1999
* USD 185,122.00

Abstract - Antal - 9521423 A new method for manufacturing charcoal from biomass
by operating at elevated pressures doubles the yield of charcoal ordinarily
realized by industry, and is able to convert wood logs to charcoal after only
one hour of reaction time. This research is aimed at employing this new
knowledge to triple the usual industrial yields of activated carbons from
biomass feedstocks. Technical barriers to the synthesis of high yield (HY)
activated carbons include: (1) What rate laws describe the gasification of HY
charcoal by oxygen and steam? (2) Can these rate laws be included in a Thiele
modulus analysis to define conditions which produce activated carbons with high
surface areas or other desirable properties? (3) Can activated carbons be
synthesized at low temperatures? (4) Can impregnants be used to synthesize
valuable carbons with peculiarly desirable properties? (5) What reaction
conditions maximize the yields of desirable carbons? To overcome the above
barriers, this work will focus on the following objectives: (i) Produce various
HY charcoals from raw and pretreated biomass feedstocks. (ii) Determine the rate
laws governing gasification of these HY charcoals by oxygen and water. (ii) Use
Thiele modulus analysis to identify favorable conditions for activation. (iv)
Activate the NY charcoals by oxygen (air) in steam (or supercritical water) at
moderate to high temperatures and elevated pressures, and by steam (or
supercritical water) at moderate to high temperatures over a very large range in
pressures, (v) Determine the chemical, physical, and adsorptive properties of
the HY activated carbons. (vi) Based on a synthesis of the foregoing results,
identify conditions and pretreatments which produce desirable activated carbons
with yields of 20% or more. Two experimental testbeds will be used to measure
kinetics and activate the charcoals: a large, pressurized, packed bed reactor
combined with a high pressure steam generator, both designed to satisfy ASME cod
e requirements, and a small diameter, packed bed, supercritical flow reactor.
Collaborators with the Hungarian Academy of Sciences will also measure HY
charcoal gasifications rates at low pressures by thermogravimetric analysis.
This work represents a partnership between the University of Hawaii, two
companies concerned with recycling and biomass utilization, and a commercial
source of activated carbons. These linkages to private industry will ensure the
rapid dissemination and employment of new knowledge generated by this research.