* 9521478
* Excitation-Emission Microspectrofluorometer
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Elli Kohen, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 08/31/1998
* USD 25,730.00

It is proposed to add excitation fluorescence spectroscopy capability to present
microspectrofluorometer with capabilities for topographic and emission
fluorescence spectral scans. Thefluorescence excitation attachment will be based
on a spinning multizone disk, prepared with a series of alternate light and dark
areas such that, as a function of radius, there will be different numbers of
alternations at different distances from the center. As the spectrum of the
dispersion element is focused on the disk, it will be modulated (coded)
according to wavelength (i.e. excitation wavelength interval divided into n 100
nm bands). The resulting coded excitation light falls on the object to be
studied. Thus it will be possible to build an excitation-emission matrix (EEMS)
of the fluorescence, a powerful method to study complex multi-emission spectra.
Both the theory and practice of building such EEMS has been tested, the latter
in cultured fibroblasts treated with the fluorescent carcinogenic hydrocarbon
benzo(a)pyrene - (BP). It is proposed that the usefulness and applications of
the proposed apparatus be investigated in fibroblasts treated with BP
metabolized through the cytochrome P450 detoxification system, daunorubicin
extruded through the P-glycoprotein-mediated MDR (multidrug-resistance) pathway,
or a fluorescent molecule such as mMSA. The observed excitation- emission
changes may relate to intracellular metabolization, interactions, binding or
quenching of the drug, as well as its elimination by conjugation or extrusion.
The microspectrofluorometer complemented to that purpose will also provide real
time processing of data enabling alterations of the experimental design in the
course of observations. Thus a system of experimentation will be produced which
is rapidly responsive to the changes provoked in the cell. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)
3