* 9521459
* Sustainability of Arctic Communities: Interactions Between  Global Changes, Public Policies, and Ecological Processes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Robert White, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Michael T. Ledbetter
* 08/31/2000
* USD 2,153,486.00

ABSTRACT OPP-9521459 KRUSE This study addresses policy questions about the
ability of arctic communities to sustain themselves in the face of climate
changes and development. For the past 25 years, communities in Alaska's North
Slope Borough have sustained themselves through a combination of wage employment
derived from petroleum revenues, harvests mf caribou, marine mammals, and other
resources. Local control has been exercised through regional government and
Native-owned corporations. The principal climate changes considered in this
study are rising temperatures, increased precipitation and increased frequency
of extreme events. Climate changes of these types will affect caribou and other
populations important to the local subsistence economy, as well as construction,
transportation and regional development. The policy audience includes state and
national entities and the North Slope Borough. An interdisciplinary group will
focus on a number of goals including: the development of a vegetation model that
predicts forage for caribou and a model that responds to climate variables and
human harvest; a subsistence hunting/wage employment model as affected by
caribou and wage opportunities; an econometric and institutional analysis of
petroleum investments as affected by environmental costs and public policies; a
comparative analysis of policy vehicles for responding to forces of change; and
the development of a synthesis framework for relating policies to future
outcomes. The study will not attempt to link the detailed subsystem models in a
single grand model. Rather, the subsystem models will be designed to operate
independently with the outputs of one subsystem model serving as key inputs to
the other subsystem models. Integration of the subsystems will start with a
simple meta-model that reflects gross changes and then successively elaborate
the model to a level of detail appropriate to address specific policy questions.
The ultimate goal is to develop a means by which policy makers can
systematically examine relationships between policy choices and possible
futures, as well as to provide a vehicle for scientists from different
disciplines to combine their data and develop complementary research programs.
*** ??