* 9521126
* Magnetic Properties of Ultra Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Roy Willis, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 245,095.00

9521126 Willis The magnetic properties of materials depositied as ultrathin
films on crystalline surfaces has excited much attention due to their unusual
behavior and potential for new magnetic recording and sensor devices. The
scientific goal of this research project is to gain a deeper understanding of
the physical laws which govern the magnetic behavior as the film thickness
approached the limit of few monolayers. Evidence for different distinct classes
of magnetic behavior, and a crossover in dimensionality (from three- to two-
dimensions), is observed as the film thickness approaches a few monolayers. In
this ultrathin thickness regime, the films are metastable due to the `clamping'
influence of the substrate crystal's lattice. It is possible to fabricate new
phases of matter, with unique properties, which do not exist in bulk material.
New alloys with novel magnetic properties hold high promise for scientific
research and future technological application. This project deals with the
fundamental properties of these ultrathin films as investigated by the
magnetooptic Kerr effect and related techniques. %%% This project deals with
magnetism studies of ultrathin films of magnetic atoms. The films are deposited
atomic-layer-by-atomic-layer on atomically flat substrates. The arrangement of
the deposited surface atoms is determined primarily by the underlying substrate.
As a result the surface atoms have different properties from what would be found
for the same atoms in a normal bulk phase. These surface metastable magnetic
layers often exhibit unusual and unsuspected behavior, and have great potential
for advanced materials for magnetic recording and sensor devices. This research
probes the magnetism of ultrathin magnetic layers to understand the fundamental
physics of these materials. The results are of basic interest and could lead to
new materials for practical applica tions. ***