* 9521671
* Processing and Devices for Integrated Optoelectronics in    GaN and Related Compounds
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Ilesanmi Adesida, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 01/31/1999
* USD 290,313.00

9521671 Adesida Over the last decade, significant improvements in the
development of the epitaxial growth of wide bandgap nitrides have yielded
positive results. Perhaps the most significant development in this yield has
been the demonstration and commercialization of high luminosity blue LEDs. These
achievements have engendered a broad spectrum of research activities in various
laboratories world wide. The major emphasis of these activities continues to be
on epitaxial growth. It is evident from literature that the excellent progress
made in the growth of nitrides has not been accomplished by a commensurate
progress in the processing methods that are required to turn these materials
into devices. Some of the processing problems are sufficiently different from
those of conventional III-V compound semiconductor materials, that the
development of variable processing techniques for the fabrication of devices in
the nitrides has become imperative . Further, it is of cardinal importance to
begin training the graduate students who will constitute the human resources
needed in the future to manufacture the impressive array of products that are
envisaged from these materials. Our proposal research is therefore motivated by
the continued improvement in the growth of GaN and related compounds and the
need to develop processing methods required to turn these materials into high
performance devices and circuits. The broad goals of the proposed research are
to provide new insights into the etching of III-V nitrides, to develop new
methodologies for the formation of ohmic and Schottky contacts on nitrides , and
to develop high performance optoelectronic integrated photoreceivers operating
at UV wavelengths. The specific objectives are to 1) develop and understand
mechanism for highly anisotropic and "no-damage" etching processing suitable for
the fabrication of laser faucets and mirrors in the nitrides; 2) develop ohmic
contacts with low contact resistance and to understand the mechanism of contact
formation ; 3) investigate Schottky barrier properties of refractory metals and
silicides on the nitrides; and 4) fabricate and characterize metal-
semiconductor-metal (MSM) photodetectors and GaN metal-semiconductor field-
effect transistors (MESFETs) and to develop the technological basis for their
integration. The work will be done in collaboration with Dr. M. Asif Khan of APA
Optics, Minneapolis, w ho will provide the epitaxial nitrides uses in the work.
***