* 9521716
* A Structural Analysis of Sediment Subduction Off Nicaragua: Why the 10Be Anomaly?
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Michael Carr, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 08/31/1998
* USD 28,111.00

9521716 Carr This collaboration among researchers at University of Kansas,
Washington University and Rutgers University addresses the geological question
of how subduction at a continental margin builds or erodes the continent. More
specifically, it addresses the question of how much ocean sediment is carried
down beneath the continental margin compared to how much is plastered against
the margin at the "subduction zone" offshore of Central America (Nicaragua and
Costa Rica). The three investigators will carry out a field program sampling
volcanoes along the west coast of Central America, and they will analyze these
rocks for 10Be, an isotope of beryllium which is known from earlier work to vary
from high levels in Nicaragua volcanoes to low levels in volcanoes from nearby
Costa Rica. The high levels of 10Be are hypothesized to be a proxy indicator of
the amount of young sediment which is scraped off of the oceanic crust and added
to the continental margin as crust is subducted beneath the Middle America
Trench. The study here will examine volcanic rocks of various ages from
Nicaragua and Costa Rica, and it will include investigation of the time
variability of the Nicaragua-Costa Rica 10Be transition. The project ties
closely to planned scientific drilling by the NSF-supported, international Ocean
Drilling Program ship JOIDES Resolution offshore Costa Rica in late 1996. That
cruise will collect samples of sediments from beneath the continental slope to
examine the direct evidence for subduction and accretion of sediments. A future
drilling leg offshore Nicaragua to perform a similar study there is highly
ranked by the JOIDES panels which set the JOIDES Resolution drilling program.
The Nicaragua-Costa Rica region is of particular interest in this regard because
the contrast in 10Be signal here is nearly as large as that observed worldwide.
Because the high and low 10Be levels are so close geographically, it tightly
constrains the number of variables aside from sediment accretion which may be
involved. The project, therefore, can be expected to improve our understanding
of the subduction process and the processes of continental growth from ocean
crust subduction. ***