* 9521621
* Making Mice:  The Standardization of Mus Musculus for       Scientific Research
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* Karen Rader, Individual Award
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 05/31/1998
* USD 53,569.00

Models in science serve an enormously important role in guiding research.
Benjamin Franklin used a "two-fluid" model when he advanced the first modern
scientific theory for electricity. Two models, the wave and the particle model,
have guided research on light since the time of Descartes and Newton though
since the discovery of quantum mechanics in this century, neither model seems
correct. Models serve an important role in biological research as well. Since we
must be extraordinarily careful in experimenting on humans, biologists must turn
to other species to model what goes on in human physiology. In the 19th century,
the model of choice was the frog. Primates, pigs, cats, newts, even horse-shoe
crab, squid and slugs serve as models for certain areas of research. Each offers
specific opportunities but also limit researchers in what they can do.
Scientists must balance the opportunities an organism offers researchers with
the limits it places on the kinds of questions they can raise. The organism of
choice in 20th century biology has increasingly become the mouse. How and why
this decision has been made and how it has shaped the direction of biological
research for the past five decades is the subject of Dr. Rader's research.
Inbred mice are the most widely-used experimental animals in American biological
and medical research. Yet the historical circumstances surrounding the mouse's
rise as a standard organism have been completely ignored. Dr. Rader is expanding
on her earlier studies of the process by which C. C. Little and the Jackson
Laboratory chose a standardized mouse, mus musculus, as a model for biomedical
research. Under this grant, she is examining the increasing importance of mouse
models in two American biomedical fields: radiation genetics and cancer
research. She is trying to demonstrate how the inbred mouse developed as a
carefully crafted experimental technology which enable a wide range of
productive relations, including among biomedical scientists and betw een these
scientists and the society that supported their work. The study should also
elucidate the connections between bench-top biomedical research and research
policy, as well as illuminate the complex social, political, and intellectual
relations that constitute scientific practices and organisms in the life
sciences.