* 9521526
* PEET: Monographic Research in Agaricales and Aphyllophorales(Basidiomycotina, Fungi)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Ronald Petersen, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2001
* USD 576,418.00

9521526 Petersen Among the thousands of species of fungi worldwide, the larger
basidiomycetes with often conspicuous fruiting bodies, the mushrooms and
puffballs for example, are comparatively well known. Still, their classification
rests upon geographically constrained treatments (by region or by political
entity), frequently with consequent duplication of scientific names, and with
reliance often placed upon morphological features that are subject to
environmental modification and hence prove unstable. Dr. Ronald Petersen at the
University of Tennessee has assembled a team of colleagues and contributors to
study several groups of fungi in the orders Agaricales and Aphyllophorales from
a worldwide perspective, and by employing several lines of evidence for
taxonomic resolution and phylogenetic analysis. These are to include traditional
morphological characters (with contributions from such colleagues as Dr. Scott
Redhead in Canada and Dr. Egon Horak in Switzerland); new molecular tools in
protein electrophoresis and DNA sequencing (with colleague Dr. Karen Hughes);
laboratory culturing and mating trials, to assess compatibility reactions among
closely related species; and all these to be pursued through the use of existing
herbarium collections and new collections assembled from extensive field
collecting in various regions. Primary emphasis will be given to monographic
treatments of the genera Clavicorona, Flammulina, and Lentinellus. Training of
graduate and postdoctoral students entails courses and seminars, extensive
laboratory and museum work, and field collecting in the U.S. and usually abroad
as well. Computerization of many aspects of the monographic endeavor, including
specimen databasing, morphological and molecular evaluations, and construction
of identification keys, will enhance the dissemination of results through the
University's World Wide Web server.