* 9521013
* Dissertation Research: A Test of Optimization Hypothesis    in Glaucomys Volans
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* F. Stephen Dobson, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/1997
* USD 9,999.00

9521013 Dobson Understanding why some individuals in a population are more
successful at raising offspring than others is central to gaining insight into
evolution via natural selection. Scientists have developed several explanations
for the evolution of family size for species with extended parental care. Since
these hypotheses each make specific predictions about offspring and parental
survival during and after reproduction, a properly designed field study can test
these explanations. This study will be the first field study to employ this
technique in small mammals. New- born flying squirrels will be moved among nests
in order to study why mothers give birth to litters of a certain number of
young. The effects of altering a mother's litter size can be monitored
throughout the rest of her reproductive life. Young female squirrels settle near
their mother so the effects of litter size on the offspring's' reproduction can
also be monitored. This study will lead to important insights into natural
selection. Additionally, the results can have applications to the conservation
of rare animals and may even shed light on how to an increase food production
from the animal farming industries. Understanding what factors set the upper
limit to family size per reproductive event is the first step in searching for
ways to increase production of young. Increasing reproduction in rare animals
would have obvious applications towards saving animals from extinction, while
increasing reproduction in an economically important animal may help increase
the production of protein for an increasing human population.