* 9522740
* Guided Wave Optics in Super-EO Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Ohannes Eknoyan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 05/31/2000
* USD 323,198.00

9522740 Taylor The overall objective of this research is to obtain analytical
and experimental results which support and promote the application of high-
electrooptic-coefficient tungsten bronze ferroelectric materials ("super-EO
materials") in a variety of guided wave optical devices. Techniques developed at
Texas A&amp;M for making the first low-loss waveguides and electrooptic
modulators in tungsten bronze substrates will serve as the foundation for the
proposed project. The waveguides are produced by a simple process in which
static strain from a patterned surface film creates a localized refractive index
increase. The Rockwell International Science Center, which has supplied super-EO
materials to Texas A&amp;M for several years, will continue in this
collaborative role during the course of the proposed project. Research will be
conducted in five critical task areas: (1) static strain optic (SSO) waveguide
modeling, (2) device design, (3) material characterization, (4) modulator and
switch development, and (5) tunable filter investigations. Two-dimensional
refractive index profiles for TE and TM polarizations in SSO waveguides will be
computed, considering both strain-optic and electrooptic contributions to the
localized index change. A variation method will be utilized for waveguide mode
analysis. Parameters needed for the waveguide and device models, such as strain-
optic and electrooptic coefficients, refractive indices, and thermal expansion
coefficients, will be measured. The recently discovered "self-poling" effect
will be investigated experimentally to determine the conditions under which a
large electrooptic effect is present without poling after processing of an SSO
device at elevated temperatures. Electrooptic cutoff modulators, coupled
waveguide switches, and tunable channel dropping filters which make use of the
SSO waveguides will be designed, fabricated in the Rockwell substrates, and
characterized. The proposed research will lay the groundwork for using super-EO
materials in guided wave devices which could find increasing application in
broadband communication networks over the next decade. Modulators and switches
which exhibit order-of-magnitude improvement in performance over their
counterparts in LiNbO3 - the traditional substrate of choice for guided wave
electrooptic devices - will be sought. New channel-dropping filters for
wavelength multiplexing with unprecedented tuning range, low crosstalk, and
minimal electrical power dissipation will be explored. Successful demonstrations
should reinforce Rockwell's expressed interest in commercializing the tungsten
bronze substrates so that they will be generally available for research and
device application. ***