* 9522774
* GOALI/IUCP:  Stretch Forming of Aluminum Extruded Tubes     for Automotive Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Farhang Pourboghrat, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 05/31/1998
* USD 103,202.00

9522774 Kyriakides The automotive industry is continuously seeking ways to
reduce vehicle weight without compromising safety in order to increase fuel
efficiency and increase payload capacity. Iron and steel account for the bulk of
the total vehicle weight. Aluminum alloys with density of less than half of
steel has the potential to lower vehicle weight substantially. The aerospace
industry already has considerable experience in the use of aluminum. Translating
that experience into automotive industry, a new body design called space frame
has been developed. Aluminum alloys are extruded into tubes which are assembled
into a space frame. Dimensional tolerances required on these cold formed tubes
are high for ease of assembly in an automated process. One problem encountered
in bending a thin walled tube is the distortion of the cross section. The
current approach is to internally pressurize the tubes and by trial and error
arrive at the optimum manufacturing process. In this research, the feasibility
of developing a forming model to arrive at the least distortion loading path
(pressure-tension-curvature) will be evaluated. Limited experimental
verification of the model will be carried out. If successful, this research
would lay the foundation for a closed loop control stretch forming of aluminum
tubes. The automotive industry is a very large sector of the total manufacturing
industry. Increase in fuel efficiency has been a driver in this industry with
many concurrent benefits. Environmental benefit is one major factor with reduced
emission along with lower vehicle operating cost to the consumer. While the
industry has made continuous improvements towards this goal, replacement of
steel by aluminum has the potential for a major reduction in vehicle weight with
concurrent benefit in fuel efficiency. This cooperative industry/university
research is seeking the most optimum manufacturing process to make this
materials substitution an attractive option for the automotive indu stry.