* 9522968
* NSF-CGP Science and Engineering Fellows Program:            Investigation of Thermal and Fluid Dynamic Phenomena for    Design of Cryogenic Pulse Tube Cooler Components
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Ravikumar Kudaravalli, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Edwards
* 10/31/1997
* USD 53,000.00

9522968 Kudaravalli This proposal supports the collaboration of Dr. Ravikumar
Kudaravalli of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the University of
California, Los Angeles and Professor Yoichi Matsubara of the Atomic Energy
Research Institute (AERI) at the Nihon University, Chiba. Project funding will
enable Dr. Kudaravalli to spend one year in Japan, resident at Nihon University,
in order to investigate the thermal and fluid dynamics phenomena for design of
cryogenic pulse tube cooler components for optimum performance. Dr. Kudaravalli
has previously investigated the heat transfer, fluid dynamics and thermodynamic
aspects of various cryogenic systems in general and heat exchangers and
regenerators of cryocoolers including pulse tube coolers in particular.
Professor Matsubara is one of the leading researchers in the pulse tube
cryocooler area. He has pushed the technology further by multistaging of the
cooler and by invention of the regenerative tube. Professor Matsubara's
demonstration of liquid helium temperatures (3.6 K) is the record low
temperature ever produced by a pulse tube cryocooler. Dr. Kudaravalli will
combine his expertise with that of Professor Matsubara to study the thermal and
fluid dynamics phenomena in cryogenic pulse tube coolers achieving optimum
performance. This proposal brings together research scientists from two
countries working in the area of advanced cryogenic cooler technology. The U.S.
scientist will have the opportunity to become familiar with research techniques,
equipment and facilities at AERI while contributing to the overall research
effort. Therefore, this proposal fulfills the objectives of the program in its
exchange and transfer of scientific knowledge through an international
collaboration. ***