* 9522531
* Development and Application of a Problem Specific Parallel  Programming Environment for Marine Seismic Tomography
* CSE,OAC
* 12/15/1995,11/30/2001
* Allen Malony, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Xiaodong Zhang
* 11/30/2001
* USD 387,187.00

Toomey 9522531 This research which is a cooperative effort between seismologists
and computer scientists at the University of Oregon - aims to develop a high
performance computing (HPC) environment for marine seismic tomography and to
test that environment by applying it to existing delay-time data from the east
Pacific Rise (EPR) at 9 degrees 30 minutes north. This project will develop a
problem-specific programming environment (PSPE) for seismologists, initially
designed around an existing tomographic code. The environment will extend
infrastructure (already developed by the PIs) that supports "models of
observability " for uniform tool interaction at the programming language level.
The extensions will raise the model abstractions to the applications level,
giving the seismologist a familiar environment for interacting with development
tools. The environment will be tested first by applying it to delay-time data
from the EPR. This data has already been analyzed in publications addressing the
velocity and attenuation structure of axial magma chambers but efforts to image
the P wave velocity structure have focused only on the upper crustual sect.
Significant performance improvements in the code will, for the first time, allow
a simulations analysis of the complete data set, resulting in an unprecedented
image of the full crustal.