* 9522299
* Minority Research Planning Grant:  Reliability and          Performance of Automated Fixed-Path Material Handling       Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Benita Beamon, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 03/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

9522299 Beamon This is a research planning grant whose objective is to undertake
a study involving the incorporation of reliability issues in the design of
fixed-path material handling systems. A fixed-path material handling system
refers to a class of material handling devices that operate on dedicated paths.
The research is built on the premise that reliability issues can affect the
performance of automated fixed-path material handling systems and that the use
of appropriate performance and reliability measures will allow for a more
accurate and realistic evaluations of such systems. With this premise, the
research aims to pursue (1) the development of quantitative methods for
defining, modeling, and measuring system failures, reliability, and
performability for fixed-path material handling systems, and (2) the
determination and modeling of relevant trade-offs between systems design and
material handling reliability or performability. The developed procedures will
enable fixed-path material handling systems designers to design, compare, and
evaluate the true performance characteristics of such systems. The work to be
undertaken during the life of this grant will be exploratory in nature. The
research outcome will be used in the preparation of a more detailed proposal
aimed at an in-depth pursuit of the research concerns explored under the
research planning grant. Material handling, as a key component in most
manufacturing systems, have been well recognized as a major contributor to
production cost. Material handling provides the link between machines stations
in the flow of material. In highly automated manufacturing systems such as a
flexible manufacturing system (FMS), the consequences of a material handling
system failure is a complete shut down of the entire operation. Not only does
this result to increase in production cost but also increased order throughput
time and missed order due dates. The work undertaken in this research can lead
to improved system design to lessen failure frequency, provide an assessment
tool for the need of a preventive maintenance program, and also as a tool to
evaluate alternate material handling systems and designs. It will also
contribute to a better understanding of the stochastic behavior of a material
handling system.