* 9522317
* Mathematical Sciences:  Produce a World Wide Web Program of the Conference on Statistical Challenge√ê and Possible       Approaches in the Analysis of Massive Data Sets
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1996
* John Alexander, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 05/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

Proposal: DMS 95-22317 PI: John Alexander Institution: National Academy of
Sciences Title: Produce a World Wide Wed Program of the Conference on
Statistical Challenges and Possible Approaches in the Analysis of Massive Data
Sets ABSTRACT The workshop on Statistics and Massive Data Sets, hosted by the
Committee on Applied and Theoretical Statistics of the National Research
Council, focuses on how to deal effectively with massive amounts of data that
need statistical analyses. In numerous practical contexts, researchers are
confronted with the inadequacy of standard statistical techniques to handle the
explosion in the size of current data sets, where the number of observations can
easily run into the giga- and even terabyte ranges. Statistical assumptions
underlying many of the most popular methods, such as "homogeneity" of the data,
may simply be wrong in these cases, thus rendering common statistical tools
ineffective and even dangerous. A corresponding problem is the growth in the
number of dimensions in many current problems. Again standard approaches, which
were developed in a different era, even predating the computer in many cases,
are not powerful enough for these challenges. The workshop on Statistics and
Massive Datasets explores the challenges presented by massive data sets, and
does so in the context of a variety of real world and currently pressing
application areas, including the atmospheric, biological and geo sciences,
business and marketing, ecology, and engineering and technology. With these
areas as a backdrop, specific over-arching multi-disciplinary research issues on
common needs, including relevant statistical principles, computational aspects,
data analysis, and visualization of massive data sets are identified. The
workshop involves highly animated discussions among scientists. These
discussions are not easily captured in a traditional published proceedings
format. In contrast, the activities are capture d and distributed via the
preparation of a videotape of the workshop followed by a World Wide Web (WWW)
dissemination. This new dissemination method brings the benefit of the actual
discussions to a wide audience in a timely fashion.