* 9522066
* Towards the Next Level of Molecular Control in the Sol-Gel  Preparation of Mixed Oxides
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Edmond Ko, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 05/31/1998
* USD 170,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9522066 This project explores the use of sol-gel preparation of
mixed oxides to achieve predictable structures or textures and to apply this to
the synthesis of acid catalysts. Specifically, titania-silica and alumina-silica
are studied; the silicon precursor has significantly slower reactivity and this
permits prehydrolysis to be used as a tuning variable. By varying the
prehydrolysis ratio, gel networks of various microstructures can be obtained.
Characterization of the product properties may provide a correlation of
homogeneity with acidity. Nitrogen adsorption, X-ray diffraction, thermal
analysis, pyridine adsorption, and 1-butene isomerization are used to
characterize the textural, structural, and catalytic properties of the mixed
oxides. Alternative precursors such as double metal alkoxides and performed sols
are also studied, as are mixed oxides prepared by coprecipitation. This effort
should provide the means to design mixed oxides with specific properties.
Although the procedures to be used are well established, little systematic work
on how the variables involved affect product properties has been done. (In other
words, mixed oxide preparation is more "art" than "science".) Although this
effort looks at catalytic properties, if successful it would clearly be
extendable to other applications using mixed oxides, such as optical waveguides.
***