* 9522596
* Structural Effects on Interdiffusion, Entanglement, and     Ultimate Mechanical Behavior of Polymers
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Andrew Klein, Lehigh University
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/1999
* USD 177,955.00

9522596 Sperling This proposal was submitted under the GOALI program and
involves the collaboration of Lehigh University and Rohm and Haas Corp. in an
industrially important program of research. The objective of this proposal is to
provide a study of the structural effects of polymers on interdiffusion,
entanglement, and ultimate mechanical behavior. The focus will be the effect
ofionic end group substitution and x1 on interdiffusion. A direct comparison of
the diffusion coefficients, depth of interdiffusion, and volume fraction of
mixing will be determined on various polymer pairs, one of which contains
deuterium, chromophores, or both, with the objective of determining the relative
advantages and potential drawbacks of measurements via small-angle neuron
methods are being used successfully, no direct comparison of the two methods has
yet been made. In particular, positive x1 values are known to exist in
deuterated-protonated polymer pairs, and a similar effect may exist in donor-
acceptor pair chemistry. The size of the donor and acceptor chromophores may
impede interdiffusion. Mechanical measurements on selected films are planned, to
provide a more complete picture of the interdiffusion phenomenon, and to allow
evaluation of scaling law relationships. A series of anionically made
polystyrenes and polymethacrylates containing deuterium or hydrogen, or donor
acceptor fluorescent chromophores, or both kinds of labels will be obtained,
with appropriate modification carried out in house. Polymers made via anionic
polymerization and formed into latexes via interdiffusion observe by small-angle
neutron scattering and non-radiative energy transfer, as appropriate. Variables
will include polymer molecular weight, time, and temperature of annealing of the
films, and extent of labeling with various groups. A series of new experiments
are planned to explore the possibility of a thermodynamic acceleration. Here,
slightly negative x1 values may result in a more rapid interdiffusion of polymer
chains, with concomitant more rapid development of strength in the resulting
films. This will be a cooperative research between Rohm and Haas and Lehigh
University personnel. Rohm and Haas is committing $100,000 towards the
successful completion of their portion of the research. This research will be
helpful in developing water-based coating technology, minimizing the need for
solvents, plasticizers, or coalescing aids. ***