* 9522309
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research - Paleomagnetic and    Mineral Magnetic Studies in Anticipation of the Cape Roberts Project
* O/D,OPP
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1997
* USD 30,000.00

Abstract This award supports a project to lay the groundwork for development of
a reliable magnetostratigraphic record from drill core collected by the
international Cape Roberts Project (CRP). A reliable chronostratigraphic
framework is a prerequisite for proper interpretation of the climatic and
tectonic events that are the focus of the CRP. Magnetostratigraphy could play a
major role in development of that framework, but previous paleomagnetic studies
of sedimentary sequences from Antarctica have shown that extracting a reliable
magnetostratigraphy from the CRP cores may not be easy and that sophisticated
treatment of samples may be necessary. This project will undertake paleomagnetic
and mineral magnetic investigations of the lower part (Eocene and/or Oligocene)
of the CIROS-1 core, which was collected in 1984/85 from western McMurdo Sound.
In addition to useful information bearing on paleoenvironments that can be
extracted from this core, this work provides an opportunity to gain
paleomagnetic experience with the lithologies present in the Cape Roberts region
and to address problems encountered in previous attempts to recover
paleomagnetic records. This project will also utilize Cretaceous to Paleocene
drill cuttings from the Great South Basin near New Zealand. The results of this
work will allow determination of the most appropriate strategy for dealing with
samples during the drilling and basic characterization phase of the CRP, when
time and resources will be very limited. In this way, the efficiency of on site
paleomagnetic investigations in support of the basic characterization work on
the core should be greatly enhanced.