* 9522582
* Evaluation of the National Science Foundation's Science and Technology Centers Program
* O/D,OIA
* 04/03/1995,11/30/1996
* Stephen Fitzsimmons, ABT Associates Inc
* Contract
* David Schindel
* 11/30/1996
* USD 543,394.00

This 12 month program evaluation will assess the effectiveness and impact of the
Science and Technology Centers (STC) Program. The National Science Foundation
created the Science and Technology Centers Program in 1987, and initiated
funding for eleven Centers in 1989 and an additional fourteen Centers in 1990.
This is the first program-level evaluation conducted in the STC Program. The STC
Program evaluation will gather performance data that indicates the degrees to
which and the ways in which the STC Program is meeting its goals. Program goals
are: ambitious research that requires the longer duration and higher support
levels of center-based research; transferring knowledge and technology from the
academic setting to other sectors of society such as industry and government
laboratories; and preparing graduates at many levels for research and other
careers in a technological society. Abt Associates, an independent evaluation
contractor, will construct a detailed history of the program, design performance
indicators associated with the three program goals, compile and analyze existing
performance data, collect and analyze additional data, and synthesize this
information in the form of a program profile. These findings will be submitted
to an expert panel for interpretation. Technical and summary final reports will
be produced and disseminated to appropriate audiences. The results of this
evaluation will provide NSF with information useful to the effective management
of and future plans for the STC Program and will also assist the STC Directors
as they seek to improve the operations of their respective Centers. The
evaluation will provide information on the impact of the STC Program to NSF's
senior management; the National Science Board; members of the Administration and
Congress; the research community; and interested parties in the industrial
sector and the science and technology education enterprise. The STC program
evaluation is one of four pilot projects being conducted by NSF in response to
passage of the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993. The experience
gained during this program evaluation will help NSF prepare for full agency-wide
implementation of the Act.