* 9522724
* Dynamics of Fluid Interfaces in the Presence of Solid       Boundaries: Acoustic, Inertial and Viscous Effects
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Jonathan Higdon, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John F. Foss
* 02/29/2000
* USD 245,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS 95-22724 Higdon The proposed work will address an important need
for more information concerning the dynamics of fluid interfaces and droplets.
There are numerous industrial applications that include distillation, liquid-
solid extraction, drying, flow through packed beds and a variety of separation
processes. In general, multiphase flows with fluid interfaces and solid
boundaries arise in a myriad of specific processes. The proposed work will
provide a scientific basis for analyzing and controlling the dynamics of fluid
interfaces across the full range of applications. The approach is a combined
analytical/numerical treatment. Four specific projects will be included in the
research program: 1. The stability of three dimensional drops attached to solid
substrates will be studied using Boundary Element analysis combined with
NewtonOs method. 2. Droplet displacement using acoustic excitation will be
studied perturbation analysis in combination with the boundary element
technique. 3. Strongly non-linear droplet oscillations will be studied utilizing
a Galerkin/finite element analysis of the Navier-Stokes equations. 4. droplet
transport through capillaries and constrictions subject to strong acoustic
forcing. the final goal is to establish the mechanisms of enhanced transport
rates that have been observed experimentally.