* 9522212
* (SGER):  Enzymatic Amplification of Genomic DNA
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Kenneth Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 07/31/1997
* USD 42,115.00

9522212 WEISS Anthropologists around the world possess in their laboratories
small amounts of human tissue collected in surveys of human populations over the
past several decades. Widespread interest exists in a worldwide assessment of
human variation, its amount, patterning and origins; an effort to collect data
for this purpose, called the Human Genome Diversity Project (HGDP) has been
proposed. For any such project, it will be important to have open-ended amounts
of genomic DNA from worldwide samples, so that many investigators can analyze
them extensively. The purpose of this project is to address the need for
amplifying an open-ended supply of representative genomic DNA from field-
collected or archival samples at a low cost, that can be undertaken by
laboratories around the world. The investigators propose to do systematic
developmental work on an exploratory method for amplifying small amounts of DNA.
The method (Adapter Attachment and Amplification-AAA) involves cutting genomic
DNA in usefully long fragments and amplifying those fragments in a specific way
so that the result is a mix containing as much of the original genome as
possible. If this method can be developed effectively, large quantities of DNA
can be generated that are easy and inexpensive to work with and store. This
approach, if successful, can have a transforming effect on the sample design of
the HGDP as well as other large-scale genetic surveys.