* 9522662
* Structure of Turbulent Convection over Non-uniform          Horizontal Surfaces
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/1995,08/31/2001
* Ronald Adrian, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 08/31/2001
* USD 865,579.00

Adrian/Abstract Experimental studies of turbulent fluid flow will be conducted
in wide fluid layers that model many fundamental aspects of the atmospheric
boundary layer. Turbulent motions in these layers are caused by buoyant heating
of the lower surface, which is typically horizontal. The purposes of the
experiments are to understand how turbulent flows are organized from
characteristic coherent structures such as thermals and plumes,and to determine
how details of the surface geometry and heat patterns affect these structures
and the macroscopic mean phenomena such as heat transport, humidity transport
and transport of pollutants. To this end experiments will be conducted over
three types of surfaces: smooth, rough and inhomogeneous, with primary emphasis
on the latter. The inhomogeneous surface have patterns of heating or elevation
that are on a scale comparable to the layer depth. High resolution particle
image velocimeter techniques will be used to measure instantaneous velocity
vector field in flow, and laser induced fluorescence will be used to measure
instantaneous temperature fields. New techniques will be developed to measure
the three dimensional structure of the scalar fields of temperature and
concentration and velocity vector fields. From the measurements patterns of
motion will be educed by direct inspection and by statistical methods such as
spatial correlation techniques, stochastic estimation and proper orthogonal
decomposition. Basic properties of the fields such as distribution of turbulent
kinetic energy, transport of various moments and dissipation will be measured.
In the case of homogeneous surfaces, the statistical axisymmetry about the
vertical will allow complete determination of the two-point spatial correlation
function, from which accurate measurement of the viscous dissipation will be
possible. The rough surface study will concentrate on sinusoidal surface shapes,
while the inhomogeneous study will co nsider variety of inhomogeneous heating
patterns such as a step function, a monolithic square, and a checkerboard. The
information obtained will be useful in testing and developing large eddy
simulations.