* 9522169
* Photoacoustic Determination of Fluorescence Quantum Yield
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Enoch Small, Quantum Northwest
* Standard Grant
* F.C. Thomas Allnutt
* 08/31/1999
* USD 320,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project aims to develop a
prototype instrument which combines pulsed-laser photoacoustic detection with
optical measurements of fluorescence to determine fluorescence quantum yields.
The instrument will be more accurate, easier to operate, and less expensive than
existing methods for measuring quantum yields. In addition, this photoacoustic
method will become a powerful tool for elucidating the photophysics of
fluorescent and nonfluorescent chromophores. It will measure photo-induced
molecular volume changes and provide important information of the disposition of
electronic excited state energies into various pathways, including intersystem
crossing, electron ejection, and other excited state reactions. This project
will attempt to design and build a sophisticated prototype and test it by
measuring quantum yields of several dyes with different spectral properties. The
research will also examine photo-induced molecular volume changes in a series of
common laser dyes with the intention of developing a molecular volume standard.
A relatively complex fluorescent, photochemical molecule, pyranine, will be
analyzed for all aspects of its photophysics and photochemistry. Finally, the
photophysics of chromophores bound to proteins will be examined. If the project
is successful, the instrument will become an important analytical tool providing
quantitative information on molecular excited states for all those laboratories
that make serious use of fluorescing chromophores as probes.