* 9522303
* Preparation of Microporous Solids from Molecular Building   Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Omar Yaghi, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret A. Cavanaugh
* 11/30/1998
* USD 225,000.00

This project, funded by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic and Organometallic Chemistry
Program, will support the research of Professor Omar Yaghi of Arizona State
University on the synthesis of new porous solids from soluble molecular building
blocks. The focus of the project is the development and understanding of two
fundamental issues that are relevant to the preparation of solids from molecular
building blocks: 1) how to control the relative orientation of the molecular
components so that the resulting structure has the desired structure, stability
and physical properties, and 2) how to obtain the solid product in crystalline
form so that its structure is readily determined. The general method to be used
will involve the room-temperature condensation polymerization of inorganic
clusters or suitably functionalized coordination compounds using polymeric
matrices as diffusion and reaction media for addition copolymerization and
condensation polymerization reactions. The anticipated zeolitic type structures
are expected to have voids that can accommodate guest molecules or ions and thus
to be useful in separations, ion-exchange, and catalysis. In principle, these
framework structures can be chemically modified and manipulated to predictably
vary their properties. The term porous solid applies to a class of network
solids that contain channels and voids that are comparable in size to many small
molecules and ions. Such species often may diffuse into these solids to be
exchanged for an existing ion or to be otherwise retained as a result of
intermolecular interactions. Such solids are widely used industrially for the
selective adsorption and catalytic transformation of molecular structures,
particularly through acid catalyzed pathways. Such materials are usually
synthesized by high temperature processes that often do not provide crystalline
products. This research project will attempt the synthesis of porous solids by
formation of bonds between small pre-formed fragments of the desired structure
through various types of room-temperature, condensation polymerization
reactions. Polymeric matrices will be used as reaction media to prevent the
formation of more dense structures and to slow the condensation process such
that crystals are more likely to be formed. The materials that result from this
project may be useful in separations technology and in catalysis.