* 9522507
* Interior-Point Algorithms:  Theories and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Yinyu Ye, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 02/28/1999
* USD 195,000.00

9522507 Ye The objective of this research is to develop and analyze interior-
point algorithms and their variants for solving large-scale linear, quadratic,
and nonlinear optimization problems that arise in production management and
resource allocation. In the research, work will be performed to strengthen
results obtained from prior research and explore new techniques for improving
linear and nonlinear programming algorithms. The results of the research will be
tested by solving actual industrial problems. Details of the research include
(1) complexity analysis with the objective of developing complexity theory for
linear programming (LP), (2) development of algorithms to extend LP-interior
point algorithms to solve nonlinear optimization problems arising from
engineering design and control, (3) decomposition and column generation for the
development of interior point algorithms for solving large-scale, semi-infinite
dimensional, and combinatorial optimization problems, and (4) implementation of
the developed interior-point algorithms and development of public-domain
computer programs based on the implementation. The findings and discoveries from
this research will strengthen and improve theoretical results and practical
performance of interior point algorithms. This will lead to the development of
new efficient algorithms for a variety of optimization problems. Progress in the
development of efficient algorithms for solving large-scale optimization
problems improves the efficiency of manufacturing systems, communication
networks, aircraft routing, multiple-flow operations, and resource planning.
Strengthening research in this area will contribute to the national interest in
industrial competitiveness and scientific knowledge.