* 9522216
* Proteasome Workshop (July 1-3, 1995) to be held at Colorado State University, Fort Collins, CO.
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Donald Mykles, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 06/30/1996
* USD 3,000.00

MCB-9522216 Mykles The proteasome is a multimeric, multicatalytic proteinase
complex that plays a central role in intracellular proteolysis in eukaryotes. As
the catalytic core of the 26S protease complex, it mediates the ATP-dependent
degradation of ubiquitinylated proteins. There have been few forums for
researchers to meet and discuss their work on the proteasome. Consequently, a
Proteasome Workshop, organized by Donald L. Mykles and others will be held July
1-3 1995 on the campus of Colorado State University (Fort Collins CO). This is
the first time that a workshop on the proteasome has been convened in the US.
The preliminary program consists of one poster session and five oral session
organized around the themes of structure and catalytic properties; allosteric
regulators and synthetic inhibitors; expression, processing, and assembly of the
20S and 26S complexes; and physiological functions. The sessions will focus on
recent developments, such asa the isolation of endgenous regulators and the 20S
ATPase complex, the synthesis of cell-permeable inhibitors, the cloning of the
complete set of cDNAs encoding proteasome subunits in yeast, and the
indentification of "nonessential" subunits that replace other subunits and
change the catalytic proteties of the complex. The proposal requests partial
support for the travel costs of the 15 main speakers and eight women and/or
minorites. The main speakers represent most of the laboratories making
significant contributions in the field, and therefore constitute the critical
promamatic core of the workshop. We recognize the importance of promoting and
encouraging the particaption of under-represented induviduals, and therefore
include in the proposal support for the travel and registration costs of eight
women and/or minorities. %%% The Proteaome Workshop is a timely meeting which
examines a non-membrane-bound organelle of the cytoplasm. The proteasome is
comprised of aggregates of proteins involved in c ellular degradation of other
cytoplasmic proteins. These aggregates are differentially sedimenting complexes
of proteases with as yet incompletely defined catalytic properties. The meeting
will address the isolation and function of the complexes and the individual
proteins of which they are comprised. It is the first workshop in the US
specifically addressing this new organelle. There will be five oral sessions
which will include speakers from around the world, as well as poster session.
The primary uses of the funding will be in defraying the travel costs of the
speakers and in providing a travel and registration stipend for women and
minorities. ***