* 9522504
* Synthesis and Electromechanical Behavior of "Smart"         Ferroelectric Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Raj Singh, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Liselotte J. Schioler
* 01/31/2000
* USD 285,000.00

9522504 Singh The objective of the proposed research is to study the effect of
the nature and amplitude of cyclic electric fields on crack propagation. Most
piezoelectric leadzirconium titanates (PZTs) are used under AC fields, where the
combined mechanical and electrical loading can cause component failure. Finite
element models developed in the current project will be extended to describe the
electromechanical response of PZT under a variety of boundary conditions. In
addition, a novel technique of laser Raman spectroscopy (LRS) will be applied to
directly measure the distribution of crack tip stresses produced by applied
electric fields. The results will be compared with stresses calculated using FEA
models. The proposed research objectives will be accomplished by performing in
situ crack propagation studies in PZT ceramics under static (DC) and cyclic (AC)
electric fields, directly measuring electricallygenerated crack tip stresses in
situ using LRS, developing a finite element model to describe the effect of
applied electric field on crack propagation, and studying the influence of
microstructure and composition on the induced phase transformations in PZT
ceramics. %%% These studies will lead to a new and fundamental understanding of
the electromechanical response of piezoelectric materials under combined
electric and mechanical loads. A new techniques using LRS for directly measuring
crack tip stresses will be demonstrated along with the possibilities of induced
phase transformation in the strontium-doped PZT system. ***