* 9522929
* Pressurized Underfill Encapsulation of Flip Chip on Board
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Cornelius Hieber, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/1997
* USD 200,000.00

9522929 Wang Flip Chip of Board (FCOB) technology generally requires
encapsulation of the solder joints to reduce the loads on such joints during
thermal excursions. At present the encapsulation process constitutes the primary
obstacle to widespeard acceptance and implementation of FCOB technology because
of the long process times involved, and because of the subsequent lack of
repairability. Underfill process times are long because current practice
involves dispensing a filled epoxy resin along the edges of the chip and relying
on capillary flow (i.e. a surface-tension-driven effect) to fill the space
between chip and substrate. Because of the small driving force, this is
unavoidably slow, requiring anywhere from one to ten minutes to underfill a
typical chip. This is clearly unacceptable as an in-line process in mass-
production. In this project an alternative encapsulation process with a
significantly shorter duration on the order of seconds, rather than minutes will
be explored. This will involve using positive pressure as a driving force in
some kind of miniaturized transfer-molding process. The project will also
include characterization of encapsulant properties (such as rheology and curing
kinetics) as well as process modeling. Such property characterization and
modeling can be used to optimize the process. Current underfill materials
require cure times on the order of hours (this long cure time is due to the long
filling time), thus requiring that the process be done in a batch mode, and do
not allow for subsequent removal for repair if chip or board proves to be
defective. However, the new process to be developed will allow for considerably
more flexibility in materials selection. With the possibility of replacing
current epoxy-based thermoset encapsulants with faster-curing thermosets or even
with a thermoplastic polymer. The latter would allow repairability of the board,
when required. Close collaboration with industry ensures that this research is
not only relevant to the electronics manufacturing sector but also that if
successful, it will have the necessary market pull for bringing the technology
into commercialization. The flip-chip market is estimated at only 5% of the
total semi conductor chip sector with the most applications in the automotive
industry (for example sensors for air bags and sensors for electronic fuel
injectors). Successful completion of this research has the potential to drive
down the manufacturing cost and enable repairability option in the flip chip
allowing for far wider applications into the computer and telecommunications
industries.