* 9522828
* Dissertation Research:  Zooarchaeology and Taphonomy of Late Archaic Hunter-Gatherers in New York
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1997
* Robert Blumenschine, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 4,568.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Blumenschine, Mr. T. Cregg Madrigal will
collect data for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct laboratory analysis
of faunal remains from two Late Archaic sites which are located in New York
State and date to approximately four thousand years ago. One site, Lamoka Lake,
located in Schuyler County was the subject of extensive excavation in the 1920s
and again in the 1980s. It has yielded thousands of animal bones as well as
other cultural materials. Excavation at the second site, Cole Quarry, in
Livingston County, uncovered over 9000 bones. Mr. Madrigal will conduct an
extensive analysis of both collections. He will identify bones to taxon and
element to determine the diversity, richness, relative abundance and skeletal-
part representation of species present. He will also examine cut marks on bones
to determine how they were butchered and the degree of alteration due to post
depositional disturbance. Mortality profiles of deer with be constructed to
determine hunting techniques and season of death. Analysis of other species,
such as migratory birds, will also provide information on the season of site
occupation. Mr. Madrigal, together with many anthropologists, is interested in
the process which leads to the development of complex societies. The question is
why and how do nomadic hunting and gathering peoples gradually settle down,
aggregate into large groups, and develop hierarchical social systems. It is this
process which leads to societies we observe in the world today. The Late Archaic
marks a very early stage in this story and through analysis of faunal remains
Mr. Madrigal hopes to gain insight into how this process starts. He should be
able to determine the degree of sedentarization and the extent to which social
differentiation occurred. This research will provide data of interest to many
archaeologists. It will shed new light on how social complexity develops and
assist in the training of a promising young scientist.