* 9522537
* CISE Educational Infrastructure:  Distributed Processing    Across the Undergraduate Computer Science Curriculum
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Carol Tretkoff, CUNY Brooklyn College
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 06/30/1999
* USD 465,649.00

9522537 Arnow This project incorporates advances in distributed processing
research into the entire undergraduate computer science (CS) curriculum,
starting from CS 1. This involves constructing a vertical integration of this
new programming methodology. As a result, (1) every student in CS will be
acquainted with distributed processing; (2) students will have time to absorb
key ideas introduced in elementary courses and these ideas will be reinforced in
advanced courses; (3) the theory and techniques of distributed computing can be
presented as the students' readiness permits and as appropriate applications are
encountered in the curriculum. At the outset, short modules addressing
distributed computing issues will be incorporated into the two beginning
programming courses. Subsequently, additional modules will be included in the
discrete mathematics course, the shell programming course, and the operating
systems course. Advanced courses will integrate distributed computing as part of
the student's standard CS toolkit. Special topics courses, oriented towards
challenging applications, will be revised to exploit the students' training. In
the third year of this effort, a faculty development workshop for CS faculty
from around the country will be organized in order to disseminate the results of
this effort. ***