* 9522123
* Actions for the Mathematical Sciences:  Adapting to the     Changed Environment
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1995,03/31/1997
* John Tucker, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 03/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

Actions for the Mathematical Sciences: Adapting to the Changed Environment
Project Abstract The Board on Mathematical Sciences will convene a two-day forum
of roughly 40 participants to explore emerging opportunities for mathematicians
to have impact on science and technology as well as indicate new directions for
both pure and applied mathematical research. With input by representatives from
outside the mathematical sciences community, it will examine what steps
mathematics should take to build upon existing connections with such areas as
materials science, the biological sciences, and medical science, and determine
what actions the community should take in response to the changed environment to
change the way mathematical research is pursued in the United States. A summary
report of the forum that details specific action guidelines will be generated
and rapidly transmitted to the mathematical sciences research community to
stimulate unified and coordinated action in beneficial directions that respond
to the new imperatives facing the community and the nation. This document will
be primarily directed toward the mathematical sciences community, and will
particularly target the sizeable part of the research community that does not
yet fully appreciate how pervasive and far-reaching are the changes underway. It
will also provide information on resources, and spotlight what actions are
needed and how to commence them. The last 6 months of the 15 month project will
be devoted to dissemination efforts, including presentations at professional
meetings, having articles describing the actions published in flagship news
journals for the profession, and making the summary report available
electronically on the Internet.