* 9522612
* Implicity Restarted GMRES and Arnoldi Methods               for Nonsymmetric Systems of Equations
* CSE,CCF
* 12/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Ronald Morgan, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 06/30/1999
* USD 56,189.00

Morgan 9522612 In this project, improvements of the restarted GMRES method for
solving large nonsymmetric systems of linear equations will be investigated. The
goal is to develop a method that is competitive with short recurrence Lanczos
methods such as QMR, but maintains the desirable properties of GMRES. These
properties include extraction of the minimum residual solution from the
subspace, generally steady convergence, and numerical stability. It is also
desired to not significantly raise cost per iteration and storage requirements.
The convergence of GMRES can be improved by including approximate eigenvectors
in the subspace. Once these eigenvalues are essentially deflated from the
spectrum of the matrix, removing even just a few small eigenvalues from the
spectrum can significantly improve the convergence. In this project a new and
efficient way of including eigenvectors is proposed. Sorensen's implicit-QR
Arnoldi method for eigenvalues is combined with an interior eigenvalue version
of Arnoldi. The surprising result is that the approximate eigenvectors become
part of a new Krylov subspace. This Krylov subspace can be used with GMRES. The
expense per iteration is even less than that of regular GMRES for the case where
matrix-vector products are expensive, and the number of iterations needed is
sometimes greatly reduced. The resulting implicitly restarted GMRES method will
be studied and compared with other methods. ***