* 9522930
* Advanced Communications Technology in Robotics and Flexible Manufacturing Cells
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Delbert Tesar, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 01/31/1999
* USD 60,000.00

IRI-9522930 Tesar, Delbert University of Texas-Austin $60,000- 24 mos CONACyT:
Advanced Communication Technology in Robotics and Flexible Manufacturing Cells
This is the first year of a two-year standard award. The field of manufacturing
is on the verge of a revolution in the level of intelligence which will become
possible and necessary during the next decade. This award under the NSF/CONACyT
Initiative funds a collaboration between robotics investigators at the
University of Texas at Austin and researchers at the Instituto Tecnologico y de
Estudios Superiores de Monterrey (ITESM) laboratories at Cuernavaca and Mexico
City to develop foundation technologies needed for high performance,
reconfigurable, and fault tolerant robots and manufacturing cells for the next
generation production facilities. The laboratory at Austin will concentrate on
the foundation technologies for highly reliable, fault tolerant, and
reconfigurable communications within production systems. This includes the
creation of the best software structure and standardized reconfigurable
interfaces at all connections in the system. The appropriate level of
granularity, multiplexing, protocols, etc. will be developed to provide
configuration management schemes to most rapidly and reliably avoid a fault in
the data transfer including buffers to allow for transition time without loss of
control information. The ITESM labs at Mexico City and Cuernavaca will focus on
hardware and operational software for the manufacturing cells.