* 9522032
* U.S.-Germany Program:  Dissertation Research in Biochemistry using Pulse Radiolysis
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1995
* Valerian Kagan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 12/31/1995
* USD 4,150.00

This award supports a research visit to Germany by Radoslov Goldman, a doctoral
degree student of Professor Valerian Kagan at the University of Pittsburgh. Mr.
Goldman's dissertation research in biochemistry will be enhanced by the
opportunity to work for ten weeks in the laboratory of Professor Wolf Bors of
the Institute for Radiation Biology at the Research Center for Environment and
Health in Oberschleissheim, Germany. The general subject of his research is the
mechanism of reactions of low energy radicals with proteins. In particular, he
is interested in the catalytic reactions of phenoxyl radicals with low molecular
weight and protein sulfhydryl groups, which include processes in RNA cleavage.
Dr. Bors is an expert in pulse radiolytic studies of reaction rates and his
recently developed technique for studying phenoxyl-radical reactions in aqueous
solutions will be invaluable to Mr. Goldman's dissertation research. In return,
Dr. Bors will benefit from the extension of his technique to proteins and
peptides. The electronic structure of organic sulfur compounds determines their
abilities as antioxidants and their roles in catalysis and enzymes. This
research will add to the knowledge of the factors which actually control the
rates of these processes, through experiments which link known structural
characteristics to rates of oxidation.