* 9522969
* U.S.-Russian Workshop on Sustainable Development in Russia  Using Environment and Health Databanks
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Murray Feshbach, Legacy International
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Turczak
* 12/31/1995
* USD 44,815.00

9522969 Kaufman This grant supports a two-day Joint US-Russia Workshop on
"Planning for Sustainable Development in Russia: Using Environment and Health
Databanks," to be held in the Washington, DC, area in the last week of April,
1995, which is to be organized by Drs. Ira Kaufman, Greg Guroff, and Murray
Feshbach, under the aegis of Legacy International of Alexandria, VA, the Center
for Post-Soviet Studies, and the Center for Russian Environment Policy. To
assess Russia's influence on global economic change requires researchers and
policymakers to have greater access to the Russian Federation's vast scientific
resources and information. Likewise, government agencies, international
organizations, corporations, and Russian citizens require the appropriate data
to address the current environment and health crisis, as well as the impact of
future development. The recent completion of the first "Environment and Health
Atlas of Russia" is a first step to presenting the wealth of Russian data. To
integrate the atlas and other information with global change initiatives, a
repository for Russian environment and health data sets needs to be
standardized, digitalized, updated, and translated to a format for policy
makers. The goal is to outline a strategy for establishing a Russian electronic
databank for environment and health. The workshop will fulfill this goal by (1)
examining existing Russian data initiatives and assess future data needs for
environment and health in Russia; (2) presenting several options for applying
information technology to meet Russian data needs; (3) recommending the
infrastructure and standards necessary for the proposed databank; and (4)
generating new proposal ideas to address global change issues using current
data. Delegations from government, private sector, non- government
organizations, and universities from the U.S. and Russia will participate. The
group will address the possibilities and difficulties to be encountered in
creati ng a Russian databank, as well as integration of the databank with
relevant international programs. Participants will recommend follow-up databank
proposals, the submission of which, workshop organizers will coordinate. This
project in geography and regional science fulfills the program objective of
advancing scientific knowledge by enabling leading experts in Russia and the
United States to combine complementary talents and pool resources in areas of
strong mutual interest and competence. ***