* 9522564
* GOALI:  Transition Control
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Yaman Arkun, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/2000
* USD 162,156.00

Arkun - Georgia Tech - 9522564 Nowadays chemical plants use the same equipment
to produce a wider variety of products. For higher productivity and better
utilization of resources, the equipment must be easily adaptable to different
operating regimes resulting from changes in raw materials, product
specifications, market demands, different energy sources and other external
disturbances. Production of undesired materials, loss of product quality and
unsafe operation are attributed to control problems encountered during long
periods of plant transitions between different regimes. The objective of this
research program is to investigate the fundamental issues related to the design
and implementation of transition control systems. The PI plans to develop and
test new theoretical approaches, and transfer the theory into useful industrial
practice. His approach stems from a unified treatment of certain modeling,
monitoring, control and plant-wide optimization issues underlying the transition
control problem. It is often difficult to develop a single first principles
model which describes the plant dynamics over all the operating conditions;
neither is it practical to identify such a model from input-output data.
Therefore, quantitative tools are first proposed to partition the plant
operating space into local model descriptions that are validated at the
individual regimes. Next these models are combined into a global model in order
to explain the plant behavior in transition regions as well. Different global
modeling techniques are planned, including model matching, output weighting,
linear parameter varying systems (LPV) and neural nets with self-organized
learning. Based on recent model validation results, a method is given to
quantify the uncertainty associated with these global models. The transition
controllers will be designed based on the global model and have the following
properties: (1) they are robust control laws which guarantee a certain level of
performance during transiti ons, and (2) they reduce to local regulatory
controllers, when the plant operates in its isolated regimes. For design
purposes different approaches will be studied including robust scheduling and
predictive control using LPV or self-organized neural net models. The
implementation of transition controllers within the context of plant-wide
control will be tackled. This will include interfacing with the lower level
feedback loops (PIDs) and coordination with the higher level optimization task
where scheduling of transition objectives is performed. During the course of
this research the PI will collaborate with the research group at DuPont (this is
a GOALI project). It is anticipated that the control methodology will help
alleviate the generic transition problems encountered in industrial processes
and improve plant operations.