* 9522004
* Atmospheric Trace Element Inputs to Surface Ocean Waters I: Lead Isotope Tracers in the Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1999
* Thomas Church, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 10/31/1999
* USD 435,856.00

9522004 Church Pb isotopes will be used as tracers to quantify the atmospheric
inputs to and biogeochemical processes in the surface waters of the Sargasso Sea
off Bermuda, and data will be gathered in the South Atlantic as part of a
proposed third IOC trace element cruise during the same period. This is a
coordinated effort between the University of Delaware Principal Investigators
and other institutions. Included are those currently active in studies of the
Bermuda atmosphere as part of the AEROCE program in its third phase with support
from NSF-ATM, and other scientists investigating the major nutrient cycles,
productivity, and associated carbon based flux (JGOFS-BATS and associated
activities) in the waters off Bermuda under NSF-OCE support. Existing archived
samples of precipitation and oceanic flux particles will be utilized first if
they satisfy clean collection criteria. The proposed study will focus on the
element Pb and its isotope tracers which include stable Pb (204,206,207,208),
and the radioactive nuclide 210Pb with the associated parent/daughter pairs
which are part of the series 226 Ra, 222Rn, 210Bi, and 210Po. Lead and its
isotopes will be measured in individual and integrated atmospheric samples to be
taken at the AEROCE Bermuda site, and on board several cruises off Bermuda. The
radioactive lead (210Pb) and its disequilibrium with the daughters 210Bi and
210Po will reveal of atmospheric and surface ocean scavenging. The half lives of
these isotopes (5 and 138 days respectively) should be commensurate with
processes such as aqueous scavenging of particle reactive elements (such as Bi),
and bio-active elements (such as Po). Through modeling of dissolved 210 Po
profiles in the surface mixed layer down to the thermocline, eddy diffusion co-
efficients in the surface waters will be determined and subsequently used to
place constraints on new production rates. Generally, lead isotope modeling will
constrain vertical and horizontal contribution s to the surface waters, and
calibrate the mixing and particle scavenging of Pb.