* 9522277
* Nonlinear Dynamics and Control of Complex Patterns in       Distributed Chemical Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Hsueh-Chia Chang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2000
* USD 187,256.00

Abstract - Chang - 9522277 Coherent Structures, like fronts and pulses drive the
dynamics in reactor instabilities and transients, fast-igniting catalytic
converters, reactive chromatographs and electrophoresis devices, ceramic
synthesis, etc. The PI has established empirically that such structure dynamics
are low-dimensional and hence readily controllable and has developed the
theoretical tools and computer software to capture the nonlinear dynamics and
implement nonlinear feedback control, typically with a video sensor. The PI
plans to use his theory to classify and decipher all coherent-structure dynamics
involving fronts, pulses, spiral waves, etc. in a general framework. Guided by
the theory, an scheme will be developed to estimate the spectra of thermal
fronts and concentration pulses from IR thermal and video imaging. The scheme
will use multi-resolution windowed wavelets to compress the pixel data during
estimation and feedback control. This scheme will then will be used to study and
control several coherent-structure driven dynamics with important potential
applications. Thermal flickering control with multiple hot spots and thermal
fronts will be attempted. A feedback control scheme will be developed to
stabilize thermal fronts in a catalytic converter during transient driving
conditions. Interfacial waves on a wetted- wall column will be structured
through feedback control to maximize heat/mass transfer in pollutant scrubbing
processes. A video-feedback control experiment will be designed to control the
speed, width and integrity of a concentration pulse in a miniature reactive
chromatograph to enhance detectability and separation.