* 9522054
* Porous Polysilicon Light Emitters for Monolithically-       Integrated Thin Film Electroluminescent Display Panels
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Nader Kalkhoran, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 01/31/2000
* USD 295,500.00

9522054 Kalkoran This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project
explores a novel thin-film electroluminescent (TFEL) display technology based on
porous polysilicon. Phase I resulted in the first-ever electrically induced
visible emission from thin films of porous silicon on a glass substrate, thus
showing the feasibility of silicon-based displays. Phase II will study the
trade-offs among process parameters as a foundation for display fabrication. An
improved solid-state metal contact will be sought which conforms with porous
silicon surfaces for high-efficiency light emitting diodes (LEDs). In situ
electroplating will be used to deposit metal contacts on porous silicon in the
electrolyte originally used to form the material. In this way an ohmic contact
can be made to the entire nanostructred layer. Because the sample is not exposed
to air prior to metallization, an insulating oxide layer at the interface is
avoided. Finally, red, green, or blue polysilicon LEDs with high efficiency will
be fabricated. A dot matrix alphanumeric display will be tested by integrating a
5x7 array of these devices. Potential commercial applications of this new
technology for all-silicon processing of flat panel displays will be found in
high volume manufacture of high definition home television, computer screens,
and medical video imagers.