* 9522734
* Bridge Nondestructive Testing Using Optical Fibers
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1999
* Rola Idriss, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 11/30/1999
* USD 249,843.00

9522734 Idriss Cracking is among the most important parameters that adversely
influences the structural design and durability of concrete elements. More
advanced nondestructive testing methodologies are needed for applications to
bridge structures. Proper testing methodologies for early detection of cracks
are either non- existence or not readily applicable to large concrete bridge
systems. Research is needed for the development of embedded sensors for real-
time detection, and measurement of displacements associated with crack openings
and propagations. The research will examine the feasibility of using a system of
optical fiber sensors for integration in an experimental full scale bridge
structure. The optical fiber sensing system will be employed in detection of
cracks and measurement of displacements associated with their progression.
Research studies will be performed through a series of research and development
activities, addressing optimization with respect to three important issues,
namely, practicality, sensitivity of measurements, and capability in
simultaneous detection of cracks emanating from different locations in the
structure. Simultaneous measurement of displacements, at several location, will
be achieved in a time domain, through interrogation of reflected optical pulses.
The study will involve a series of experiments at small, as well as full scale
implementation in a bridge structure. The full scale structure will be a 40 ft
simple span, reinforced concrete slab, steel girder bridge. Conventional
displacement measuring devices, such as strain gauges, and LVDT's will be
employed in the examining the data acquired from embedded optical fibers. ***