* 9522915
* Giant Magnetoresistance of the Two Dimensional Electron Gas
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Shou-Cheng Zhang, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/1998
* USD 143,000.00

9522915 Zhang This project is part of the Grant Opportunities for Academic
Liaison with Industry (GOALI) initiative at NSF. The project is an industry-
university collaboration between Stanford University and IBM Almaden research
center, especially Dr. Barbara Jones. The investigators are using both analytic
calculations and extensive numerical simulations to understand giant
magnetoresistence of the two- dimensional electron gas. The project also
includes interaction with the experimental colleagues at both IBM (such as Dr.
Stuart Parkin) and Stanford (such as Prof. Charlie Marcus), and interaction with
the IBM development and manufacturing divisions in San Jose to understand long
term issues and share developments. The project represents a synergy between
research in magnetism, semiconductors, and mesoscopic physics. Successful
completion could eventually benefit the computer industry by integrating
magnetic recording with the semiconductor devises. It will also educate and
train a new generation of young physicists with both the capability of pure
research and the experience of industrial development. %%% This project is part
of the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) initiative
at NSF. The project is an industry-university collaboration between Stanford
University and IBM Almaden research center, especially Dr. Barbara Jones. The
investigators are using both analytic calculations and extensive numerical
simulations to understand dramatic changes in semiconducting interfaces due to
the application of an external magnetic field. The project also includes
interaction with the experimental colleagues at both IBM (such as Dr. Stuart
Parkin) and Stanford (such as Prof. Charlie Marcus), and interaction with the
IBM development and manufacturing divisions in San Jose to understand long term
issues and share developments. The project represents a synergy between research
in magnetism, semiconductors, and mesoscopic physics. Su ccessful completion
could eventually benefit the computer industry by integrating magnetic recording
with the semiconductor devises. It will also educate and train a new generation
of young physicists with both the capability of pure research and the experience
of industrial development. ***