* 9522251
* Fullerene Nano-Probes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Richard Smalley, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 744,728.00

9522251 Smalley This project addresses one of the grand challenges of
nanotechnology: learning how to image and manipulate individual objects on the
nanometer scale. Using carbon networks in the form of fullerene nanotubes and
wires, this project aims to develop a new generation of probes which connect the
macroscopic to the nanoscopic world with chemically specific, atomic precision.
Whereas x-ray diffraction and related techniques have long been the basis of our
detailed understanding of objects on this atomic length scale, they only work
with large numbers of identical copies of the structure arranged in regular
crystal lattices. Since the invention and early applications of scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM) it has become increasingly clear that it is possible,
at least in principle, to break loose from this requirement of needing a
crystalline array. It should be possible to image, probe and manipulate
individual structures, one by one, on the nanometer scale. Extensions of the
idea of STM to other proximate probes such as atomic force microscopy (AFM), and
magnetic force microscopy (MFM) have therefore become a major scientific
endeavor worldwide. The common feature of all these methods is that they rely on
a direct, physical connection between the macroscopic and nanoscopic realms in
the form of a tiny "tip" which is scanned with sub-angstrom precision by
piezoelectric devices. Most bulk materials are not chemically stable when
elongated into probes of width less than 10 nanometers. However, carbon in the
form of a graphine sheet is chemically stable in the form of fullerene balls and
tubes even when these are less that 1 nm in diameter. This project is aimed at
the general development of fullerne tubes as the tips of proximate probes and
manipulators. Fullerene nanotubes will be produced both by currently known
techniques using carbon arcs and/or catalytic particles and by new methods
presently under development. These involve production o f single- and multi-
walled nanotubes by laser vaporization of carbon/metal catalyst composite
targets in a quartz tube furnace, and controlled growth of mounted "seed
crystal" nanotubes in high electric fields. Mounting techniques will be
developed to attach individual nanotubes to sharpened platinum electrodes with
good electrical contact and reliable mechanical, chemical stability. Electrical
and mechanical properties of the individually mounted nanotubes will be
measured, including their ability to serve as efficient antennas at optical
frequencies and their Q value when used as a nanoscopic cantilever. ***