* 9522671
* Dissertation Research: Language Socialization and Language  Maintenance in a Hasidic Community
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Bambi Schieffelin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 12/31/1996
* USD 5,500.00

Despite predictions after World War II that Yiddish would disappear, Yiddish
has thrived alongside English and Hebrew in many New York Hasidic communities,
including the Bobover Hasidim of Boro Park, Brooklyn. Yiddish is critical to
Bobover ethnic identity. The cultural meanings of Yiddish, however, are
established in contrast to patterns of English use. These patterns of language
choice - Yiddish and English - are gendered. In this project I use the language
socialization research paradigm to investigate activities through which young
children become competent members of a groups whose identity is enacted through
gendered language practices and other self and community defining activities. My
research will be based on the analysis of audiotaped natural speech between
caregivers and four focal children in contexts of home and school as well as
analysis of English and Yiddish children's literature published by the
community. To date, there has been no research which focuses on Hasidic children
and multilingual acquisition and practices. The Bobover provide a particularly
illuminating case study for language socialization because language maintenance
(especially Yiddish) and the reproduction of social identity are so tightly
linked in this community. This study will be relevant more broadly for
understandings of gender and religious fundamentalism, processes of social
reproduction and change, as well as the relationship between Jewish ethnic
identities and languages.