* 9522629
* Construction Decision Support System for Delay Analysis
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Janet Yates, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 04/30/1996
* USD 59,032.00

9522629 Yates The Construction Decision Support System for Delay Analysis (DAS -
Delay Analysis System) for use on personal computers was developed to integrate
existing project control systems and scheduling programs by adding the
capability of determining possible causes for delays and suggesting alternative
courses of action to prevent further delays. The DAS was designed to demonstrate
the importance of providing an interactive environment for knowledge acquisition
to improve project controls and analysis processes. The development of the
interactive system enhances information processing and decision- making
capabilities. The ability to monitor the progress of a project, and to determine
possible causes of delays and suggest corrective actions with the aid of a
personal computer provides consistent evaluation of project performance. The
objective of the second phase of the DAS research is to include additional
knowledge bases related to contract and project parameters such as different
types of projects, different locations of projects, and different types of firms
to increase its usefulness to the diverse segments of the construction industry.
The data collected will be analyzed using hypothesis testing to determine
whether there are correlations between the different parameters and types of
delays. The results of this analysis will be used to refine the DA system
submodels. Additional research objectives include conducting research in the
area of international delays, including cultural factors, and creating new
submodels that will contain knowledge on delays related to international
construction. Research will also be conducted in to resolution upon completion
of construction projects. ***