* 9522932
* Euler Products and Eisenstein Series on Symplectic and      Metaplectic Groups, May 19-24, 1996 at Texas Christian      University
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Robert Doran, Texas Christian University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1996
* USD 24,101.00

9522932 Doran To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the
National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional
Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference
features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of
important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical
sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon
these lectures, which is normally published by the American Mathematical Society
or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the
American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Certain features differentiate these conferences from typical research
conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and timely area of
research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation
through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and
timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience. This project will
support an NSF-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on
Euler Products and Eisenstein Series on Symplectic and Metaplectic Groups to be
held May 19-24, 1996 at Texas Christian University. Professor Goro Shimura of
Princeton University will be the principal lecturer.