* 9522195
* Scanned Probe Lithography for Nano Structures
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1995,01/31/1999
* Calvin Quate, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 01/31/1999
* USD 330,000.00

9522195 Quate The proposal by Prof. Quate addresses a fundamental issue in
nanoscience and engineering, namely, the fabrication of nanostructure electronic
devices with a novel anomic-force-microscopy (AFM)-based nanolithographic
technique. The proposal uses the concept of 'direct writing' with AFM tips with
an innovative approach to building sub 0.1 pm devices and , thereby, open the
door to exciting new devices research in the next century. Parenthetically, if
we allow the SIA roadmap, then device dimensions are predicted for 700 nm c
hannel lengths by the year 2010 and the proposal by Quite leads in this
direction. The problem of manufacturing through is addressed with the use of
MEMS technology to form an array of parallel proximal silicon probes (i.e. AFM
tips on cantilever beams) which are controlled by integrated piezoelectric ZnO
actuators on a piezoresisitive cantilever. The high electric field which is
produced by the proximity of the AFM probe tip up to the semiconductor surface
causes bound protons to be released under the tip with subsequent field-enhanced
oxidation. This subsequently serves as an etchant mask to transfer a
nanolithograph pattern into the underlying semiconductor. This work is highly
revolutionary and visionary. The basic element of and adaptively controlled
'nanowriter' is the component for this instrument research and should be well
understood before moving to a large matrix array of similar elements. ***