* 9522801
* Processing Fundamentals and Process Modification for Rapid  Liquid Molding of High-Performance Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Ranga Pitchumani, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Chen
* 09/30/2000
* USD 234,460.00

9522801 Pitchumani Liquid molding with processes like resin transfer molding, is
a way to fabricate relatively high volumes of complex, high performance
composite products at reasonable costs. A key to the success of liquid molding
is uniform and complete filling of a closed and vented mold with resin. Because
the inside of the mold is a labyrinth of composite preforms and inserts, the
flow permeability is difficult to model and predict. This project uses an
analytical and experimental investigation of fractals as a way to describe pore
structure. This allows calculation of the permeability inside the mold. With
fratal models for the tortuous length and capillary size, the permeability can
be determined using Darcy's law so the flow in the closed mold can be calculated
using existing numerical codes. An experimental setup to verify this approach
uses a three-part Plexiglas mold, and a video and image processing system to
document the flow pattern and determine the fractal dimensions of the composite
mat. Passing a current through conductive fibers that are part of the preform is
a process innovation that will be investigated to improve the uniformity of
curing. The impact of this research will be improvements in the design of
venting systems and uniform filling in liquid composite molding processes,
leading to lower costs and more opportunities for use of these high performance
materials. ***