* 9522035
* High-Power, Phase-Locked Single-Frequency Arrays of Diode   Lasers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Dan Botez, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tien-Pei Lee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 215,500.00

9522035 Botez Phase-locked arrays of antiguided diode lasers (so called ROW
arrays) have demonstrated 1-1.5W of diffraction-limited power, the highest
coherent powers for all-monolithic oscillators. However, the devices do not have
a single-frequency output, which prevents their use in many applications.
Furthermore, all the present time, their number of elements is limited to 20
,which in turn limits the amount of coherent power. It is proposed here to: 1)
develop ROW arrays with a distributed feedback (DFB) built-in structure for
longitudinal-mode control; and 2) implement novel concepts for increasing the
number of array elements from 20 to 40-80, while maintaining a single spatial
mode. For ROW-DFB arrays the proposed material system is InGaAs/InGaP/GaAs, an
A1-free structure that assures defect-free regrowths, high efficiency,
reliability, and low linewidth enhancement factor. As a result 20-element ROW-
DFB devices are expected to provide single-frequency, diffraction-limited-beam
operation to 1W with linewidths of = 50kHz. In order to increase the intermodel
discrimination, and thus allow for single-spatial mode array operation of
devices with more than 20 elements, two novel concepts are proposed: 1)
array-(lateral)-mode selection via selective feedback from a buried diffraction
grating, and 2) laterally restricted reflector (LRR). Both concepts rely on the
single-frequency nature of ROW-DFB devices. High-order array modes are
discriminated against by preferential feedback. The devices will be made by
using metalorganic chemical vapor deposition for crystal growth; e-beam and/or
X-ray lithography and chemical etching for grating fabrications; and e-beam
lithography and preferential etching for array pattern generation. Theoretical
analysis and design will be performed employing the matrix formulation for
antiquated arrays, the beam propagation method, and the Block-function formalism
for 1-D and 2-D finite periodic structures. ROW-DFB devices are in effect 2-D
pho tonic lattices. Their will shed new light on how such lasers work, and will
spur interest in other classes of devices based on photonic lattices. The
realization of watt-range, single-frequency, diffraction-limited-beam stable
sources will have significant impact on parallel optical-signal processing, the
generation of blue light via harmonic conversion, the generation of mid-IR
coherent light for environmental monitoring, and free-space optical
communications. This research program is strongly coupled to collaborative with
optoelectronic research and development groups at various major US companies and
laboratories, including AT&amp;T Bell Labs, Uniphase, New Focus, TRW, and David
Sarnoff Research Center. A key feature of the program is the training of
graduate and undergraduate students in this significant area of optoelectronic
device research. ***