* 9522815
* Control of High-Speed Machining Systems Using Direct Spindle and Feed Drives
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Tsu-Chin Tsao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 08/31/2000
* USD 298,859.00

9522815 Tsao Recent advances in tool materials and spindle technology have the
potential to dramatically increase material removal rates. To achieve this
requires high dynamic rigidity and precise motion and speed control to maintain
accuracy. Direct drive technology eliminates the gear reduction between servo
and the tool or spindle motion. Potentially this means high performance, but it
also eliminates the means by which the servo and the final motion can be
decoupled. This means that to achieve the potential of direct drives in
machining systems, the drive dynamics have to be included in the dynamic model
of the system. This research will complete the theoretical design of an inner
loop robust feedback control, outer loop repetitive control and control tracking
control, and optimal feedforward/preview control. Dynamic mechanistic models of
the machining process represent the loads presented to a direct drive machining
system during operation. Two experiments to test these direct drive control
concepts are part of the research: two axes high feed rate milling, and variable
spindle speed machining for chatter suppression. These results will provide
fundamental understanding of the dynamics and control of direct drive machining
that can be used to design the next generation of high performance direct drive
machining systems. ***