* 9522232
* ChemMatCARS:  A Synchrotron Resource for Chemistry and      Materials Research at the Advanced Photon Source
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Stuart Rice, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 04/30/2001
* USD 6,397,707.00

This project, supported in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences by the Divisions of Chemistry and Materials Research and by the Office
of Multidisciplinary Activities, and co-supported by the U.S. Department of
Energy Office of Basic Energy Sciences, enables the Consortium for Advanced
Radiation Sources (CARS) to design, build, and operate an allocated sector
dedicated primarily to structural and condensed matter chemistry and materials
research at the Advanced Photon Source (APS) synchrotron X-ray facility. During
the tenure of this forty- eight month continuing grant, Drs. Stuart Rice and
James Viccaro of the University of Chicago, Benjamin Chu of the State University
of New York at Stony Brook, Philip Coppens of the State University of New York
at Buffalo, Peter Pershan of Harvard University, and Mark Schlossman of the
University of Illinois at Chicago will lead a team of experts to instrument the
insertion device beamline at Sector 18 at the APS that will enable research in
three areas: (1) surface and interfacial properties in soft condensed matter,
molecular liquids, and liquid metals; (2) static and time-dependent interfacial
and bulk properties of novel polymers and composites, including properties of
supramolecular and mesoscopic structures; and (3) chemical crystallography, with
emphasis on anomalous scattering, time resolution, and high spatial and energy
dispersion. In this project, it is intended that the sector to be developed will
serve as the primary access to the APS for scientists who comprise the
ChemMatCARS group of investigators within CARS, and that there will also be made
available 25% of beamtime to scientists in the chemistry and materials research
communities whose research activities would benefit from this facility.