* 9522971
* Computational Techniques for Mapping Design Features to     Machining Features:  Machining Algebra and Dimensioning     and Tolerancing Mapping
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Jami Shah, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/1999
* USD 251,495.00

9522971 Shah This project investigates several computational techniques for
transferring product geometry data from design to manufacturing without human
intervention. The project is divided into two parts. The first component of the
project is the development of machining algebra for geometric representation of
tool-workpiece interaction for all machining processes. This provides the
mathematical basis for determining the machining process that produces each
machining feature on a given part. The second component of the project is a
computational model for mapping dimensions and tolerances (D&amp;T) while
preserving the design intent. The key elements of the model are geometric
building blocks, directed geometric constraints, and degree of freedom analysis
for validation. Methods for redistributing the designers D&amp;T between
machining features will also be developed. This project addresses a critical
area of industry need, viz., design and manufacturing integration. The lack of
this integration results in longer development times because manufacturing
planning today is a very labor-intensive activity. The machining algebra has the
potential to capture the fundamental characteristics of common machining
processes, replacing shallow heuristic rules used now, enhancing the degree to
which manufacturing can be automated. The methods proposed are generic; they are
independent of particular computer aided design (CAD) or computer aided process
planning (CAPP) systems used. Each of the computational methods can be used
independent of each other, making it attractive to incorporate them into
existing CAD/CAPP systems. This will enhance the communication between design
and manufacturing and enhance process planning productivity, thus reducing time
to market.