* 9522105
* Transport of Water and Contaminants Between Surface Water   and Groundwater Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Helena Solo-Gabriele, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 08/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9522105 Solo-Gabrriele This is a planning award the objective of which is to
determine the feasibility of the approach the investigator plans to take in
conducting research on the factors that influence the movement of chemical
contaminants from surface water systems to groundwater aquifers. The
investigator's objective is to incorporate factors that influence movement of
contaminants from surface to groundwater aquifers in development of a
mathematical model that can be used in engineering design of water supply
systems. Factors that are planned for consideration include the relative
importance of storm events that yield contaminated surface water to the duration
of the period between storm events. The proposal leading to this award was
submitted in response to NSF 93-130, Research Planning Grants and Career
Advancement Awards for Women Scientists and Engineers. An understanding of the
mechanisms by which pollutants move from surface to groundwater aquifers is
necessary in the formulation of mathematical models that can be used in the
engineering design of water supply systems. Results of this project are expected
to guide the investigator in development of a competitive research project that
advances our understanding over how contaminants move from presence in surface
waters to aquifers used to supply water for domestic and industrial uses.