* 9522733
* Research Planning Grant:  The Investigation of a Concurrent Approach to Design of Facility Layout and Automated         Guided Vechicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Fataneh Taghaboni-Dutta, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 11/30/1997
* USD 27,981.00

9522733 Taghaboni-Dutta This is a research planning grant aimed at integrating
decisions on the problem of facilities layout and the specification of guide
path configuration for automated guided vehicle (AGV) system in a flexible
manufacturing environment. Automated guided vehicles are computer controlled
mobile material handling equipment that operate on a network of guide wire
buried in a plant floor. The size and configuration of the guide wire network is
a design problem whose solution depends on the characteristics of material flow
in the shop, the creativity of the network designer, and the design criterion
selected The ultimate objective of this research is to develop methodologies for
the concurrent specification of both the layout of a shop (i.e., the arrangement
of departments or workstations) and the flow path of automated guided vehicles.
As a prelude to the main research, the research planning grant will be used to
undertake the background work necessary to prepare a full proposal that pursues
the ultimate objective. In the main research to be pursued, the design of the
facility layout and the layout of the guidepath will be based on the
minimization of the total travel time needed to move the required volume of
material through the plant floor. Although the current focus is on AGV system,
the research experience and insight gained will be used to extend the work to
other types of material handling systems such as monorails and overhead cranes.
However, in the research planning grant phase, the research objectives are (1)
to explore similar (concurrent design) problems in other areas, and (2) to
investigate potential solution techniques. The solution techniques to be
investigated include simulated annealing and genetic algorithms. Facilities
layout and material handling are two highly interrelated subsystems in a
manufacturing system. Despite this strong relationship, very little research
that focused on their design integration have been reported. There are several
benefits that can be realized through the concurrent design of both the layout
and the material handling systems of a facility. Concurrent design of a layout
and an AGV system will lead to a more efficient material flow, less traffic
control problems, and proper accountability and location of buffers for both
idle vehicles and materials. Furthermore, not only will it guard against
locating too far apart machine stations that have high material flow volume
between them but also ensures that aisle directions for traffic flow are well
oriented. This will reduce shop floor congestion, reduce work-in-process due to
improved flow, and reduced order throughput time.