* 9522771
* Improvements of the High Voltage Transmission Electron      Microscope for Imaging of Frozen Cells and Complex          Macromolecular Bio-Assemblies
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Marek Malecki, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Lee C. Makowski
* 02/28/1999
* USD 120,481.00

In transmission electron microscopy of biological structures, there are two
phenomena that often prevent imaging at the molecular level: radiation damage
and contamination. These problems can be reduced by two approaches: protecting
the specimen and/or improving the microscope. In the first approach, significant
progress has been achieved. Firstly, a special apparatus has been developed for
rapid cryoimmobilization of a living cell during light microscopic observation
for further imaging as this cell's cryo-whole-mount. Cellular architecture is
retained at the molecular level and therefore can be referred directly to the
behavior of the living cell (Malecki 1992, Proc. EMSA 50: 566-567. Secondly, the
deep negative staining/ embedding procedure has been developed. A thick and
uniform layer of embedment supports and protects the three-dimensional structure
within the whole-mount. This electron-dense preparation is only transparent for
electrons with high energies attainable at high accelerating voltages
(Ris&Malecki 1993, J. Struct. Biol. 111:148-157). In this project, as the second
approach, the aim is to improve the microscope for work with beam-sensitive
specimens maintained at low temperatures. The high voltage transmission electron
microscope operating at the accelerating voltage lMeV is used. It is already
known that high accelerating voltage is a major factor in reducing beam damage.
Therefore, benefiting from this unique high accelerating voltage feature and on
the basis of preliminary results, four modifications are proposed: (1) addition
of an improved cryo-stage to reduce thermal drift and to damp mechanical
vibrations; (2) development of new double-blade and cylindrical cold traps to
shield the specimen; (3) replacement of diffusion pumps for the specimen chamber
and the film camera with turbomolecular pumps to obtain a cleaner vacuum, and
(4) addition of a computer and an intensified charge-coupled device camera to
pursue real-time image pro cessing at low doses, including real-time three-
dimensional imaging via the HEVEM. These new capabilities of the high voltage
transmission electron microscope will be essential to pursue three leading
projects: (a) study of the functional ultrastructure of the nucleopore complex
in nucleus/cytoplasm transport, (b) study of the role played by titin gene
expression in myofibril assembly and myoblast maturation, and (c) study of the
effects of the forced expression of myoD, myogenin, and titin genes on induced
differentiation, thus reduction of malignancy in rhabdomyosarcomas.