* 9522319
* CISE Educational Infrastructure:  Laboratories for Data     Communications and Computer Networks
* CSE,EIA
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Ten-Hwang Lai, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 12/31/1998
* USD 356,067.00

9522319 Jain A laboratory-oriented hands-on curriculum for data communications
and computer networking will be developed. This will enable students to
experiment with various communications/telecommunications and networking
concepts using a workstation, a PC, or a network of workstations. They will be
able to design new protocols, verify them using protocol engineering tools,
implement them, and visually see the impact of their actions. Data message
flows, packet losses, control/routing message flows, virtual circuit setups,
link failures, bit errors, etc. will be seen by the students at a slow (visible)
speed. Multimedia and sound effects will be used to show abnormal conditions
such as errors and losses. Various nodes of the simulated network will be
programmable to run automatically or be under manual control of students. The
manual control will allow the students to see the effect of unpredictable
actions. The major features of this project include the following: 1) Hands-on
laboratory-oriented curriculum requiring students to develop protocol modules
and experiment with their designs. 2) Integration of traditional concepts. 3)
Use of a distributed gaming/simulation environment to allow experimenting with
unpredictable behaviors. 4) Use of multimedia visual techniques to show the
effects of various actions 5) Application of protocol engineering principles to
protocol development. ***