* 9522659
* Multilayer Diamond Composites for Heat Spreaders in         Electronic Packaging
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/2001
* Jagannadham Kasichainula, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 03/31/2001
* USD 253,013.00

9522659 Kasichainula This project addresses the need for higher efficiency heat
spreaders for high frequency power devices. The research approach is to take
advantage of high thermal conductivity of diamond by growing a multilayer
composite coating to prevent the common failure of delamination of the diamond
layer from the substrate. The composite coatings are designed to consist of
diamond, aluminum nitride or silicon carbide layers. A discontinuous layer of
diamond crystallites is grown on copper or molybdenum or silicon nitride
substrates either by hot filament chemical vapor deposition or microwave plasma
chemical vapor deposition. The diamond crystallities are further embedded and
anchored to the substrate by deposition of an interposing layer of aluminum
nitride or silicon carbide layer by laser physical vapor depostion. A second and
continuous layer of diamond is deposited on the top with a smooth surface.
Metallization of diamond layer with deposition of thin layer of tatanium and a
barrier layer of tungsten or chromium to prevent interaction of titanium with
the gold-tin eutectic solder will also be carried out in-situ by laser physical
vapor deposition in the multi-target high vacuum chamber. The heat spreaders
will be soldered to the device wafer using a eutectic alloy of gold-tin or gold-
silicon that can withstand temperatures up to 500K. Selective deposition of
diamond multilayer structure to absorb heat from the devices, maximization of
contact area to increase the heat flux, and epitaxial growth of diamond and
interposing layers to reduce the thermal resistance of the interfaces in the
composite layers are the important goals of this research. The thickness of the
interposing layers, the microstructure and the epitaxial growth of the diamond
and the interposing layers will be optimized to give the highest thermal
conductivity and good adhesion. Improvement in resistance against failure from
stresses generated due to high frequency thermal cycling is the expected bene
fit of this project. In an attempt to quantify the benefit, the failure
mechanisms of the new and conventional heat spreaders will be determined by
subjecting them to laser pulse radiation or high power heat bulb radiation and
quantified by measuring the energy density at which peeling takes place. The
effective thermal conductivity perpendicular to the film will be determined by
the Flash method. Thermal cooling pattern of the power devices with the new heat
spreaders will be investigated using the infrared detection of the temperature
of different regions of the device. Modeling of the thermal conductivity and
thermal stresses in the multilayer structure will be carried out by numerical
solution of the non-linear heat equation and finite element analysis,
respectively. As electronic devices shrink in size while packing more
information per unit area and frequencies increase to speed information
processing, local heating becomes a major problem. The ability to effectively
cool these devices becomes the technical barrier to further progress. With the
advent of diamond coating technology, an opportunity arises to use its high
thermal conductivity to dissipate the heat. However, another property of
diamond, non-stickiness makes it difficult to apply as an adherent coating.
Successful solution of this problem as addressed in this project may have a
major impact on the electronics industry.