* 9522887
* Performance and Thermal Stability of Ohmic Contacts to GaN  Using Graded InxGa1-sAsyN1-y Layers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Cammy Abernathy, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9522756 Abernathy In electronics applications, narrow budget and/or high doping
levels are usually needed in order to minimize the resistances arising from
Ohmic contacts. Similar contact schemes must be developed for nitride-based p-n
junction devices. In addition to a low contact resistance it is especially
important that the contracts be thermally stable as the devices will often have
to operate in a high temperature environment. The first objective of this
proposal is to fabricate stable non-alloyed Ohmic contacts on both n-type GaN
and graded n-InxGa1-xN/n-GaN layers to determine the contact resistance as
deposited over a wide range of measurement temperatures and drive current
densities. Next, Ohmic contacts on structures containing an additional graded
layer of InASyN1-y on top of the graded InxGa1-x N will be fabricated to
determine what improvement if any these contacts show at room and elevated
temperatures. Contact resistances as a function of measurement temperature for
Ti/Pt/Au, Pd/Ge or Si sometimes deposited as a single crystal/Ti/Pt, W, and
possibly other metallization schemes will be measured using the transmission
line method (TLM) over the range of 230C to 5000C at current densities ranging
from 103 A.cm-2. For all of these structures, extensive characterization of the
metal-semiconductor interface will be carried out using Auger Electron
Spectroscopy (AES) to determine the degree of interdiffusion and transmission
electron microscopy (TEM) to evaluate the structural integrity of the
semiconductor/contact. This information will be used to determine the failure
models of these structures to provide insight into methods for improvement and a
more in depth understanding of how Ohmic contact is formed. Contacts to p-type
GaN will be investigated as well. Using non-alloyed contacts to p-GaN as a
baseline, structures containing heavily carbon doped GaASyN1-y contact layers
will be fabricated and compared. As discussed above, contact performance and
integrity will be measured over a wide range of ambient temperatures. In this
program, the University of Florida will supply the epitaxial used for Ohmic
contact information, while EPSD will provide contact processing and testing. ***