* 9522286
* Direct Dynamics for the Electrode-Electrolyte Interface
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,09/30/2000
* J. Woods Halley, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 09/30/2000
* USD 270,000.00

9522286 Halley This project constructs computational models to describe the
electrode-electrolyte interface, with particular emphasis on models of metal
electrodes and aqueous electrolytes. Using direct dynamics methods, which have
not been applied to these interfaces by others before, the electronic structure
of the constituents of the interface is recalculated at each step of the
simulation of the atomic motion. More traditional methods are qualitatively
incorrect because of the mobility of the molecules of the liquid. Preliminary
work is being improved upon in several stages, beginning with the inclusion of
nonlocal pseudopotentials and various computational improvements to study the
potential dependence of the interfacial capacitance. The next stage studies the
reconstruction of noble metal surfaces under potential control in
electrochemical environments. The third stage investigates deposition and
dissolution. Progress in the proposed directions will contribute to
understanding chemical reactions at interfaces in diverse technological
contexts, including catalysis, corrosion, electroplating, and the understanding,
development, and improvement of microelectronic processing techniques and
advanced batteries. %%% This project constructs computer models to describe the
electrode-electrolyte interface, with particular emphasis on models of metal
electrodes and aqueous electrolytes. Such interfaces are found in batteries,
fuel cells, corrosive environments, and in the electronics industry. The
investigators have developed preliminary computer codes of a type that no other
has ever applied to such systems. Other, more conventional approaches fail
because they do not do a good job describing the liquid. The project proceeds in
three states of increasing complexity, eventually addressing the change in the
structure of the metal surface, and adding material to or taking material away
from the metal surface. Progress in the proposed directions will contr ibute to
understanding chemical reactions at interfaces in diverse technological
contexts, including catalysis, corrosion, electroplating, and the understanding,
development, and improvement of microelectronic processing techniques and
advanced batteries. ***