* 9522573
* Mathematical Sciences:  Conference on Network Optimization: State of the Art
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Donald Hearn, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 12/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F % \ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l % \ % \ 4 @ ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9522573 Pardalos This grant provides funding for a conference
on network optimization, Hosted by the Center for Applied Optimization at the
University of Florida, this conference will bring together leading researchers
working on many different aspects of network optimization and on diverse
applications in fields such as engineering, computer science, operations
research, transportation, telecommunications, and manufacturing. It will also
provide a unique opportunity for cross-disciplinary exchange of research. The
conference has received endorsements from the Mathematical Programming Society
and the Institute for Operations Research and Management Science, and is being
held in cooperation with the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics.
Networks are pervasive in modern life, whether real, as in the case of highways,
pipelines, electrical systems, etc., or more abstract network models which
represent interconnections among components of a complex system. Advances in
data structures and computer technology and the development of new algorithms
have made it possible to solve classes of netwo rk optimization problems that
were formerly intractable. Among these are problems in airline scheduling,
transportation planning, satellite communications, water resource allocation,
environmental modeling and VLSI chip design. Papers presented at this conference
will represent the state-of-the-art in network modeling and solution techniques.
A selection of these papers will be placed in the public domain by the
publication of special issues of refereed scholarly journals. *** Oh +' 0 S u m
m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ' $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT
lagnese lagnese @ Wzp @ J# @ G @ ^ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 e = e ? ? j j j j j j ?
D D F F F c % T y " j j j j j D j r j j j j D 9522573 Pardalos This grant
provides funding for a conference on network optimization, Hosted by the Center
for Applied Optimization at the University of Florida, this conference will
bring together leading researchers working on many different aspects of network
optimization and on diverse applications in fields such as engineering, computer
science, operations research, transportation, telecommunications, and
manufacturing. It will also provide a unique opportunity for cross-disciplinary
exchange of research. The conference has received endorsements from the
Mathematical Programming Society and the Institute for Operations Research and
Management Science, and is being held in cooperation with the Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics. Networks are pervasive in modern life,
whether real, as in the case of highways, pipelines, electrical systems, etc.,
or more abstract network models which represent interconnections among
components of a complex system. Advances in data structures and computer
technology and the development of new algorithms have made it pos