* 9522753
* Research Planning Grant:  Integration of the Engineering    Function with Production in Semiconductor Manufacturing     and Assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1995,10/31/1996
* Diane Bailey, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9522753 Bailey Most research efforts to improve cycle time in semiconductor
manufacturing have focused on scheduling issues, and efforts to reduce time to
market have used a concurrent engineering approach to approving coordination
between engineering and fabrication personnel. This work will plan a research
effort toward integrating engineering with the other functions within a firm,
from product conception to final assembly. The planning stage is essential
because, while the need for thorough engineering integration is well-recognized,
the exact description and prioritization of the problems resulting from its
absence are not. Collaboration with industry, including visits to semiconductor
research, manufacturing, assembly, and packaging facilities, will allow
appropriate case studies for the subsequent research to be defined. The
sophistication of both semiconductor products and semiconductor manufacturing
processes make coordination and integration of semiconductor production systems
particularly difficult. The goal of this research is to define clearly the
engineering function throughout an organization, to develop a predictive model
of firm performance as a function of engineering integration, and then to
develop mechanisms for combining the resources of the engineering function with
production, assembly, and other departments in this high-technology industry.
Both cycle time and time to market could be shortened through a mechanism for
engineering integration that allows faster identification and resolution of
production problems.