* 9522567
* Dissertation Research: Learning Variation: Language         Acquisition and Socialization in St. Lucia
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Bambi Schieffelin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Paul G. Chapin
* 11/30/1996
* USD 9,000.00

St. Lucian children are confronted with a complex sociolinguistic environment in
which they receive highly variable, multilingual input. As they acquire language
they must learn to control multiple varieties or codes, including a French-
lexicon creole (Kweyol), various emergent forms of English-lexicon creole, and
"standard" English(es). In the course of developing the communicative competence
to use these different varieties in pragmatically and culturally appropriate
ways, these children acquire detailed knowledge of a great degree of both
linguistic and sociocultural variation, as well as an intimate understanding of
how these two orders of variation are interlinked in St. Lucian society. In the
process, they learn to draw on these language varieties as a rich cultural
resource for setting forth their emergent identities and negotiating various
types of social interactions. These developmental processes will be investigated
through a language socialization study. The language acquisition process will be
longitudinally documented in six children of differing social backgrounds.
Regular periodic audio recordings will be made of the children's speech
interactions with various interlocutors in a variety of naturalistic settings.
These recordings will be annotated in detail and transcribed in cooperation with
local consultants so as to place the recorded utterances in ethnographic
context. The course of language acquisition will be analyzed with regard to the
extent to which different varieties are used in each child's verbal environment,
the differing structural features of those varieties, the differences in
pragmatic salience among particular forms and variants, and the sociocultural
norms of their use. This research will yield insights into how children acquire
communicative competence in multilingual settings, and how knowledge of
linguistic variation and the social differentiation it indexes and encodes forms
an essential part of the overall cultural competenc e of persons living in
creole societies. More broadly, the study will contribute to theoretical
understandings of how multilingual communities are constituted and organized;
and it will provide insight into how individuals apprehend their social worlds
and how they use language in asserting and managing their often shifting
identities in these heterogeneous (and today, increasingly prevalent) settings.