* 9522253
* Internal Interfaces in Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9522253 Carter The goals of this research project are to gain new understanding
of microscopic details, particularly chemical bonding and defects, at
heterostructure interfaces and of dislocations in the lattice of compound
semiconductors. The research will emphasize studies of anti-site bonding which
is thought to be an intrinsic factor in the core of dislocations and of nearly
all grain boundaries in these materials. Correlation between observed and
calculated defect structures will be made through computer image simulation. The
electrical properties of interfaces will be investigated by high-resolution
cathodoluminescence and electron-beam induced current techniques. Additionally,
the mechanical behavior of individual interfaces will be studied by controlled
deformation experiments. The project will utilize samples specially prepared
where interfaces and defects have been introduced in a controlled manner so that
improved understanding of the defects can be obtained, and also understanding of
the ways new information can be used to both exploit defect behavior or to
develop strategies to control, avoid or eliminate the defects. %%% This research
project will apply state-of-the-art materials science analysis and computer
simulation techniques to obtain basic understanding of defects at critical
interfaces in advanced structures of compound semiconductor materials used in
lasers and electronic devices. This research will contribute to improve
fundamental understanding of interface chemistry and physical properties as well
as other defects which limit the applications or lifetime of semiconductor
devices. An important feature of the program is the training of graduate and
undergraduate students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area.
***