* 9522639
* Human-Aided Hierarchical Drug Delivery Control System
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Howard Kaufman, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Janice M. Jenkins
* 02/28/2001
* USD 429,960.00

9522639 Kaufman Critical care patients have often suffered a disturbance to the
normal operation of their cardiovascular system; this disturbance could have
been generated by surgery or some sort of trauma. A responsibility of the
critical care physician is to maintain certain patient states within an
acceptable operating range. Often, the anesthesiologist will infuse several
drugs into the patient to control these states close to the desired values,
historically, this has been done using a manual (open-loop) strategy. Towards
the important goal of using feedback for aiding the anesthesiologist, the
Departments of Biomedical (BME), Chemical (CHE), and Electrical, Computer, and
Systems (ECSE) Engineering at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute are proposing an
interdisciplinary research project in the development and analysis of a human-
aided supervisory adaptive control system and its application to a
representative drug delivery system. This system will regulate the infusion of
multiple drugs in order to simultaneously steer several hemodynamic states (eg
blood pressure, cardiac output) towards desired values. This system can also be
considered as an interactive human aided supervisory system in which the human
operator or anesthesiologist commands the desired state and interacts with the
control drug selection logic. From a set of measured signals, the patient state
is constructed and then used by the anesthesiologist to command a desired state
and with the help of a supervisory program, to select the controls or drugs.
These drugs, along with the commanded values, are then used by the control
system to steer the states towards their commanded values. Fuzzy and adaptive
control concepts are to be used and an expert system will be used to select the
proper (adaptive or fuzzy) controllers for the drug infusion rates. The novel
contributions expected to result from the proposed research include: A system
that manipulates the infusion of a variety of drugs, in response to some trauma,
in a manner so as to steer the hemodynamic states towards their desired values.
Procedures for studying the behavior of complex nonlinear systems that include a
mixture of fuzzy controllers and conventional and/or adaptive controllers.
Procedures for deciding what controls or drugs should be used and which should
be nulled out for a specific state and mission. Control strategies that
incorporate almost continuous measurements of cardiac output. ***