* 9522973
* Real-Time Monitoring of the Solidification Front in Metal   Casting
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Jung-Hoon Chun, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Ming C. Leu
* 11/30/1998
* USD 269,953.00

9522973 Chun Real-time monitoring of the solidification front in metal casting
operations will greatly enhance manufacturing productivity. In the casting of
aluminum alloys for example, the shape, location, and velocity of the
solidification front affect casting speed, ingot integrity, and
macrosegregation. Ingot recovery loss due to cracking now amounts to as much as
10% for both aerospace and common alloys. At present, information on the
solidification front is obtained either experimentally or numerically.
Experimental methods include installation of a thermocouple-tree in the
solidification zone, measurement of the secondary dendrite arm spacing of cast
ingots, or by "doping" the liquid metal with grain refiners. While these
techniques provide valuable information on the solidification front, they cannot
be used for on-line, closed-loop control of the process. Efforts have also
focused on the three-dimensional numerical ingot casting models to simulate, for
example, mold filling and start-up and steady-state conditions. Although much
progress has been made, there is no direct method of verifying these numerical
models. In the current research, using high energy (5-10 MeV) gamma rays
generated by a compact, linear electron accelerator (LINAC), the differences in
gamma ray transmissivity due to differences in the density of the solid and
liquid metals will be measured. Because the attenuation coefficients of the
liquid and solid metals are about the same but their densities are different
(typically 4-12 percent), it is possible to estimate the liquid (or solid)
fraction of metal in a solidifying ingot. Moreover, by scanning the gamma ray
beam across the solidifying ingot appropriately, a three-dimensional image of
the solidification front can be obtained using the reconstruction techniques of
computerized tomography. The direct result of the proposed work would be an
enabling technology for the on-line monitoring of solidification front and the
closed-loop control of casting oper ations. Expected research outcomes are: (i)
design and fabrication of a sensor system, (ii) identification of characteristic
signals that reveal such undesirable process conditions as ingot cracking and
breakout, and (iii) characterization of the extent and morphology of the mushy
zone at the solidification front. In primary metals processing, ingots are cast
and rolled or slabs are continuously cast. The final property of the product is
strongly influenced by what goes on at the molten metal and frozen solid
interface. This is a dynamic state and there are no known non-invasive
monitoring techniques that can lead to feedback control interface. If this
innovative idea works, the casting industry could benefit by cutting waste and
rework, which could translate into driving down the manufacturing cost while
concurrently improving the quality.