* 9522125
* Development of Nonlinear Models for the Earthquake Response of Railway Bridges
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2001
* Bruce Douglas, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/2001
* USD 220,046.00

9522125 Maragakis Railway bridges are a critical component of the transportation
infrastructure. Many of them are located in densely populated areas with high
seismic risk. A basic knowledge of the seismic response characteristics and
performance of these structures is important. An important feature of railway
bridge dynamics is the rail-ties-ballast system which extends over the adjacent
roadbed and probably provides additional strength to the structures. A recent
dynamic test of a ballasted railway bridge sheds some light into the complexity
of the dynamic interaction involved in rail-ballast systems. In this project a
series of identification studies will be performed by using the available field
data in order to identify important stiffness parameters of various elements of
the bridge. The data from the failure tests conducted at the University of
Nevada on ballasted and unballasted systems will be used for the development of
failure elements and their incorporation into nonlinear models. The developed
models will be used for the prediction of the response of typical railway
bridges to earthquake excitations. A study of these responses will indicate
needs for retrofitting. This project will improve the capability of modeling the
nonlinear dynamic response of railway bridges which are a critical component of
the nation's transportation networks. ***