* 9522314
* Planning Activities: Research Program Development at Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2001
* Michele Dionne, Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 09/30/2001
* USD 11,227.00

9522314 The Wells National Estuarine Research Reserve (Wells NERR) is part of a
national system created to promote and support estuarine research. It is the
sole on-site research facility for the study of marsh dominated estuarine
ecosystems on the Gulf of Marine coast, and its site encompasses estuarine
ecosystems of such systems from Cape Cod to Maine's mid-coast. It contains one
of the few undeveloped barrier beaches in Maine and two marsh dominated
estuaries, one nearly pristine, the other in use as a harbor and surrounded by
development. The Reserve has a Research Program that is growing to meet the
pressing need for estuarine research in the Gulf of Maine region. The Wells NERR
is a partnership between governmental and private entities. A unique feature of
the NERR program is that research and resource management work together, so that
new research findings will be used to guide management of coastal resources. The
Wells NERR has fulfilled many of the research objectives set out in its first
Management Plan, which was approved in 1990. It is beginning to work on a major
revision of its Management Plan this year. The Research Program is cooperating
with this effort. The research director will work with an independent panel of
scientist, herein called the Research Planning and Review Committee, to review
and develop the long-term goals of the program and formulate achievable
objectives for the next five years, including establishment of a university
affiliation. After the planning activities and conference are completed, the
Wells NERR will make the necessary changes that will allow it to establish its
place in the research community and meet the demand for ecological research
focused on marsh dominated estuaries in the Gulf of Maine.