* 9522221
* Development of a Dual-Probe Scanning Tunneling Microscope   for Investigating Nanoscale Materials and Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* John Boland, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1998
* USD 186,380.00

9522221 Boland This award provides funds to develop a dual-probe scanning
tunneling microscope (DP-STM) to investigate nanoscale material and device
properties. DP-STM is essentially identical to conventional single probe STM
except that it enables two independent STM probes to be positioned 10-100nm from
each other. This capability will be achieved by the controlled growth of
nanowhiskers on each STM probe. A method is described to reliably position the
whiskered probes within the prescribed separation. In contrast to conventional
STM which can only measure local static properties of materials, DP-STM opens up
whole new areas of investigation, particularly in the area of non-local
dynamical and relaxation phenomena. By selecting the locations of the STM probes
it is possible to measure transport and surface band dispersion along any
particular direction in the material. A variety of novel pump- probe experiments
are also possible. For instance, it is possible to measure how charge injection
at a particular location affects the electrostatic potential and density of
states at some nearby location. The latter is particularly interesting since it
amounts to a fundamental description of the local chemical reactivity. DP-STM
also represents a potentially powerfully technique to probe the characteristics
and performance of nanodevices. ***