* 9522576
* Dissertation Research:  Ceramic Production in the Maya      Formative:  A Study of Ceramic Technology at K'axob, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1996
* Patricia McAnany, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/1996
* USD 8,342.00

McAnany Under the direction of Dr. Patricia McAnany, Ms. Mary Lee Angelini will
collect data for her doctoral dissertation. She will analyze ceramics from the
archaeological site of K'axob, a prehistoric Mayan village. Her goal is to look
at changes in the manufacture of ceramics over time. To determine the types of
clays which the K'axob potters exploited, she will compare ceramic pastes from
three hundred and thirty-eight vessels from the site to one hundred clay samples
from locations in northern Belize proximate to K'axob. Comparisons will be based
on ceramic petrography and INAA. Vessels will be sampled to obtain information
on the full range of types present and clay locales will be tested on the basis
of soil data and topographical features. Determination of changes in production
technology will be investigated through analysis of formation techniques as
revealed through breakage patterns, xeroradiography and petrography and
determination of clay modification strategies through petrography and
experimental testing. Changes in vessel size and form will also be noted.
Because ceramics are so abundant in many prehistoric sites and because they
preserve well in the ground, they provide a focus for much archaeological
analysis. Archaeologists try to reconstruct prehistoric social, political and
economic organization on the basis of detailed analysis of such remains. The
site of K'axob spans the time period when complex Mayan society emerged. Most
archaeologists believe that as social complexity increases and centralized
authority appears, objects such as ceramics become more standardized because
production is taken over by specialists who operate under a hierarchical form of
control. The case of K'axob is very interesting because - based on visual
inspection of ceramic form - just the opposite seems to occur. If this is the
case, it challenges a basic archaeological assumption. Ms. Angelini wishes to
see if this pattern holds when one examines the same corp us of data from a
technological perspective and determines where raw materials were collected and
how vessels were made. This project is important for several reasons. It will
provide data of interest to many Middle Americanist archaeologists. It will help
scientists to refine analytic tools and models and it will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.