* 9522074
* Optimizing the Differential Global Postioning System        Infrastructure for Scientific Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* JoAnn Clayton, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 08/31/1997
* USD 107,240.00

Abstract ATM-9522074 Clayton, JoAnn National Academy of Sciences Title:
Optimizing the Differential Global Positioning System Infrastructure for
Scientific Applications A variety of civil, commercial, and scientific
organizations currently are establishing ground-based differential networks to
provide the basic infrastructure for generation and dissemination of
Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) data. These differential stations
will provide data not available from the basic DOT/DOD-managed civil GPS signal.
These data include corrections to GPS position errors; high accuracy orbit
information; corrections for the intentional degradation of the civil signal,
ionospheric errors, and clock and ephemeris errors; and provide integrity
information. An opportunity now exists to optimize the usefulness of the data
produced from DGPS networks for scientific applications. Considerations for
future GPS infrastructure include specification and standardization of receiver
equipment, testing, documentation, error reduction, real- time data
communications, analysis software development, and data management and
archiving. To maximize the value of emerging DPGS networks for scientific
applications, the NRC/ASEB in cooperation with several other NRC units, proposes
to bring together in a workshop a select group of scientists, engineers, and
researchers, as well as representatives from federal agencies. The goal of the
workshop will be to discuss DGPS plans and objectives and develop options for
improving communication and coordination among the scientific DPGS users and
network operators. A steering committee of six experts will be appointed to
develop the workshop program and oversee the preparation of the proceedings of
the workshop, which will include a thematic summary of the discussion. This
workshop is important because it will enhance the scientific benefit from the
rapidly emerging GPS technology.