* 9522816
* CEDAR:  Electrodynamic Coupling of Troposphere and          Mesosphere in Thunderstorm Regions
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Umran Inan, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 10/31/1998
* USD 90,000.00

This two-year award will investigate the electrodynamic coupling of tropospheric
and mesospheric regions of the atmosphere due to intense short duration
electromagnetic pulses and quasi- electrostatic pulses originating in
tropospheric lightning discharges. The PI will develop and apply a computer
model describing changes in the electron density, chemistry and optical
emissions in the upper atmosphere due to the simultaneous action of all three
mechanisms stimulated by electrical energy released in tropospheric lightning
discharges. Expected results of this research include: (1) three-dimensional
configurations of the disturbed regions within which significant changes occur
in temperature, airglow, electron density and chemical processes; (2)
determination of the fraction of electromagnetic energy from lightning deposited
in the lower ionosphere and the dominant sinks of such energy; (3) determination
of dependence of the resulting disturbances on the type of lightning discharges;
(4) assessment of the effects of the lightning electromagnetic pulses on the
thermal and chemical balance of the upper atmosphere on a global scale; (5)
investigation of ways in which the existing CEDAR data bases may be used to
better understand upward discharges; and (6) preparation of a theoretical basis
for a new CEDAR campaign aimed at the investigation of electrodynamic coupling
of tropospheric and mesospheric regions, particularly as driven by
thunderstorms.***