* 9523123
* An Integrated Machine Vision Based System for Solving the   Cutting Stock Problem in the Leather Industry
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Christopher McCord, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 12/31/1997
* USD 110,000.00

9523123 Anand This research addresses the problem of using an integrated machine
vision system in the optimization of the cut and minimization of the scrap
losses in the leather industry. This is a cutting stock problem in which machine
vision technology is applied to optimize the cuts and minimize scrap. The
operation involves cutting smaller irregular leather pieces from a larger piece
in the shoe industry. Based on input from shop schedule and the prices of
leather parts, a systems approach is applied for planning the cutting
operations. The machine vision is used in acquiring the image of the leather
pieces and the shoe parts for which the leather pieces are to be attached,
polygonizing them, and storing the polygonized images in separate image
databases. Using the polygonal images of the leather pieces, the shoe parts, and
the manufacturing priorities as input, algorithms are developed for solving the
irregular shape cutting stock problem from irregular sheets. The layout
information for each leather piece is stored in a layout database and
communicated to the cutting operator as a graphic display on a terminal.
Alternatively, the layout information is converted to a numerical control (NC)
code and fed to a computer numerical control (CNC) controller for automated
cutting (laser or waterjet cutting of leather). The general cutting stock
problem has applications in a number of industries, including construction,
sheet metal, apparel, textile, and glass. Most of the parts in these industries
are irregular in shape. Therefore, any methodology or algorithm that improves
the utilization of raw materials in these industries can substantially reduce
scrap losses and make them more competitive. This project is focused at
developing such a tool. The outcome of this research will also help automate
some of the critical operations in these industries and thus, reduce
overdependency on human labor and experience.