* 9523151
* GOALI/IUCRP:  Integration of Computer Aided Design, ComputerAided Process Planning and Manufacturing Resources Planning Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Robert Judd, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 08/31/1999
* USD 318,131.00

9523151 Judd Sophisticated software tools now exist for computer-aided design
(CAD), computer-aided process planning (CAPP), and manufacturing resources
planning (MRP) independently, as well as for many of the other functions of a
manufacturing enterprise. Attaining significant improvements in the overall
throughput of the manufacturing enterprise now depends on optimizing the flow of
information from one application to another. This research will apply and extend
recently developed ideas integrating databases to industrial grade software.
Data representation, commonality, sychronization, and communication will be
addressed. The architecture for the integrated environment will be flexible
enough so that it can easily be used with a variety of software solutions to
these applications. This research aims to create a theoretical foundation for
the unification of existing manufacturing databases into common data model with
methods to synchronize these databases. The results of this research should
enable the development of an integrated CAD, CAPP, and MRP system to model and
evaluate the impact of product designs on an organization's production
resources. Feedback through the various systems will allow a manufacturer to
reduce unproductive time in process planning and scheduling and thus to improve
the quality, time-to-market and cost of new products.