* 9523022
* Manufacturing of Thin Polymer Fibers by Electrospinning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Yuris Dzenis, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 08/31/1998
* USD 269,916.00

9523022 Dzenis The objective of this project is a comprehensive experimental and
theoretical study of the process of electrospinning polymer solutions and melts
into fibers. Electrospinning makes it possible to spin very thin polymer fibers,
with diameters as small as 1/100 the diameter of ordinary textile fibers, that
is about 50 nanometers. Such fibers are not readily available now. This research
will provide a scientific background for the development of experimental methods
and devices to control the geometrical parameters, microstructure, and
properties of fibers that can be produced economically. This project will be
carrier out at two universities. One will concentrate on electromechanical
models of the process, on the evaluation of fiber mechanical properties, on the
electromechanical control of the placement of the fibers into useful patterns,
and in the mechanical analysis of structures created with these fine, nanoscale
fibers. The other university will design and build improved electrospinning
apparatus, collect data to improve the modeling of the process, measure
diameters, shapes and molecular orientation in individual fibers using scanning
probe and electron microscopy, select polymers to be spun, demonstrate
successful spinning in air, other gases and vacuum. Process modifications needed
for spinning in special environments, such as would be encountered in applying
pesticides to plants, or creating structures in space will be explored. A number
of unique phenomena, such as fiber splaying, acceleration of the jet by an
alternating field, multiple jet interaction, and electrical means of fiber
placement will be analyzed for the first time. Experimental and theoretical data
generated will constitute a fundamental basis for the future integrated
manufacturing technologies combining fiber spinning with an automated
fabrication of three dimensional fiber assemblies. Both universities will be
involved in educating students and transferring information developed in this
proj ect to industrial, agricultural, space communications, or other areas where
it can be used. The interest in thin polymer fibers is broad. Potential
applications include improved reinforced composites; a substrate for catalysts
and enzymes; a new way to place pesticide to plants; improve textiles; and
advanced filters. More exotic applications include solar sails for propulsion in
space, large space antennas, reflecting lenses and mirrors, and others. This
research is part of a broader effort to understand and exploit the uniqueness of
nanoscale technologies.