* 9523585
* Collaborative Research:  Testing Earth System Models with   Paleoenvironmental Observations
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Thompson Webb III, Brown University
* Continuing grant
* David Verardo
* 10/31/2000
* USD 580,000.00

Abstract ATM-952385 Webb, III, Thompson Brown University Title: Testing Earth
System Models with Paleoenvironmental Observations (TEMPO) This award supports a
project under the Earth System History (ESH) Program of the USGCRP. The
objective of this award is to improve the ability of models to simulate large
changes in the earth system and to understand the interactions and feedbacks
among components of the system. The earth's climate system with its vegetation,
lakes, wetlands, and oceans has changed dramatically in the past, and the data
about these large changes provide "ground truth" for testing the accuracy of the
earth system models. The research team will develop an integrated equilibrium
biosphere model, a lake/continental-hydrology model, and coupling procedures to
link these models off-line to atmospheric general circulation models and an
ocean general circulation model. A regional fine-mesh climate model will also be
used for studying earth system changes in regions of complex topography. With
these coupled models, it will be possible to explore a wide variety of potential
earth system feedbacks including: a) atmosphere-biosphere interactions
associated with boreal forest replacing tundra, or tropical savannah replacing
desert; b) atmosphere/land-surface-hydrology interactions associated with
increases or decreases in the area extend of lakes and wetlands;
atmosphere/ocean/terrestrial- vegetation interactions associated with changes in
Arctic sea-ice, the North Atlantic thermohaline circulation, and coastal and
equatorial upwelling. Global paleovegetation and lake status data sets will be
compiled for 6000 and 21,000 years ago, and these data sets will be used along
with data for ocean circulation and from the previous intergalcial to make
comparisons with the coupled earth system models.