* 9523650
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research:  What Balance Between Technical Standards, Professional Standards, and            Professional Education?
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Vivian Weil, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Layne
* 11/30/1997
* USD 19,613.00

The Institute for Electrical and Electronics Engineering (IEEE) Computer Society
and the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) have formed a Joint Steering
Committee for the Establishment of Software Engineering as a Profession
(SEEEPP). The Committee's Working Groups are beginning deliberations on
electronic mail, and are scheduled to complete their work before November 1995.
This project presents a rare opportunity to study a technical profession coming
into being. A research group of two ethics specialists and a computer science
specialist have approval to monitor the activity of the Working Group on
Reliability and Safety. While joining in the Working Group's deliberations, the
researchers will study the factors that two powerful professions (electrical
engineering and computer science) bring to bear in discussing, examining and
resolving questions concerning technical, educational, and ethical standards for
the new profession. The project will proceed by monitoring the e-mail of the
Working Group, complemented with telephone interviews for further explanation
and with participation in teleconferences or face-to-face meetings. The research
team will meet monthly to analyze the process. The team expects to prepare two
reports, one a research paper contributing to the understanding of professions
and the development and uses of professional codes, and the other, a report
assisting the Joint Steering Committee. If warranted, a proposal for a larger
research project may develop out of this work.