* 9523637
* Workshop on Interdisciplinary Haromonization of Terminology Used in Describing Spore-Forming Organisms in Santa Maria   Imbaro, Italy in October 1995.
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Micah Krichevsky, Bionomics International
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 8,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 覺Y C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t Q O b j e c t
P o o l 覺Y 覺Y 4 @ ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9523637 Krichevsky Spore forming microorganisms are
consistently encountered in microbial biodiversity and bioconservation studies.
Spore formation is found in bacterial, fungi, protozoa, and algae. The
systematics of these organisms is complex. Furthermore, the lack of a
comprehensive authoritative treatment of the description of spores and spore
types means that many biodiversity and systematics studies are either in error
(by not working on a true spore), or are not understandable due to resulting
misidentifications or confusing descriptions. Consequently, to help remedy the
situation, an international workshop was organized and held in Santa Maria
Imbaro, Italy, consisting of experts on the systematic of spore formation in
bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and algae. The experts were chosen by consultation
with appropriate international organizations involved with the systematic of
these various microbes (such as the Bergey s Manual Trust and the International
Committee on Systematic Bacteriology for the bacteria.) The object of the
workshop was to rationalize and codify the terminology of spor e descriptions
for all spore-forming type microorganisms. The result of this effort will be a
report on the proceedings of the workshop and a manual of definitions and
instructions on accurate and standardized descriptions of spores. It is intended
that this report will serve as a multidisciplinary standards manual for
systematics of spore forming microbes, thus providing for more accurate and
consistent terminology and cell identifications in studies on microbial
biodiversity. *** ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ( Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Krichevsky, M. I. Robert Uffen Shelley A. Graves @
Q\a J @ 1H Y @ 覺Y @ L Microsoft Word 6.0 5 ; e = e E Q E j j j j j j j 1 ' ) ) )
# L l T B j j j j j ' ~ j j j j ' 9523637 Krichevsky Spore forming
microorganisms are consistently encountered in microbial biodiversity and
bioconservation studies. Spore formation is found in bacterial, fungi, protozoa,
and algae. The systematics of these organisms is complex. Furthermore, the lack
of a comprehensive authoritative treatment of the description of spores and
spore types means that many biodiversity and systematics studies are either in
error (by not working on a true spore), or are not understandable due to
resulting misidentifications or confusing descriptions. Consequently, to help
remedy the situation, an international workshop was organized and held in Santa
Maria Imbaro, Italy, consisting of experts on the systematic of spore formation
in bacteria, fungi, protozoa, and algae. The experts were chosen by consultation
with appropriate international organizations involved with the systematic of
these various microbes (such as the Bergey s Manual Trust and the International
Committee on Systematic Bacteriology for the bacteria.) The object of the
workshop was to rationalize and