* 9523700
* Improving Skills and Capabilities in the Conduct of         Institutional Research in Postsecondary Educational         Institutions
* SBE,NCSE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Terrence Russell, Association for Institutional Research
* Continuing Grant
* Mary J. Golladay
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,472,835.00

9523700 Russell This five-year project will support a variety of activities
designed to promote the use of national databases maintained by the National
Science Foundation (NSF) and the U. S. Department of Education, National Center
for Education Statistics (NCES). The grantee, the Association for Institutional
Research (AIR, will organize and administer a program to support several types
of awards to investigators using these data bases. The project will consist of
three components. The first component would support fellowships to individuals,
to support on-site work in Washington, DC Project would be expected to utilize
national databases and also provide a significant professional development
experience to the fellow. The second would support research work at the awardees
home institution, either on national databases or work of such a nature that it
will contribute to an overall understanding of postsecondary education or to the
professional development of personnel working in postsecondary education. The
third component would provide small grants for communicating and disseminating
information about the content of the NSF and NCES databases and techniques for
utilization of these databases for analysis. Activities under this component
could include small meetings or seminars, support for special sessions at larger
meetings, special publications, or other dissemination activities. Results from
all projects will be disseminated through a variety of means to the user
community. This project will be administered by the Executive Officer of the
AIR, which will publicize the availability of project funds, organize and
conduct review panels for evaluating individual proposals. A Grant and
Fellowship Advisory Committee will provide guidance on program direction and
priorities; NSF and NCES will be represented on the committee. Other members
will be broadly representative of the higher education research community. The
project offers benefits including greater visibility of issues in postsecondary
education and science and engineering education, and improved data quality
fostered by greater use and scrutiny of existing data sources.