* 9523092
* Effects of Stochastic Variability of Soil Properties on     Liquefaction Resistance
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jean Herve Prevost, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/2000
* USD 325,995.00

9523092 Prevost Though extensively studied during the last 30 years, the
phenomenon of soil liquefaction is still one of the main causes of catastrophic
damage during major earthquakes. The aim of this project is to obtain a better
understanding of soil liquefaction mechanisms, aimed at more realistic
liquefaction risk assessment methods and appropriate seismic design
countermeasures, and emphasizing the importance of spatial variability exhibited
by soil properties. Natural soils are variable in their properties. The scarcity
of field test results, and the degree of disorder exhibited by soil properties,
leads to the use of statistical methods to describe the distribution of those
properties. In this context, the various geomechanical soil properties are
modeled as the components of a multi-variate, multidimensional (mV-nD)
stochastic field. The characteristics of the stochastic field are evaluated
based on statistically significant sets of "in- situ" measurement results. Two-
and three-dimensional finite element simulations of the behavior of horizontally
layered sandy soil, as well as of structures founded on liquefiable soil and
subjected to seismic loads, are performed using the multi-yield soil
constitutive model implemented in the computer code DYNAFLOW. The numerical
simulation results for predicting excess pore- pressure buildup, liquefaction
index, and liquefaction induced deformations -- obtained using stochastic input
constitutive parameters -- are compared to deterministic input simulation
results; and the influences on these results of spatial correlation distances,
probability distributions of soil properties, cross-correlations between various
soil properties, finite element discretization mesh size, as well as the effects
of the 2-D simplification vs. true 3-D behavior are examined and quantified.
Verification of the method for constitutive parameter calibration and for the
performance of the analysis procedure is made by comparison with "in-situ"
behavior recorded during past earthquakes. Recommendations will be made for
updating current analysis and design procedures for structures founded on
liquefiable soils, in order to account for the degree of spatial variability of
soil properties. This research will provide a sound basis for liquefaction risk
assessment and for characterization of spatial variability of soil properties.
***