* 9523167
* Workshop: Developing Power of Electronics Curricula:        Courses, Hardware and Software Laboratory. To be held in    Orlando, Florida January 7-9, l995.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Issa Batarseh, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 18,000.00

9500465 Batarseh The Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at the
University of Central Florida (UCF) will purchase research equipment that
include: HP3580A-Spectrum Analyzer, HP6060A-DC Electronic Load, HP6655A-DC Power
Supply, TEK371A-Power Device Testing and 50MHz Current Probes which will be
dedicated to support research in power electronics. The equipment will become
permanent part of the Power Electronics Research Laboratory at UCF, and will be
used to support the three research projects proposed here. These projects will
investigate the dynamic behavior of high frequency, high power density power
converters and their use as power factor correction. The PI has developed an
innovative analysis technique to obtain frequency response for high-frequency
dc-to-dc resonant converters by using improved dynamic modeling. Based on the
derived model, a closed loop controller design methodology for such converters
was developed. In this project, experimental investigation of the derived small
signal modeling will be carried out. Specifically, the objectives of the
proposed research are: 1) Develop dynamic models by including the high frequency
parasitic components such as transistor and diode junction capacitances and
power transformer leakage inductances, in the power converter models. 2) Based
on this modeling, the design of a suitable feedback controller for various
resonant converter topologies will be investigated. Also by using the
u-synthesis approach, the design of robust controllers for both high order
series and parallel resonant converters will be carried out. 3) Using the Zero-
Voltage Switching technique, high power factor correction resonant circuits will
be designed, tested and evaluated. 4) Experimental studies will be conducted to
verify the theory and the practicality of the developed dynami c models for high
frequency converters, and their applications as power factor correction. ***