* 9523611
* MMIA: Vegetation Response To Mesoscale Climate Variability  in the Mountainous West
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Sue Ferguson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Robert Kelman Wieder
* 09/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9523611 Ferguson An integrated modeling methodology will be developed to help
assess vegetation response to climate variability and climate change in complex
terrain. the chosen modeling domain includes the state of Oregon that represents
linked regions of complex terrain. In addition, the maritime influence in this
domain allows successful dynamic modeling of climate and reasonably consistent
statistical regression between climate parameters. The spatial resolution of
many currently available climate scenarios is too coarse for accurate ecological
modeling in complex terrain. The few high resolution climate scenarios of not
have long enough time series for modeling transient responses of ecological
processes. Also, the effect of changes in climate variability is an important
uncertainty in integrated assessments. Therefore, significant effort will be
devoted to developing very high resolution baseline climate scenarios and
climate change scenarios that include changes in daily and interannual
variability. Available weather observations will be used to generate a spatially
distributed data base that describes a current scenario of climate. Daily
climate will be simulated using a stochastic weather generator that will be
modified to include relative humidity, wind, and maintain physical consistency
between climate variables. Changes in variability will be applies to the
baseline climate database to develop a high resolution time series of potential
change. Three different simulated ecological responses will be tested. One of
the current climate, one from the time series reflecting only mean changes, and
one from the time series reflecting mean and variance changes. The integration
of these physical components (scenario formation-physical impacts) fills a
critical void in the full framework of integrative assessments.