* 9523481
* MRA: Integration of Information Age Networking and Parallel Supercomputer Simulations into University General Science   K-12 Curricula
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/1995,04/30/2003
* Edward Lipson, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose L. Munoz
* 04/30/2003
* USD 1,389,335.00

9523481 Lipson This project will create a Metacenter Regional Alliance between
the Cornell Theory Center and the Northeast Parallel Architectures Center (NPAC)
and the Department of Physics at Syracuse University, to develop interactive
multimedia educational modules incorporating advanced scientific simulations.
These will be integrated into undergraduate courses, and then into K-12
curricula, to enhance the teaching of general science courses. The project will
combine leading-edge technologies in high-performance computing and
communications, a high-speed network serving as a testbed for the National
Information Infrastructure, and advanced client/server technologies such as the
World Wide Web, VRML and Java, to produce and deliver these simulations and
educational modules. An important aspect of this project is the conversion of
computational science simulations into interactive educational modules. Four
simulations are proposed: fluctuating membranes, fluid dynamics, crack
propagation and structural failure, and avalanches. The researchers will utilize
three different methods to provide these simulations in the classroom: annotated
digital video on demand; partially interactive exploration using multiple video
streams; and fully interactive simulations on demand. Hypermedia navigation
based on the concepts of the World Wide Web will be used to impose a coherent
interface to these different simulations, and to provide educational information
about the concepts illustrated by the simulations.