* 9523480
* MRA: High Performance Computing, Information Serving, and   Data Visualization on Clusters of Shared Memory             Multiprocessors
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Paul Woodward, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,155,000.00

9523480 Woodward A collaboration with the NSF Metacenter to develop effective
uses of the emerging supercomputer architecture consisting of a cluster of
shared memory multiprocessors (SMP's) is proposed. Uses which will be addressed
include not only high performance computing, but also providing high performance
data and multimedia services over the National Information Infrastructure and
scientific visualization of very large data sets. A strong team of researchers
with considerable experience with the clustered SMP and closely related computer
architectures has been assembled under the auspices of a new Laboratory for
Computational Science and Engineering (LCS&amp;E) at the University of
Minnesota. Exploiting generous long-term loans of equipment as well as existing
infrastructure, this team will work closely with the computer industry on system
integration and software development and with the Metacenter on application
development. Because of a shared interest in this new Silicon Graphics
architecture; this MRA will collaborate especially closely with NCSA. However,
the work of this Metacenter Regional Alliance is ultimately intended to be
portable to other vendors' implementations of the clustered SMP architecture,
and therefore should be applicable to the IBM SP-3 (Cornell), the Cray J90
(Pittsburgh), as well as the Convex Exemplar (NCSA). This MRA team developed the
Wgl resolution Power Wall display system and demonstrated it at Supercomputing
'94. The LCS&amp;E team will work with NCSA and the Electronic Visualization
Laboratory through its recently funded MRA, to help bring this technology into
use at those sites and, particularly, at the I-WAY (Information Wide Area Year)
demonstration at Supercomputing '95. Because of the Minnesota team's extensive
work in building very high performance disk I/O subsystems for workstations, a
useful relationship with the Parallel I/O Initiative at Caltech, another recent
MRA, is also anticipated. Finally, the LCS&amp;E team will work together with
local inner city high schools and with the TIES organization representing a
consortium of 45 Minnestoa school districts to provide K-12 outreach throughout
the state of Minnesota.