* 9523511
* The Behavior and Design of Reactors with Complex Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Martin Feinberg, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1997
* USD 70,116.00

Abstract - Feinberg - 9523511 This work is a continuation of the development of
chemical reaction network theory, which aims to provide engineers and chemists
with easily applied tools for the analysis of complex reactors. Unlike the
previous work which emphasized reactor stability, the new work's main thrust is
design of reactor systems. The PI's past work emphasized the drawing of precise
connections between reaction network structure and reactor stability. When the
underlying chemistry is known, the theory helps indicate a reactor's capacity
for unstable behavior of various kinds. When the chemistry is poorly understood,
the theory helps distinguish between those candidate mechanisms that could
account for observed reactor behavior and those that could not. This work will
address questions of optimal reactor design in the presence of complex
chemistry. Of Particular interest is the development of theory that would
network, the feed and the design objectives are specified. That is, one would
like to know which qualitative configuration, taken from virtually limitless
palette of reactor configurations available to the designer, is best suited to
the designer's objectives. The Chemical Reaction Network Toolbox, a program for
IBM-compatible computers, was written by the PI so that early results of
reaction network theory might be disseminated to a wide audience. It is
anticipated that work completed under this new grant will be incorporated into a
more comprehensive version of the program.