* 9523118
* NSF/CBMS Regional Conference in the Mathematical Sciences   "Advances in Inverse Spectral Geometry"
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Jeffrey Lee, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 12/31/1997
* USD 25,471.00

9523118 Drager To stimulate interest and activity in mathematical research, the
National Science Foundation each year supports a number of NSF-CBMS Regional
Research Conferences in the Mathematical Sciences. Each five-day conference
features a distinguished lecturer who delivers ten lectures on a topic of
important current research in one sharply focused area of the mathematical
sciences. The lecturer subsequently prepares an expository monograph based upon
these lectures, which is normally published by the American Mathematical Society
or the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, or jointly by the
American Statistical Association and the Institute of Mathematical Statistics.
Certain features differentiate these conferences from typical research
conferences. These are: (1) Focus on a single important and timely area of
research by a leading practitioner, (2) Continued effect and local stimulation
through regional emphasis, (3) Panel review for quality, breadth, and
timeliness, and (4) Published monographs for a wider audience. This project will
support an NSD-CBMS Regional Research Conference in the Mathematical Sciences on
Advances in Spectral Geometry to be held June 24-28, 1996 at Texas Tech
University. Professor Carolyn Gordon of Dartmouth College will be the principal
lecturer.