* 9523565
* Collaborative Research:  RUI:  Application of In-situ       Produced Cosmogenic 36Cl to Central Andean Volcanism
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Shanaka de Silva, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/1997
* USD 45,000.00

9523565 de Silva Recently an important contribution to the field of
geomorphology has been the development of a nuclear method for quantifying
erosion rates and exposure ages of geological surfaces. the method relies on
measurement of a number of radionuclides and stable nuclides which are
continually being produced in situ in rocks exposed to cosmic rays. We have
chosen to examine 36Cl due to its ease of measurement and applicability to
volcanic rocks. We propose to calibrate the 36Cl method of exposure age dating
up to 600 Ka. The 36Cl and 40Ar/39Ar methods will then be applied to Central
Andes volcanic rocks to provide a chronological framework for late Pleistocene
to Holocene volcanism in the Central Andes. The Central Andes has been selected
for this pilot study because it is probably the finest example of continental
volcanism in the world, and its high elevation and hyper-arid environment result
in superb preservation (extremely low erosion rates) of volcanic features. In
addition, since a high incident flux of cosmic rays is attained at high
altitudes, cosmogenic isotope production rates will also be high. 36Cl depth
profiles, and, if possible, 36Cl/10Be ratios will be determined to ensure that
the erosion rate is well below that which would affect exposure ages. The
proposed study will help to quantify several important scientific questions
about central Andes volcanism: (1) the rate of growth and evolution of volcanic
constructs, (2) the eruption frequency of lava flows and magma production rates,
and (3) the correlation of 36Cl exposure ages and erosion rates with Landsat
imaging data. The study is important as volcanism and tectonism are intimately
related and any conclusions about the processes studied will likely be
applicable globally.