* 9523958
* Dynamic Service Aggregation for Interactive                 Information Delivery
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Thomas Little, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Karen R. Sollins
* 08/31/2000
* USD 295,476.00

Digital audio and video are increasingly common as data that are manipulated in
computer and communication systems. Current resource allocation mechanisms for
network-based multipoint information delivery are static in nature and cannot
support interactivity for each participant. Point-to-point approaches can
support interactivity but are inefficient for scaling to a large number of
participants. Currently, no techniques have demonstrated the ability to
renegotiate and scale service parameters per session in progress as required to
adapt to differing terminal equipment characteristics and network congestion.
The proposal addresses this problem through the definition of decomposable
service groups that permit aggregation of interactivity, terminal
characteristics, and levels of service scaling. Interactivity implies the
availability of a unique service group. A mechanism is proposed to dynamically
reassign elements to service groups based on changing interactivity and session
requirements. Such a mechanism will allow the adjustment of service quality
based on cost, available resources, or user-equipment characteristics, and will
adapt to changing network loading. The proposed approach applies the
characteristics of end applications and data storage requirements to the design
of a data scaling mechanism. Specific tasks of this research are to (1)
formalize a model for characterizing and aggregating service groups, (2) develop
a protocol for dynamic service aggregation, (3) identify a mapping for
application requirements to service groups and network quality of service, (4)
the establishment of a network access mechanism to support service degradation
and scaling for multiple sessions, and (5) the simulation, implementation, and
evaluation using established multipoint applications and multicast protocols.