* 9523128
* Dielectrometry Sensors and Algorithms to Monitor Moisture   Dynamics and Other Impurities in Transformers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Markus Zahn, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 184,882.00

9523128 Lesieutre New captive sensors can measure distributions of conductivity
and permittivity in dielectrics. Each sensor has a set of interdigitated
electrodes which impose a spatially periodic source of voltage at temporal
frequency f and spatial wavelength. With an excitation that is periodic in
space, the fields decay in the perpendicular direction with a penetration depth
equal to the spatial wavelength. One set of electrodes are driven with a
variable frequency AC voltage, and a high impedance measurement is made of the
induced voltage on the alternate set of floating electrodes. The magnitude and
phase of the floating voltage depends on the dielectric permittivity and
electrical conductivity of the medium adjacent to the sensor. From such
gain/phase measurements as a function of frequency for different wavelength
sensors, computer algorithms can calculate spatial profiles of the permittivity
and conductivity. With calibration of permittivity and conductivity dependence
on other physical variables such as moisture, temperature, concentration of
combustible gas, concentration of trace impurities, etc., it is impossible to
measure spatial distributions of such physical quantities as a function of time.
Recent EPRI funded research has performed the preliminary calibration between
moisture and temperature to conductivity and permittivity so that the sensors
can be used to monitor the time and space dynamics of moisture in oil
impregnated transformer pressboard. The proposed research is to develop
efficient computer algorithms that can extract the pressboard moisture as a
function of time and space in transformers so that this monitoring system of
trend analysis and advanced diagnostics sponsored by EPRI and several electric
utilities. Other research tasks propose to extend the capability of the
dielectrometry sensor to include the investigation of special encapsulating
coatings that are selectively absorbing or reactive to combustible ga s and
other trace impurities in transformers such as anti-oxidants, proposed anti-
static additives such as benzontriazole (BZA), and other impurities resulting
from aging and corrosion. ***