* 9523470
* A Metacenter Regional Alliance for Computational Science    Collaborations with Historically Black Colleges and         Universities
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Michael Leuze, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen T. Elbert
* 08/31/1999
* USD 921,414.00

9523470 Leuze Currently few researchers from historically black colleges and
universities (HBCU) are able to effectively incorporate high performance
computing (HPC) technology into their research. The Joint Institute for
Computational Sciences (JICS), a consortium between the University of Tennessee
(UT) and Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), seeks to remedy this lack through
training, hands-on experience, and long term collaborative relations between
HBCU researchers, and computational scientists and applications researchers.
This goal will be met by the establishment of a Metacenter Regional Alliance
(MRA) at UT to enable JICS to extend supercomputing support to HBCUs within the
southeastern United States. Initially, four HBCUs will participate in the MRA's
planned activities: Tennessee State University and Meharry Medical College in
Nashville, Tennessee, Alabama A&amp;M in Normal, Alabama, and Southern
University in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. Approximately twelve individuals from
these four institutions will be selected to participate in Summer Computational
Workshops, with the goals: To provide basic instruction in the use of HPC
resources, particularly parallel computers and clusters of workstations linked
via PVM; to begin developing and porting application codes to HPC through one-
on-one and small group consultations with JICS staff, and to initiate
collaborations with researchers with common interests at UT, ORNL, and other
institutions affiliated with JICS and the NSF Metacenter. Equipment to
facilitate remote collaboration and interaction with HBCUs will be used to
maintain communications between participating researchers and MRA personnel.