* 9523447
* Development and Evaluation of Lead-Free Solders for         Electronic Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Gautam Ghosh, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 06/30/1999
* USD 299,923.00

; R F E b C o m p O b j \ W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o o l yb yb ' (
) * + , - F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document NB6W Word.Document.6 ; 9523447 Fine
Fundamental aspects of alloy design, microstructural evolution, and
solderability are addressed in this lead-free solders research project. Modeling
and simulation of intermetallic growth at the solder/substrate interface is
carried out by using DICTRA and newly-developed THERMO-CALC softwares. The study
is conducted to improve the mechanical, thermo-mechanical, and electrical
properties of low and higher melting temperatupe lead-free solders and solder
joints; hence, the focus is on three areas: (1) design of hierarchical high
temperature (260 to 310(C) lead free solders; (2) dynamical microstructural
evolution and its effect on the properties of solders and solder joints; and 3)
design of fluxes aimed at improving the solderability of the lead-free solders.
Powders of Cu-Ni-Al and Ni-Ti alloys that exhibit pseudoelastic behavior are
dispersed into selected lead-free solders. The investigation of properties are
measured as a function of solid-state aging for bulk solders and solder joints
and the microstructural parameters are quantitized. %%% This project is
important to gaini ng increased fundamental understanding of physical,
electrical, and chemical properties of lead-free solders and solder joints. The
result of this investigation of the alloy design and development at high
temperature lead free solders is expected to contribute significantly to the
environmental and health concerning new electronic package technology. *** ; O h
+' 0 &amp; 2 &gt; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( &amp; F N Z w @
Macintosh HD:Applications:Microsoft Word 6.0.1:Templates:Normal 9523447 jyu
Bruce MacDonald '@ " ^b @ v @ xgb @ Microsoft Word 6.0.1 6 ; h O e j j j j j j j
1 &amp; * X - j j j j j ~ j j j j ) 9523447 Fine Fundamental aspects of alloy
design, microstructural evolution, and solderability are addressed in this lead-
free solders research project. Modeling and simulation of intermetallic growth
at the solder/substrate interface is carried out by using DICTRA and newly-
developed THERMO-CALC softwares. The study is conducted to improve the
mechanical, thermo-mechanical, and electrical properties of low and higher
melting temperature lead-free solders and solder joints; hence, the focus is on
three areas: (1) design of hierarchical high temperature (260 to 310(C) lead
free solders; (2) dynamical microstructural evolution and its effect on the
properties of solders and solder joints; and 3) design of fluxes aimed at
improving the solderability of the lead-free solders. Powders of Cu-Ni-Al and
Ni-Ti alloys that exhibit pseudoelastic behavior are dispersed into selected
lead-free solders. The investigation of properties are measured as a function of
solid-state aging for bulk solders and solder joints and the microstructural
parameters are quantitized. %%% This project is important to gaining increased
fundamental understanding of physical, electrical, and chemical properties of
lead-free solders and solder joints. The result of this investigation of the
alloy design and development at high temperature lead free solders is expected
to contribute significantly to the environmental and health concerning new
electronic package technology. ***