* 9523414
* Tsunamis:  Landslide Generated Waves and Run-up and         Landward Inundation
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2003
* Fredric Raichlen, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Juan M. Pestana
* 07/31/2003
* USD 532,640.00

9523414 Raichlen This project addresses two areas related to the damage
resulting from tsunamis, namely generation and coastal effects. Tsunamis are
ocean waves which are generated by impulsive events such as earthquakes,
landslides, and volcanic eruptions occurring on the ocean bottom. The tsunami
problem can be divided into three general areas: generation, propagation and
coastal effects. This investigation is directed toward mitigation of the tsunami
hazard primarily due to nearshore underwater landslides. In California, numerous
submarine canyons are oriented perpendicular to the shore, with the canyon heads
nearshore where the underwater sliding of sediment layers stored in the
nearshore regions of these canyons could generate large waves. An important
mechanism which could cause such landslides could be a distant or an offshore
earthquake, such as the Northridge earthquake of January 1994 which caused
considerable shaking and damage in the coastal community of Santa Monica,
approximately 20 miles from the epicenter. If such shaking had triggered the
failure of sediment layers in the nearshore canyons, it is possible that a
damaging tsunami could have been generated in the nearshore waters. The shape
and the kinematic properties of waves generated by underwater landslides and
their modification as they propagate shoreward and overland are important in
defining the forces on structures, such as seawalls and buildings which may be
in the path of such potentially-destructive waves. The project involves
experiments to understand the tsunami generation mechanism through underwater
sediment slides, in conjunction with the development of an analytical model for
the generation mechanism. It will provide data to assist in the evaluation of
inundation distances to predict coastal flooding, and suggest reliable limits to
evacuation zones. Such data are important for the engineering design, urban
planning, and for improvement of the tsunami warning syste m. The results will
be directly applicable also to engineering problems associated with other wave-
structure interactions, such as the shoreward propagation of long-wavelength
storm waves, and to waves generated in inland reservoirs and coastal inlets by
landslides. ***