* 9523413
* Modeling of Matrix-Assisted Laser Desorption Ionization of  Proteins and Nucleic Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1999
* Akos Vertes, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 11/30/1999
* USD 244,250.00

Recent results in laser-solid interactions indicate that there is a convenient
way to propel large molecules into the gas phase with little or no degradation.
This particularly exciting new method, matrix-assisted laser desorption
ionization (MALDI), has enormously expanded the mass range for the spectroscopy
of high molecular weight biomolecules. No adequate theory is yet available to
explain the entire method, or even parts of it like co-crystallization or ion
formation. The proposal plans to study the chemistry and physics of the
mechanisms that produce the sample crystals, energize, eject, and ionize the
molecules from condensed molecular samples with emphasis on the MALDI
experiments on proteins and nucleic acids. Two limits of the ejection process
will be explored: the hydrodynamic (HD) limit and the molecular dynamic (MD)
limit. The two descriptions complement each other in terms of time scales
(&lt;200 ps for MD vs. 1 ns to 100 ns for HD) and accessible information
(molecular vs. bulk properties). Large biomolecules are hard or impossible to
evaporate since they tend to decompose before reaching high-enoughtemperature.
The most accurate spectroscopic methods, however, rely on gas phase molecules. A
recently discovered phenomenon, called matrix-assisted laser
desorption/ionization (MALDI), gets around this problem by embedding the large
molecules into an easy-to-evaporate matrix that can be excited by pulsed laser
radiation. The MALDI method has provided unprecedented accuracy in the molecular
mass determination of large proteins and other biomolecules. Despite the great
benefits of this method, understanding of the underlying processes is lagging
behind. The proposal plans to explore the chemistry and physics of the
mechanisms that produce the sample crystals, energize, eject, and ionize the
molecules from condensed molecular samples with emphasis on the MALDI
experiments on proteins and nucleic acids. Improved understanding of the basic
phenomena involved will help to extend the capabilities of MALDI for a larger
group of important biomolecules.