* 9523787
* Internal and External Causes of Climatic Changes
* GEO,AGS
* 11/15/1995,04/30/2001
* Michael Ghil, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 04/30/2001
* USD 1,016,199.00

Abstract ATM-9523787 Ghil, Michael University of California, Los Angeles Title:
Internal and External Causes of Climatic Changes The PI will study three general
areas of climate: 1. He will continue research on the physical mechanisms of
Quaternary glaciations. Simple and intermediate models of these mechanisms will
be developed further, including zero-, one-, two- and three dimensional models
of the paleoceanic thermohaline circulation (THC), in addition to the
previously-modeled radiation balance, ice-sheet mass balance, and hydrologic
cycle. Model results will be compared in the spectral and temporal domain with
marine, ice-core and continental records, emphasizing rapid variations
associated with marine Heinrich and ice-core Dansgaard- Oeschger events, and
their spatial patterns. 2. Research on the low-frequency variability of the
atmosphere, emphasizing intraseasonal oscillations in the midlatitude
atmosphere, has proceeded through theoretical studies with a hierarchy of simple
and intermediate models, observational studies of the longest upper-air
datasets, and studies using the UCLA general circulation model. The PI shall
complete this research with a direct comparison of intermediate-model, GCM, and
observational-analysis results. A laboratory study of barotropic flow over
topography should also shed further light on the oscillations' physical
mechanisms. 3. Natural climate variability on the interdecadal time scale is the
third, and new area of research. Preliminary, univariate studies of instrumental
records will be extended to explore this variability's spatial patterns. Two-
and three-dimensional THC models will be coupled with active and passive
atmospheric and sea- ice models. These models will be studied first for constant
radiative forcing and then for different scenarios of changes in this forcing,
due to solar variability, volcanic eruptions and greenhouse-gas increases. The
interaction of these long-periodic, intermittent or g radual changes with those
caused by the short- periodic annual cycle will be examined carefully. All three
thrusts of the investigation are aimed at clarifying the interaction between the
climatic system's natural variability - intraseasonal, interdecadal or
millennial - and the variable forcing: external to the atmosphere, in the
intraseasonal case, and to the climate system as a whole, in the other two. The
tools to be used are those of dynamical systems theory, for the model studies,
and of nonparametric statistics, for the model diagnostics and data analysis.
Ultimately, the proposed research should improve our understanding of the
factors that contribute to or limit the system's predictability on each one of
the three time scales under consideration.