* 9523589
* Mathematical Sciences:  Reduced-Form Modelling for          Integrated Assessment
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Max Henrion, Institute for Decision Systems Research
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 09/30/1998
* USD 279,998.00

Integrated assessment is increasingly used as a way to bridge the gap between
science and policy in environmental problems. Models of each aspect of a complex
problem are often too cumbersome to integrate directly. Instead, it is often
more appealing to develop reduced-form models for each component model that are
small enough to be comprehensible, flexible, and easily linked to one another. A
reduced-form model provides approximately the same behavior as the model from
which it is extracted in a much more compact and comprehensible form. The goal
of this project is to develop and evaluate techniques to help modellers analyze
their models and construct reduce-form models. The specific objectives are: 1.
To design and prototype a modellers' workbench to facilitate specification and
documentation of the inputs, outputs, and assumptions of existing models of
various types and sizes; 2. To provide a range of existing and new sampling
techniques to generate scenarios to exercise these models; 3. To provide a range
of existing and new model analysis techniques to identify key inputs and
parameters, identify nonmonotonic and regions of qualitatively different
behavior, and so help develop reduced-form models; and 4. To evaluate these
techniques experimentally by application to the development of reduced-form
models and integrated assessment models, and so to provide guidance on which
techniques are most valuable and for what kinds of models. This project is
supported under the Methods and Models for Integrated Assessment funding
opportunity.