* 9523959
* Physically-Based Computational Modeling of Saturated Soil
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Sia Nemat-Nasser, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 08/31/1999
* USD 181,868.00

9523959 Nemat-Nasser Major earthquakes can cause lateral and vertical motion of
the surface soil layers, which may result in large permanent dis placements. A
consequence is damaged underground pipelines and surface facilities such as
roads, bridges, and buildings. In coastal regions, saturated soils may liquefy
during an earthquake, resulting in damage to man-made facilities. The necessary
scientific tools for assisting soil engineers and geophysicists concerned with
liquefaction and the resulting soil failure are physically-based computational
models with predictive capability. The aim of this research program is to
develop such tools. The goal is to create science-based computational tools with
predictive capability in order to address the liquefaction and soil failure
phenomena. The following tasks are addressed: 1. Examine by direct observation
the history of the deformation of lines and layers of lead-doped granules
embedded in a soil sample, and relate this to the overall response. A special
cell with X-ray attachment provides a tool to study the kinematics of
deformation inside the sample. It provides the capability to obtain insight into
the deformation of a saturated particulate medium during its liquefaction. It
also permits the study of the inception and growth of shearbands. Preliminary
observations suggest that even in a liquefied sample, shearbands can be induced,
as the deformation becomes large, during each cycle. The development of such
shearbands is examined as they develop, and how they change as the deformation
cycle is reversed. Both drained and undrained samples are investigated. 2.
Directly observe and quantify the microstructure in shearband zones. The special
cell is used to create controlled shearbanding in both drained and undrained
saturated samples. The sample is then impregnated with polyester resin, and
solidified. In this manner, the microstructure of the shearbands within the
sample can be captured. The sand mass is so lidified in situ, once a desired
state is reached. Thin sections are cut from this solidified sample for
microscopic analysis. During shear localization, the particles in the region
which eventually forms the localized band may undergo large rotations, whereas
particles adjacent to the eventual shearing zone may still retain their
orientation and relative position that existed prior to the localization. By
studying the microstructure of a zone adjacent to the localized region and
comparing the deformation with that within the zone, a complete picture of the
transition from a homogeneous to a highly localized heterogeneous deformation
state can be documented, Pictures are taken of the shear zones and their
neighborhoods for complete statistical and deterministic analysis. These results
are used to guide the theoretical modeling of the deformation prior to shearband
inception, during shearband formation, and within the shearband, once it has
fully developed. ***