* 9523801
* Reaction of Carbon with Nitric and Unified Mechanism for    Oxidation Carbon Gasification
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1995,01/31/1999
* Ralph Yang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 01/31/1999
* USD 208,845.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9523801 This is a study of the reaction between carbon and nitric
oxide (forming nitrogen and carbon oxides), including an examination of a
hypothetical surface oxygen complex which could be the basis for a unified
mechanism for all oxidative gasification reactions of carbon. In the first part
of this study, rates are measured for the reaction between carbon and nitric
oxide using electron microscopy and single-crystal graphite for both uncatalyzed
and catalyzed reactions. For the uncatalyzed system, measurements include the
relative rates of reaction of oxygen and nitric oxide with carbon, the
dependence of activation energy on temperature, the kinetics of abstraction of
basal-plane atoms, kinetic effects of water and carbon monoxide, and surface
nitrogen species. For catalyzed reactions, turnover frequency is determined from
the monolayer channeling rate data on the basal plane of graphite; catalysts are
selected from the transition metals, alkali metals, and alkaline earths. The
second part of this study seeks better understanding of the oxygen intermediate
suggested by molecular orbital theory; this species is the key to a unified
mechanism. Four graphites with four gases (oxygen, nitric oxide, water, and
carbon dioxide) are studied by temperature-programmed desorption (TPD).
Spectroscopic analyses (Fourier-transform infrared, X-ray photoelectron, and
carbon-13 nuclear magnetic resonance) are performed on graphite samples after
interrupting TPD experiments at various temperatures to determine, if it exists,
a correlation between surface oxygen species and carbon - monoxide desorption
energies. The "gasification" of carbon is a key element in a large number of
energy, chemical, and environmental processes. This, project examines one
reaction (the fourth to be studied in this series) in the family of carbol
gasification reactions and attempts to reduce the collected knowledge to a
unified mechanism for the process. ***