* 9523311
* Sapphire Fiber Optic Sensors and Instrumentation Capable of Operation Above 1500 Degrees Celcius
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Russell May, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 02/28/1999
* USD 139,368.00

9523311 Wang Cylindrical sapphire optical waveguides have been shown to be
especially attractive for the fabrication of high temperature sensor
instrumentation capable of operation at temperatures potentially up to 2000C.
The Fiber &amp; Electro-Optics Research Center (FEORC) at Virginia Tech proposes
to develop low-cost reliable sapphire fiber temperature, pressure, and strain
sensors which are desirable for the monitoring and control of many high
temperature industrial processes, including the combustion process-vital for the
power generation industry. Seven different sensing configurations will be
systematically investigated, designed and fabricated to determine the optimal
scheme for each parameter measurement. These sapphire waveguide-based schemes
include the balanced polarimetric sensor, the lead-insensitive polarimetric
sensor, the critical angle reflection intensity- based sensor, the frustrated
optical coupling intensity-based sensor, and the grating-based wavelength-coded
sensor. The selected optimal sensing schemes will then be further developed into
prototype sensor instrumentation units for system testing to determine the
system technical performance as well as the feasibility of these sensors for the
monitoring of the identified high temperature industrial processes involved in
the power industry. In addition to the sensor study, system development and
testing, the proposed research will also largely involve research in waveguide
evaluations and modifications, high performance sapphire-to-silica fiber
splicing, and high temperature component fabrication which will directly support
the proposed sensor work. The successful completion of the proposed program will
result in sapphire fiber sensor instrumentation to meet the needs of monitoring
and/or control of high temperature industrial processes involved in the power
generation industry, including the combustion, boiling process, high temperature
piping and vessel systems. ***