* 9523974
* Studies of Nuclear Reactions and Structures
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1999
* Kirby Kemper, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 11/30/1999
* USD 4,448,525.00

; R o o t E n t r y F D @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9523974 Kemper This research in experimental nuclear physics
will be carried out with the FSU tandem/linac accelerators and at other
laboratories in the U.S. Studies of new octupole behavior in 0(6) nuclei,
rotational structure in s-d shell nuclei, identical band structures near Z = 64,
and single-particle and collective properties of nuclei in the mass 80 region
will be undertaken. The excellent charged-particle detector resolution recently
attained in resonant particle decay spectroscopy will allow levels in lieht
nuclei to be studied within a few hundred keV of their a emission threshold. The
largely unexplored rank 3 analyzing powers can now be studied using the 7Li beam
from the laser-pumped polarized ion source. In addition, the high beam currents
and polarizations from this source will permit detailed investigation of the
origin of the tensor force in 6Li scattering. Present and future laser
capabilities along with beams from the tandem/LINAC will allow precise tests of
quantum electrodynamics calculations of energy levels of low to intermediate Z
helium-like ions. The Hall B experime ntal physics program at CEBAF is set to
commence and the capabilities of the CLAS will be aimed at examination of
nucleon resonances and strangeness production. Construction of the Ring-Imaging
Cherenkov system for PHENIX is well under way. Programs of radioactive beam
scattering at MSU and conversion electron and ray studies at GAMMASPHERE are
proposed. *** ; Oh +' 0 ( L p S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( &amp; $ H l
R:\WWUSER\ABSTRACT.DOT 9523974 Gwendolyn C. Owens Gwendolyn C. Owens @ @ @ ( @
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e " " " " " " " L L L L L L V L l j ` d d d d d d d N
T * U l " d d d d d l d " " d ` d d d d " d " d 6 &gt; " " " " d d k d 9523974
Kemper This research in experimental nuclear physics will be carried out with
the FSU tandem/linac accelerators and at other laboratories in the U.S. Studies
of new octupole behavior in 0(6) nuclei, rotational structure in s-d shell
nuclei, identical band structures near Z = 64, and single-particle and
collective properties of nuclei in the mass 80 region will be undertaken. The
excellent charged-particle detector resolution recently attained in resonant
particle decay spectroscopy will allow levels in light nuclei to be studied
within a few hundred keV of their a emission threshold. The largely unexplored
rank 3 analyzing powers can now be studied using the 7Li beam from the laser-
pumped polarized ion source. In addition, the high beam currents and
polarizations from this source will permit detailed investigation of the origin
of the tensor force in 6Li scattering. Present and future laser capabilities
along with beams from the tandem/LINAC will allow precise tests of quantum
electrodynamics calculations of energy levels of low to intermediate Z helium-