* 9523482
* Dissertation Research:  Early Paleoindians and Rockshelters in the Eastern Woodlands:  A Case Study at Wolfe Shelter,   Kentucky
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Tom Dillehay, University of Kentucky
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 10,779.00

Under the direction of Dr. Tom Dillehay, Mr. Leon Lane will collect data for his
doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavation at Wolfe
Shelter, a rock overhang located on a tributary of the Cumberland River in
Cumberland County, Kentucky. Previous work at his site has indicated a long
archaeological sequence with remains from a number of different cultures. On the
basis of stone tools recovered, it appears that the shelter and the adjacent
area was occupied by Paleoindian hunter-gatherers as much at 12,000 years ago.
Such sites are extremely rare in the Eastern United States. Mr. Lane will
conduct careful stratigraphic excavations and expose an area of 56 square meters
in, and in the immediate vicinity of the site. Lithic materials as well as
associated faunal and floral remains will be collected and analyzed. The
geological and environmental history of the site will be reconstructed and
appropriate samples collected for radiocarbon dating. This information should
provide insight into: the type and extent of Paleoindian occupation; the
technology and economy of the early occupants; the relationship between
materials recovered inside the shelter and those in surrounding depositional
settings. While abundant data attest to the presence of Paleoindian peoples
across North America by 12,000 years ago, surprisingly little is known about how
they adapted to this unexploited environment. Almost all well preserved sites
from this period are located in the Western part of the U.S. and there a picture
of highly mobile large game hunters has emerged. However the environment in the
Eastern part of the continent is quite different and quite likely adaptations
were different in this region. However very little information is available.
Thus the Wolfe Shelter is quite important and the results of this proposed
research will be of widespread archaeological interest. It will also provide new
understanding of hunter gatherer behavior during the earliest period of New
World prehistory. The award will assist in the training of a promising young
scientist.