* 9523625
* Dissertation Research:  Production and Distribution of      Chalcolithic Materials
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Anthony Marks, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1997
* USD 10,927.00

Under the direction of Dr. Anthony Marks, Mr. Staso Forenbaher will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological research in the
Estremadura region of Portugal, the westernmost land of continental Europe.
During the Chalcolithic (Copper Age), the Tejo estuary penetrated deep inland,
effectively turning it into a peninsula over 100 km long and 50 km wide. The
area thus forms a discrete archaeological region. Mr. Forenbaher will conduct
two types of work. First he will excavate at the site of Casas de Baixo to
collect a large systematic sample of lithic materials as well as contextual
information and organic for radiocarbon dating. Excavation will be carried out
in 1 m. sq. units and continue until an adequate lithic sample has been
obtained. Secondly, Mr. Forenbaher will analyze lithic collections from a large
number of Chalcolithic sites. These include quarries where raw materials were
obtained and stone tools produced, small settlements, larger fortified
settlements and human burials. Specimens will be measured and described both to
establish artifact classes and to determine the degree of standardization within
each. Raw materials will also be sourced to tie them to point of origin.
Archaeologists wish to understand how complex societies emerged and it is clear
that the Portuguese Chalcolithic sites represent an early stage in this process.
Based on very carefully worked artifacts which appear in some graves, it is
evident that social hierarchies had begun to appear during this time but the
extent to which society generally was organized along such principles is
uncertain. Through his research, Mr. Forenbaher will be able to determine how
lithics functioned within the social system. He will examine the degree to which
standardized products were manufactured and this will provide information on the
extent of economic centralization. By tracing finished products to the raw
material source he can reconstruct the extent and direction of trade networks
and the degree of centralized control involved. This research is important for
several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will shed new light on the origins of social complexity and assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.