* 9523759
* SGER:  Photo Polymer Based Optical Pattern Recognition for  Security Verification
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Bahram Javidi, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9523759 Javidi Credit card fraud is a serious problem facing many banks,
businesses, and consumers. In addition, counterfeit products such as computer
chips, compact discs, and designer fashions, are arriving on our shores in great
numbers. With the rapid advances in computers, CCD technology, image processing
hardware and software, printers, scanners, and copiers, it is becoming
increasingly easy to reproduce pictures, logos, symbols, paper currency, or
patterns. Credit cards and passports currently use holograms as a security
measure to thwart copying. But technology has advanced to the point where the
holographic image can be easily acquired from a credit card - and a new hologram
synthesized using commercially available optical components or hologram-
producing equipment. We propose a novel system for security verification of
credit cards, passports, and other IDs so that they cannot easily be reproduced.
The system uses a new scheme of complex phase/amplitude patterns that cannot be
seen and cannot be copied by an intensity-sensitive detector such as a CCD
camera. The basic idea is to permanently and irretrievably bond a random phase
mask to a primary identification pattern such as a fingerprint, a picture of a
face, or a signature. For additional security, the primary pattern could also be
phase encoded which results in a very secure system. Both the random phase mask
and the primary pattern are identifiable in an optical system. ***