* 9523410
* Nuclear Permeability as a Function of Cellular Activity
* BIO,MCB
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1998
* Carl Feldherr, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 04/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F IDx @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t + O b j e c
t P o o l u u 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; \ \ 4 L 4 9523410 Feldherr Recently, we found that signal-
mediated nuclear import varies as a function of cellular activity. Thus, as
proliferating fibroblasts become quiescent there is a significant decrease in
both the rate of macromolecular uptake into the nucleus, and the functional size
of the transport channels. Conversely, nuclear import capacity increases above
the proliferating level in rapidly dividing, SV40 transformed cells. These
transport changes could have a significant effect on the regulation of
transcriptional and translational events. Similarly, the modulation of nuclear
efflux could play a fundamental role in controlling cell metabolism. Since
substances exit the nucleus through the same transport channels that are used
for uptake, and are subject to the same size restrictions, it is reasonable to
assume that the import results mentioned above reflect overall transport
activity. However, it is also possible that specific factor which enhance
signal-mediated import have no effect on export. Therefore, considering its
regulatory potential, we will investigate macromolecular movement out of the
nucleus in transformed, quiescent, and dividing BALB/c cells. Relative efflux
rates, as well as the size of particles that are able to exit the nucleus will
be determined. This will be determined. This will be accomplished by injecting
RNA- or polynucleotide-coated gold into the nucleoplasm and following its
intracellular distribution by electron microscopy. To facilitate export, the
gold preparations will be treated with oocyte nuclear extracts, or specific
proteins that are known to be required for nuclear efflux. %%% This proposal
will investigate the mechanisms by which components within the cell are
transported across barrier (that is, the nuclear envelope) which separates the
genetic material of the cell from the remainder of the cell (that is, the
cytoplasm). The rate at which material is transported is a reflection of the
level of metabolic activity of the cell, but the mechanism which controls this
is not clear. A better understanding of this mechanism may allow researchers to
cause a slow and quiescent cell to become an active cell. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D
h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9420795 toni douglas toni douglas @ ? @ S u m m
a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 1 @ b @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e + j j j j
j j j s 1 5 U T 3 s j s j j j j ~ j j j j m 9523410 Feldherr Recently, we found
that signal-mediated nuclear import varies as a function of cellular activity.
Thus, as proliferating fibroblasts become quiescent there is a significant
decrease in both the rate of macromolecular uptake into the nucleus, and the
functional size of the transport channels. Conversely, nuclear import capacity
increases above the proliferating level in rapidly dividing, SV40 transformed
cells. These transport changes could have a significant effect on the regulation
of transcriptional and translational events. Similarly, the mo