* 9523157
* New Oxygen Ion Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Hans-Conrad zur Loye, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1996
* USD 122,731.00

Abstract 9523157 Zur Loye In the previous funding period, it was shown that new
oxide ion conductors containing intrinsic oxygen vacancies can be readily
synthesized by creating intergrowth structures and, furthermore, that such
intergrowths can exhibit very high oxide ion conductivities above an order-
disorder transition. Although the exact mechanism for this order-disorder
transition is not yet fully understood, it appears that by appropriate choices
of structure type and elemental compositions such transitions can be induced in
many types of intergrowth structures containing intrinsic oxygen vacancies. This
approach of creating intergrowth structures for the synthesis of new oxide ion
conductors is a general one, and can be extended to other systems. During the
proposed funding period, major emphasis will be placed on investigating the
precise structural changes that occur during the order-disorder transitions and
on extending this work to include brownmillerite/rock salt intergrowths and on
modifying a class of materials which is structurally related to the Aurivillius
phase. It is expected that new oxygen ion conductors will be synthesized and
that their oxygen ion conductivity and their stability in both reducing and
oxidizing conditions will be determined. The new materials will be synthesized
by high temperature solid state methods and structurally characterized by
Rietveld refinement of powder X-ray or neutron diffraction data. Their chemical
and physical properties will be determined by standard electrical and analytical
techniques. %%% The objective of the proposed research is to synthesize new
oxide ion conductors and to characterize their structures, conductivities and
chemical stabilities. Oxide ion conductors have many important applications in
the areas of solid oxide fuel cells, oxygen sensors, oxygen pumps and partial
oxidation catalysts. Although this class of materials has been known for a long
time, there still exists the general need to develop new oxide ion conductors
that exhibit high conductivities and that are chemically stable under both
oxidizing and reducing conditions.