* 9523423
* SGER:  Nanoelectronic Functional Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1996
* Vwani Roychowdhury, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deborah L. Crawford
* 04/30/1996
* USD 50,000.00

9523423 Roychowdhury Continuing advances in the miniaturization of electron
devices have made possible the fabrication of nanoelectric devices with feature
sizes in the 1-100nm range. However, it is widely believed that conventional
integrated circuit design techniques will become impractical, due to the small
size and the low current carrying capacity of nanostructured devices. Proposals
which envision novel ways to circumvent this problem have begun to appear in
earnest. The majority of these proposals use globally coherent quantum systems
to generate computational abilities. We differ from these proposals in that we
use semiclassical global models as the basis from which to conceive
nanoelectronic functional devices. An additional point of departure, is our
assumption that currently perceived limitations to realizing interconnects
amongst the nanostructured devices will in time be overcome. Finally, we
restrict attention to niche applications, in which the collective activity of a
large number of nanostructured devices give rise to useful computational
functions. The special purpose functional device concept adopted here can be
contrasted with other approaches which envision the design of general purpose
computers on the basis of quantum mechanical logic gates. This work has been
unified under a particular technology based on the creation of arrays of
nanometer-sized metallic islands. We consider different types of network
mechanisms for the transfer of electrons between islands. Depending on the types
of transport nonlinearities permitted by the network links, we show that it is
possible to generated different kinds of global activity in these networks. We
show, in addition that it is possible to impart a computational interpretation
to these global activities. In particular, we show that within a classical
circuit theoretic model, non-monotone nonlinearities in the local transport can
yield global associative memory effects. We then show that this interpretation
will remain valid even when single-electron effects come into play, provided
that the effective capacitance of the nanometallic islands is not too small. We
then investigate networks of islands in which the sole nonlinearity arises from
single-electronics. These networks are shown to be capable of associative memory
effects, as well as yield approximate solutions to certain NP-complete
optimization problems, provided that there is sufficient flexibility in the
choice of inter-island capacitances. Proposed future work includes: (a)
Development of novel theoretical techniques for the analysis and design of
nanoelectronic networks, (b) Development of detailed simulators for
nanoelectronic functional devices on parallel machines, and (c) Incorporation of
novel nanoelectronic device and network mechanisms in functional devices. ***