* 9523636
* Biocatalyzed Reactions: A New Approach to Fuel Cells
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* G. Tayhas Palmore, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1997
* USD 35,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F : @ C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t # O b j e c t
P o o l : : F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Oh +' 0 $
H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT marcia steinberg marcia steinberg @ P: @ e
= e # j j j j j j j O L # 1 T 4 O j O j j j j ~ j j j j 4 9506831 Plapp Alcohol
dehydrogenases from horse liver and yeast have been studied extensively, but the
origin of the catalytic activity and the function of the whole protein in
catalytic dynamics is not fully understood. Roles for some amino acid residues
at the active sites have been proposed from knowledge of the three dimensional
structures, chemical modification, pH dependencies, and site directed
mutagenesis, but contributions to catalysis should be quantitatively evaluated.
Although enzymologists consider that residues at the active site are most
critical for catalysis, emerging data suggest that amino acid residues distant
from the active site contribute indirectly to catalytic power. Moreover,
conformational change s can affect catalysis in unknown ways. Alcohol
dehydrogenases offer a good system for studying these and other aspects of
dynamics and catalysis. Three dimensional structures of the liver enzyme in two
conformational states have been solved, and amino acid sequences for more than
60 alcohol dehydrogenases are available. Rate and dissociation constants for
each step in the mechanism can be estimated from steady state and transient data
and can quantitatively assess the effects of structural changes. The objectives
of the proposed research are to answer questions about (1) the pH dependence of
the catalytic mechanism, (2) the contribution of protein dynamics and
conformational changes to catalysis and hydrogen tunneling, and (3) the tertiary
and quaternary structures of various states of the horse and yeast enzymes. Site
directed mutagenesis will be used to substitute amino acid residues, and steady
state and transient kinetics, x ray crystallography, NMR, and fluorescence will
be used to study these variants. Amino acid residues in the proton relay system
and other residues at or distant from the active site will be substituted in
order to study the origin of the pH dependencies for coenzyme binding and
substrate interconversion steps. Residues near the coenzyme and substrate
binding sites will be studied, as will some residues that contribute to the
overall electrostatic potential of the protein. Protein flexibility and hydrogen
tunneling will be studied in the liver enzyme with substitutions of residues in
the interiors of the domains and at hinge regions, and by deletion of Q loops or
other "extraneous" structural elements. Dynamic fluorescence properties of the
horse liver enzyme with substituted tryptophan residues will be assessed. Three
dimensional structures of complexes of the tetrameric yeast alcohol
dehydrogenase and of potentially new conformational states of the dimeric horse
liver enzyme will be determined by x ray crystallography. This research should
increase our understanding of biocatalysis. %%% Alcohol dehydrogenase is the
enzyme required for the production of ethanol by fermentation in yeast and for
the removal of alcohols by metabolism in man. The enzyme accelerates the rate of
dehydrogenation of alcohols with a coenzyme, but the catalytic mechanism is not
yet fully understood. Enzymes are large proteins that have a smaller active site
region with several amino acid residues that directly bind the alcohol and the
coenzyme. Other amino acid residues outside of the active site provide a
framework for the catalytic process and indirectly affect the rate of the
reaction by controlling protein dynamics. Three dimensional structures of the
horse and human liver enzymes have been determined, and now the structure of the
yeast enzyme will be determined. The horse liver enzyme changes conformation
during catalysis, which may facilitate the transfer of hydrogen by a "tunneling"
process. The roles of the various amino acid residues in the horse and yeast
enzymes will be studied by "protein engineering", which uses site directed
mutagenesis to change individual amino acids, and by steady state and rapid
reaction kinetics, X ray crystallography, and other spectroscopic methods that
can detect the effects of the mutations. These studies will increase our
understanding of biocatalysis. *** @ @ ; S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (