* 9523658
* Collaborative Research:  Broadband Seismic Measurements on  the Deep Ocean Floor: A Pilot Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Tokuo Yamamoto, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 11/30/1996
* USD 70,000.00

9523658 Yamamoto This team of investigators from Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution (Massachusetts), Scripps Institution of Oceanography (University of
California, San Diego, California) and Rosenstiel School of Marine and
Atmospheric Sciences (University of Miami, Florida) will jointly develop and
test three types of deep-ocean seismometers as a pilot experiment for a set of
ocean sensors to expand the existing land-based "global" seismic network to one
which has truly global coverage. Global seismic coverage with broadband
seismometers provides a capability to accurately define the interior structure
of the earth with resolution presently not possible, and it provides a
capability to significantly improve warnings for tsunamis. The instruments to be
used in the present project are all "broadband" sensors, and will be deployed
respectively 1) lying on the seafloor, 2) buried slightly within marine
sediments, and 3) within an existing seafloor drill hole. All deployments will
be carried out for the same 3-month period in early 1997. The borehole
deployment will use a specially developed system (Scripps Institution) to place
the instrument in the borehole; the buried sensors will be emplaced with a
system developed at University of Miami. Tests will take place near Hawaii, and
results of all three systems will be compared with a permanent land seismometer
on the island of Oahu as well as with each other. This project is jointly
supported by Ocean Sciences and Earth Sciences Divisions of the Geosciences
Directorate at NSF, and follows earlier development and testing programs of
component instruments. It is expected that this test will allow decisions to be
made about what types of deployments (surface, buried or in drillholes) will be
optimum for future "ocean seismic network" deployments. ***