* 9523456
* Remote Detection of Decaying Wood electric Power            Distribution Poles
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Christopher Davis, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 08/31/1998
* USD 175,000.00

9523456 Sirkis This proposal describes the development of a sensor system
capable of remotely monitoring the progression of decay in wood utility poles
used to support overhead transmission lines in power distribution networks. This
shall be done by detecting one or more of the following chemical/biological
metrics of decay: (1) presence and/or concentration of decay causing fungi, (2)
end-products of metabolic growth of the decay causing fungi, (3) decrease in
critical nutrients required to support fungi metabolic growth, (4) increase in
enzymes, (5) decrease in the ratio of carbon to nitrogen, and/or (6) decrease in
pH. Detection of these chemical metrics of decay shall be accomplished by
developing a multifunctional integrated optic-based sensor system that utilizes
Bragg gratings etched into planar waveguides. Part of the waveguide will utilize
Bragg grating with an upper cladding fabricated from chemical species. As
binding occurs, the propagation constant of the waveguide changes, resulting in
corresponding changes in the Bragg wavelength. Highly sensitive interferometric-
based demodulation schemes will be developed to monitor the chemically-induced
changes in the Bragg wavelength. A higher order Bragg grating located on the
same waveguide will be used aid optically probe the cellular structure in order
to monitor pH and/or florescence indicative of the targeted metabolic by-
products of decay. The sensor technology we propose offers (1) high rejection of
electromagnetic noise, (2) compatibility with optical fiber telemetry so that
sensor data can be transmitted simultaneously with communications signals
thereby making possible remote pole inspection, (3) multiplexibility so that
many sensors can be fabricated into the same planar waveguide, and many planar
waveguides can be located along the same optical fiber lead, and (4)
manufacturing processes similar to those used in the microelectrics industry
thereby making possible sensors amenable to l ow cost mass production. ***