* 9523279
* Early Transition Metal Complexes with Polydentate           Polyanionic Ligands as Olefin Polymerization Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,05/31/1999
* James Boncella, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Mackay
* 05/31/1999
* USD 244,000.00

This project supported by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic
Chemistry Program will support the continuation of studies of transition metal
polymerization catalysts by Professor J. Boncella of the University of Florida.
Studies of transition metal complexes of polydentate, polyanionic ligands will
be undertaken with the following objectives: 1) continued development of
catalysts for olefin metathesis polymerization and depolymerization with
emphasis on the mechanism of action of a recently developed tungsten-based
catalyst of N,N'-bis(trimethylsilyl)-o-phenylenediamide, 2) possible
applications for C-H bond activation reactions that are observed with this
tungsten compound, 3) development of catalysts that will perform both metathesis
polymerization and Zeigler-Natta type polymerizations at the same metal center,
and 4) the synthesis of a new class of polyanionic ligands based upon the
pyrrolide ligand, including some that carry more charge than ligating atoms.
This new class of ligands is expected to lead to the synthesis of high oxidation
state early transition metal complexes that have unusually low coordination
numbers and which may have enhanced reactivity. The properties of transition
metal catalysts are critically dependent upon the type and number of groups
(ligands) that are attached to the active metal center. This project involves
the synthesis and study of several new catalysts. Among objectives of this
research are 1) the development of new types of polymerization catalysts that
are thermally robust and allow for the polymerization of monomers that cannot
currently be polymerized because of catalyst instability, and 2) the development
of dual function catalysts that can be used to co-polymerize two monomers that
undergo polymerization by different mechanisms.