* 9523383
* Acoustic Emission Leak Prevention, Detection and Location   in Storage Tank/Pipeline Facilities
* ENG,EEC
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1999
* Daniel Watts, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* alexander schwarzkopf
* 07/31/1999
* USD 2,415,211.00

ABSTRACT EEC-9523383 WATTS Underground pipelines and storage tank systems can
develop leaks over time and cause significant environmental damage. A number of
Government agencies have jointly recognized this concern and are joining
together to facilitate a research and development program to be undertaken
jointly by the New Jersey Institute of Technology's Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center for Emission Reduction (ERRC) and Iowa State
University's Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Nondestructive
Evaluation (CNDE). This collaborative effort will address the envisaged broad
scope of a multi-university, multi-agency project. The Emission Reduction
Research Center (ERRC) at New Jersey Institute of Technology will be responsible
for the interface with the sponsoring agencies, EPA, DOE, DoD, and NSF. ERRC is
studying how to modify the pipeline systems at the EPA UST/Pipeline Test
Apparatus in Edison, NJ utilizing the research results of a prior award,
EEC-9420695. Researchers in collaboration with instrument manufacturers will
characterize the nature of acoustic emission leak signals in the large scale
pipeline systems. Working collaboratively with researchers from the Center for
Nondestructive Evaluation at Iowa State University and utilizing the
characterization data base, sensor placement and signal processing and analysis
will be optimized for the range of leak size and location precision necessary to
obtain a 95% reliability for leak location. These results will provide another
data base for the two Centers to test how effective the acoustic emission system
will be in a number of "real world" operational sites. The Center for
Nondestructive Evaluation is studying the pipeline acoustics transmission
characteristics to clarify interpretation of measured signals in this
laboratory. Tests will then be made on an outdoor buried, water filled pipeline
using an artificial acoustic source and manufactured fluid leaks. These results
will be compared and analyzed to develop transit time-based leak location
algorithms. The algorithms will be tested against the experimental and
theoretical data to establish units, performance and accuracy as a function of
location, leak rate, etc. The CNDE researchers will then assist in implementing
the acoustic emission system for "real world" field tests, at various sites
coordinated by NJIT and the participating agencies. The researchers are fully
qualified to perform these studies. Funding for year one of this collaborative
award is being provided by EPA, DOE, DoD, and NSF. Dr. Ken P. Chong, Program
Director, Structural Systems and Construction Processes Program, is providing
the NSF funds.