* 9523870
* Bioavailability and Biodegradation of Organic Contaminants  In Heterogenous Subsurface Environments
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Raina Maier, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Siegel-Causey
* 09/30/1999
* USD 409,996.00

9523870 Miller Bioavailability and Biodegradation of Organic Contaminants in
Heterogeneous Subsurface Environments. One of the most promising and cost-
effective environmental cleanup technologies for contaminated soil and
groundwater is in situ bioremediation. In situ bioremediation is the use of
microorganisms to restore a contaminated environment without having to excavate
or otherwise disturb the contaminated site. Many natural environments contain
microbial communities capable of degrading (destroying) pollutants. There are
two serious problems facing successful implementation of in situ bioremediation.
These are the physical and chemical heterogeneities found in natural
environments, and the reduced availability of contaminants that results from the
sorption (sticking) of contaminants to solid surfaces (clay or sand particles).
The goal of this project is to use an integrated biological and
physical/chemical approach to investigate the factors controlling bioremediation
in natural (heterogeneous) subsurface environments. This proposal outlines a
unique approach to understanding the effect of heterogeneity on contaminant
availability, and how availability constraints can be overcome to enhance the
magnitude and rate of bioremediation. This approach combines state-of-the-art
intermediate-scale flow and transport experiments with an advanced technique for
the determination of both the number and activity of contaminant-degrading
microorganisms (fiber optic detection of luminescing microorganisms). This
approach will allow the simultaneous detection of contaminant transport and
microbial activity, which will allow for the investigation of the relationship
between spatial heterogeneity and availability of contaminants for microbially-
mediated destruction. In addition, the approach will be used to evaluate the
physical and biological parameters that control the transport of microorganisms
in a heterogeneous environment, and to relate microbial mechanisms for enhanced
transport to their potential to enhance the degradation of inaccessible organic
contaminants. The approach will also be used to evaluate strategies to enhance
in situ bioremediation, for example, the application of surfactants (detergents)
that may increase the availability of sorbed contaminants. The results of the
research will improve our understanding of these issues and will provide
significant advancement in prediction of contaminant transport and fate, for
evaluating groundwater contamination potential, and for the manipulation of
subsurface systems to enhance the effectiveness of bioremediation technologies.