* 9523575
* Time Resolved Studies of Molecular Clusters Using Mass      Analyzed Threshold Ionization Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Joseph Knee, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Charles Pibel
* 11/30/1999
* USD 301,000.00

Joseph L. Knee is supported by the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program to
study the spectroscopy and dynamics of molecular clusters using pump-probe
threshold photoelectron spectroscopy. Threshold photoelectron spectroscopy is
used as a state selective probe of excited state dynamics by monitoring the time
evolution of the photoelectron spectrum as a function of pump-probe laser delay.
By implementing mass analyzed threshold ionization spectroscopy (MATI), such
studies can be done with mass resolution; a reflectron mass spectrometer will be
built for this purpose. Fluorene-Ar(subn) clusters will be used to study
intramolecular vibrational redistribution (IVR) and vibrational predissociation
(VP) in van der waals complexes. The cluster size, n, will be varied in order to
investigate cluster size influence on IVR and VP dynamics. MATI experiments will
be carried out which will distinguish between different cluster conformations,
allowing dynamic measurements of processes such as conformer interconversions.
Cation cluster spectroscopy will be another important component to these
studies. Also, proton transfer in Naphthol-(NHsub3)subn and other hydrogen-
bonded systems will be studied. Many studies have been completed on binary and
tertiary complexes, but for clusters of four or more, the quantity and quality
of information available is much less. Larger clusters are important to study if
one is interested in learning about solution phase behavior such as how solvents
can participate in and mediate chemical reactions, e.g., the excited state
proton transfer between 1-Naththol and ammonia requires at least four ammonia
molecules complexed to the naphthol to occur. To learn about cluster structure
and dynamics in larger clusters, one has to overcome problems of complexity and
mass selectivity.