* 9523748
* Aggregation Dynamics of Antarctic Krill, Euphausia Superba  Dana
* O/D,OPP
* 11/01/1995,04/30/1998
* Mark Huntley, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 04/30/1998
* USD 148,061.00

9523748 Huntley Patchiness of zooplankton and micronekton is a feature of
central importance in marine ecosystems. In the Southern Ocean, aggregations of
krill (Euphausia superba) are of particular interest. The distribution and
dynamics of such aggregations are critical to determining the transformation of
organic matter (e.g. carbon flux) and the fate of populations in the sea. These
phenomena are especially important in the mesoscale and sub- mesoscale domains,
where patchiness is most strongly expressed. If the means to predict patch
dynamics is lacking, then so is the means to adequately predict carbon flux and
population dynamics at these scales. Traditional models of zooplankton patch
dynamics generally treat animals as Lagrangian particles whose aggregations are
determined solely by processes of advection and diffusion. This approach ignores
behavior induced by biotic and abiotic forces and manifested as purposeful
motion - motion that clearly is not governed by advection and diffusion.
Attempts to acknowledge behavior in models of plankton motility have been
successful at the level of the individual animal, but even the most powerful
computers cannot run individual-based models to predict aggregation dynamics of
n individuals. This proposal takes a new approach to modeling aggregation
dynamics, based on "bio-continuum" theory, and provides for model verification
against benchmark field data. Rather than relying on traditional advection-
diffusion equations, which ignore behavior, the bio-continuum theory recognizes
behavioral forces in the context of statistical mechanics. Model output provides
information on animal behaviors, manifest as swimming velocities, that are
absent from other models of patch dynamics. All key model variables are
measurable using common sampling techniques, such as acoustic Doppler and
multiple net systems. The proposed research consists of studying both the
internal and external forces that act on aggregations of Euphausia superba.
First, the internal forces of autocoherence (that act between animals to
maintain patch integrity) will be measured in krill aggregations observed in the
Gerlache Strait region in 1992. Our database consists of more than 20 such
aggregations observed by ADCP and MOCNESS. Second, the effect of external
physical forcing on krill aggregations will be studied by embedding krill swarms
of typical scales in numerically modeled flow regimes that are typical of the
Gerlache Strait region (Zhou and Niiler 1995), by combining the Princeton
circulation model (e.g. Blumberg and Mellor 1987) with our aggregation model.
This research provides a novel, dynamic theory of animal aggregations in the
sea. A study of the fundamental theory, coupled with model realizations that can
be compared to observed aggregations of Euphausia superba, may lead to more
realistic predictions of krill patch dynamics in the Southern Ocean. Such
predictions are critical to more accurate measurements of carbon flux and the
population dynamics of krill.