* 9523932
* Hydrological, Geochemical and Microbiological Controls On   Anaerobic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation In a Petroleum-Contaminated Aquifer
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Derek Lovley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* None
* 09/30/1998
* USD 349,535.00

9523932 Lovely Hydrological, Geochemical and Microbiological Controls on
Anaerobic Aromatic Hydrocarbon Degradation in a Petroleum-Contaminated Aquifer
Contamination of ground water with petroleum products as the result of
terrestrial oil spills and leaking underground storage tanks is a serious
environmental problem. Toxic aromatic hydrocarbons such as benzene and toluene
which are important components of many fuels are water soluble and thus migrate
with the ground water. Although aerobic microorganisms can readily degrade
aromatic hydrocarbons when oxygen is present, most heavily contaminated ground
waters lack oxygen. Recent studies have demonstrated that there are
microorganisms which can degrade aromatic hydrocarbon contaminants in ground
water in the absence of oxygen. These anaerobic microorganisms use ferric iron
or sulfate as an electron acceptor for the degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons
rather than oxygen. In some instances this anaerobic microbial metabolism can
remove significant quantities of aromatic hydrocarbons from contaminated ground
waters and may alleviate the need for expensive remediation procedures. The
purpose of this research is to determine what microorganisms are responsible for
the degradation of aromatic hydrocarbons in petroleum-contaminated aquifers and
to elucidate the environmental conditions which might stimulate or inhibit this
microbial activity. Microbial populations in the aquifer will be studied with
several novel techniques including a newly developed molecular method which
permits rapid screening of the microbial populations in the sediments without
the need to culture the microorganisms. The effect of changes in hydrological
and geochemical conditions on the size and activity of the anaerobic microbial
populations responsible for aromatic hydrocarbon degradation will be evaluated
with field observations and in aquifer material that is experimentally
manipulated in laboratory incubations. It is expected that these studies will
identify key p arameters which can be used to simply and reliably predict the
rate and extent of anaerobic romatic hydrocarbon degradation in petroleum-
contaminated environments. ??