* 9523275
* Computational and Applied Aspects of Multiperiod Stochastic Programming
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* John Birge, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 09/30/1999
* USD 185,120.00

9523275 Birge This research is a continuation of a previous NSF funded project
on stochastic programming. Specifically, this project will continue the
development of solution methods, approximation procedures, models , and
structural results for multiperiod stochastic programs. These objectives will be
accomplished through the development of new decomposition methods for
distributed processors, including integer variables and nonlinear functions, new
methods with interior point techniques that focus on distributed solutions, new
bounds on the value of the stochastic solution and approximation solutions, new
techniques for bounding stochastic integer programming problems, and new
approximations and methods using specific model characteristics to enable
accurate results. Cmmparisons will consider alternative approaches with
computational effort, error analysis, and the value of information and model
complexity. The models will be applied to a variety of problems drawn from
manufacturing, finance, vehicle routing, power systems planning, and energy
policy. The goals are to obtain efficient practical solutions with known error
characteristics. Many optimization problems are characterized by parameter
values that are not known with certainty. Stochastic programming recognizes the
uncertain nature of parameters to model and solve problems. The algorithms
developed in this research will provide additional capabilities for solving
complex decision problems which generally possess greater number of parameters
with uncertain values. The explicit recognition of uncertainty in model building
combined with more efficient algorithms for solving the models will lead to
higher decision quality. The impact of improved decision quality from an
economic point of view can be very significant. Further, the models investigated
and the solution techniques produced will help to advance the knowledge in the
area.