* 9523564
* USA-India Bilateral Seminar on Multimedia Science           &amp; Technology, September 1995, New Delhi
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Venkat Rangan, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marjorie Lueck
* 01/31/1998
* USD 12,000.00

9523564 Rangan Description: This proposal will support the participation of six
US experts at the US-Indo Seminar on Multimedia Science and Technology, planned
for September 1995 in New Delhi. The host is the Secretary, N. Vittal, of the
Department of Electronics, Government of India. At the seminar, six leading
experts from the US will give talks and discuss the most appropriate areas for
joint collaboration. Recent advances in computers/networking are revolutionizing
the process of information acquisition, composition, publishing,
delivery,learning, and usage. Large-capacity storage disks and high-speed fiber-
optic networks are enabling the integration of diverse media, such as text,
audio, and video, during storage and delivery. These advances are stimulating
multimedia technologies that allow several forms of information--journals,
lectures, historic documents, movies, and newspapers--to be made available to
users via broadband networks. The multimedia sciences have sparked a number of
innovations such as digital multimedia "libraries without walls" and distance
learning. Scope: As part of this activity, the DOE will provide US participants
with access to several DOE laboratories scattered throughout India where they
will be able to investigate important multimedia S&amp;T research challenges
with their Indian colleagues. These include distance learning, computer
supported multimedia collaborative work, and digital libraries. This activity is
highly beneficial for the US as they will be interacting with top-notch
researchers in an area of great importance and strength on the Indian side. ***