* 9523356
* O2 Herzberg State Reaction with N2 - A Possible Source of   Stratospheric N2O
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Tom Slanger, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 04/30/1997
* USD 29,961.00

9523356 Copeland In this project, the production of nitrous oxide from the
reaction of individual excited states (specifically, Herzberg states) of
molecular oxygen with molecular nitrogen will be investigated. This reaction
could potentially provide an atmospheric source of nitrous oxide. The general
understanding of the sink and source terms that determine the atmospheric
altitude profile of nitrous oxide is still evolving. Although the major fraction
of atmospheric nitrous oxide comes from the soil and from anthropogenic
activity, there may also be a stratospheric source. Recent isotopic measurements
of stratospheric nitrous oxide suggest that all of it may not be formed on the
earth's surface. Laboratory experiments performed by this SRI research group
have demonstrated that the removal of the oxygen Herzberg states in collisions
with nitrogen is quite rapid, and that at least for the higher vibrational
levels of these states, nitrogen is the dominant quencher in the terrestrial
atmosphere. The Herzberg states are generated in the upper stratosphere and
lower mesosphere by absorption of solar radiation, and in the upper mesosphere
and lower thermosphere by oxygen atom recombination. To have a significant
impact on the stratospheric nitrous oxide budget, only a very small reaction
yield would be required. Laboratory experiments will be performed where oxygen
molecules will be excited to a specific vibrational level of one of the three
Herzberg states with a UV laser in a closed system containing oxygen and
nitrogen. After the mixture is exposed to the resonant light for minutes to
hours, the resulting gases will be analyzed for nitrous oxide using the
extremely sensitive technique of frequency-modulated diode laser spectroscopy.
If no nitrous oxide is detected, an upper limit for its production will be
established, eliminating this reaction system from further speculation.