* 9523361
* Physics of Strong Disorder and Correlation
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1998
* Patrick Lee, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 10/31/1998
* USD 258,000.00

9523361 Lee The broad subject area of this project is the physics of strong
interactions and the effect of random disorder. An example of strong correlation
is the physics of the fractional quantum Hall effect, where an electron gas is
subject to a high magnetic field so that only the lowest Landau level is
partially occupied. A key question is these systems is whether the composite
fermions can be described by Fermi liquid theory. The project proposes to
continue studying this important system and to explore new experiments which may
provide further information on this fascinating new state. The tools being used
include many- body perturbation theory, renormalization group analysis, and, at
times, numerical analysis. A successful completion of this project will have
significant impact on a broad area of condensed matter physics, including other
strongly correlated materals, such as high temperature superconductors and heavy
fermion metals. %%% This project theoretically investigates systems of electrons
where their repulsion plays a crucial role in determining their physical
properties, and the effects of random disorder on such systems. An example that
constitutes an important focus is the physics of the fractional quantum Hall
effect, in which a magnetic field is applied to a gas of electrons that forms at
an interface in semiconductors. The investigator is a distinguished leader in
this area of condensed-matter physics, using state-of-the art methods. A
successful completion of this project will have significant impact on a broad
area of condensed matter physics, including other strongly correlated materals,
such as high temperature superconductors and heavy fermion metals. ***