* 9523120
* A Hough Transform Based Approach for Accurate Evaluation of Geometric Tolerances
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Sundararaman Anand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 06/30/1997
* USD 60,391.00

9523120 Anand Continuous improvement of the quality and reliability of
manufactured parts requires clear methods and guidelines for accurate, fast and
consistent inspection of parts and interpretation of inspection data. This
research aims to develop a technique for calculating size tolerances and the
minimum zones for flatness and straightness based on the Hough Transform method.
This technique for evaluating geometric tolerances of manufactured parts, unlike
the methods currently used, is exact and is thus more appropriate for precision
applications. Data will be collected from actual industrial parts from three
different manufacturers who will collaborate to compare the new technique with
the methods they currently use for size, flatness, straightness, and orientation
tolerances. Most manufacturers currently us approximate methods to verify
geometric tolerances. This can result in errors that degrade product quality,
especially for precision machining. The results of this research could result in
more accurate and efficient inspection of geometric tolerances. Since the method
is exact rather than approximate, it should be particularly useful for precision
manufacturing. The proposed method has application to a broad range of
manufacturing industries, if successful.