* 9523534
* Magnetic Moment Creation at Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,05/31/1999
* Leonard Klebanoff, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 05/31/1999
* USD 290,000.00

This research project, supported jointly by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry
Program of the Chemistry Division and the Solid State Chemistry and Polymers
Program of the Division of Materials Research, explores the magnetic properties
of epitaxial monolayers and bilayers. Spin resolved photoelectron spectroscopy
is used to probe the creation of magnetism in non-magnetic metallic overlayers
deposited on the Fe(001) surface with elemental specificity. X-ray photoelectron
diffraction is used to determine overlayer geometric structure in these systems.
In combination with theoretical calculations, this information is used to
comprehensively examine the creation of magnetic interfaces using normally non-
magnetic materials. The novel properties of these materials are of fundamental
interest, and are relevant to the understanding of magnetic thin film recording
materials. %%% With the support of the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program
and the Solid State Chemistry and Polymers Program, Professor Klebanoff of
Lehigh University is investigating the magnetic properties of monolayer and
bilayer films of non-magnetic metals deposited on magnetic iron substrates.
Magnetic information from spin dependent electron spectroscopy coupled with
geometrical information and theoretical calculation, provide a detailed
understanding of these fundamentally important solid state systems. A better
understanding of the magnetic properties of thin film materials is essential for
the continued health and growth of the magnetic recording materials industry.