* 9523029
* Process Control in Batch Manufacturing:  Dynamics and       Coordination
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* David Yao, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 09/30/1999
* USD 189,000.00

This research is focused on the problem of quality control in a batch
manufacturing system. Its aim is to develop techniques for identifying policies
and control measures to apply to quality control problems. The techniques are
described as dynamic in the sense that they are not limited to parametric
designs but also consider the finding of policies and controls. The focus is on
sequential techniques. Sequential techniques make use of the dynamic information
that result from testing and process monitoring. Process control will be studied
with other related logistics issues in batch manufacturing. In particular, the
research will proceed along the following directions: (1) inter-stage
coordination under capacity constraint, (2) coordination among production,
inspection, and process revision, (3) coordination among subassembly operations
and substitutable components, and (4) computation, approximation, and
aggregation techniques. The research also aims at identifying certain optimal
sequential procedures and revealing their structural properties, particularly,
optimal sequential policie s with threshold structures. The basic methodology
underlying the research emphasis is Markovian decision programming incorporated
with the use of stochastic comparison techniques, including those based on the
notion of stochastic convexity and stochastic submodularity. This research will
yield several benefits if successful. It will advance the state of knowledge in
quality control in batch manufacturing. In particular, the effectiveness of the
sequential contrml policies, the importance of quality dynamics, and the
coordination of process control with other production logistics represent key
contributions. In addition, there will be new industrial technology findings
based on the research. Finally, there are some educational gains as well. The
research will present new teaching materials for an engineering course in
dynamic process control. This way, next generation engineers will benefit from
the research by taking the knowledge gained from the course to their various
employing organizations.