* 9523553
* Monitoring and Enhancing Molecular Beam Epitaxy Using       Low-Energy Ion Scattering
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Scott Barnett, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/1999
* USD 327,413.00

9523553 Barnett This research project investigates the kinetic processes and
microstructure which occur as a result of glancing angle low energy ion
irradiation during MBE growth. Studies of angle-dependent ion damage generation
are used to develop new approaches to surface modification, and the use of in-
situ ion scattering spectroscopy as a non-destructive analytic technique. The
research also includes efforts to modify surface morphology in island growth,
and explores research ideas related to selective epitaxy. Electrical, optical
and structural characterization will be used throughout the research to evaluate
the films. %%% The primary goal of this research project is to establish greater
basic understanding of particular phenomena relevant to thin film synthesis and
processing through the study of glancing angle low energy ion irradiation during
molecular beam epitaxy, and to relate this understanding to the development of
advanced microelectronics devices through modifications in processing methods.
Additionally, an important feature of the program is the training of graduate
and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
area. The knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is
expected to contribute generally to improving the performance of advanced
devices used in computing, information processing, and telecommunications. ***