* 9523910
* Role of Protozoan Grazing in the Fate and Transport of      Contaminants in Coastal Marine Environments
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* David Caron, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 12/31/1998
* USD 330,000.00

9523910 Moffett Because the transport and reactivity of particulates in coastal
waters may be strongly affected by protozoans during feeding and other
manipulations, the cycling of chemical contaminants associated with such
particles may also be significantly impacted. In this research, a team of
scientists at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution will study the role of
protozoans in the fate and transport of trace metal and organic contaminants in
coastal waters. The suite of contaminants will include Cr, Pb,Cd,PAHs, and PCBs.
The focus will be on estuarine and open coastal environments in which high
concentrations of particle- associated contaminants coincide with rich water
column and benthic microbial communities, because it is in such situations that
protozoans would be most likely to affect particle transport and chemistry.
Effects of protozoan grazing will be compared with bacterial and non-biological
processes impacting the cycling of contaminants. Although the field work was
originally planned for both Boston Harbor and New Bedford Harbor; it has
subsequently been scaled back to involve only the latter. Laboratory studies
will involve systems ranging from the very simple (one protist, one bacterial
species) to the complex (natural marine microbial assemblages). The results
should be extensible to contaminant cycling by protozoans in other marine
environments.