* 9523466
* Tomales Bay, California: LMER Site for the Study of         Biogeochmical Reactions in Estuaries
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Stephen Smith, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/1996
* USD 66,072.00

9523466 Smith The coastal bays play a critical role in the transport and
transformation of land runoff to the ocean. Drs. Hollibaugh and Smith will
consider the role of bays and estuaries in the net flux of carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorous between the land and ocean. The system of interest (Tomales Bay,
California) is hydrographically simple, has a long water residence time, is
sufficiently compact that it can be studied as a single unit, and has low
inorganic nutrient population. The system functions metabolically like numerous
other coastal marine ecosystems. External sources of organic matter which
support food chains in this system are simple to characterize and have strong
seasonal and interannual signals. These investigators will address the following
questions by means of a multi-investigator field and laboratory program: 1) What
is the relative importance of coastal upwelling versus terrigenous runoff in
delivering oxidizable organic matter and nutrients to this system? 2) What are
the responses of system metabolism and the metabolism of major system components
to seasonal and interannual variations in these forcing functions? 3) What is
the relationship between net system metabolism and non-conservative fluxes of
nitrogen? 4) Can rates derived from stoichimetric arguments be validated by
"direct" biochemical assays. It is anticipated that the outcome of this research
can be extrpolated to other systems which may be applicable to management of the
nations resources. This effort is being funded as a Land Margins Ecosystem
Research project in a program which is jointly supported by the Directorates of
Geosciences and Biotic Systems and Resources.