* 9523237
* A Cooperative Ice Core Paleoclimate Study of Monsoon        Variablity as Archived in the Dasuopu Glacier, China
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Lonnie Thompson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 04/30/2000
* USD 877,915.00

Abstract ATM-9523237 Thompson, Lonnie G. Ohio State University Title: A
Cooperative Ice Core Paleoclimate Study of Monsoon Variability as Archived in
the Dasuopu Glacier, China This award supports the retrieval and analysis of ice
cores from the tropical Dasuopu glacier located in the south central Himalayas
where conventional, long-term climatic data are completely absent. Tropical
records are of particular interest as 50% of the global surface lies between
30oN and 30oS and 75% of the Earth's population inhabits these climatically
tropical lands. The records from these cores will complement the long histories
recovered from Dunde and Guliya ice caps, on the northeastern and northwestern
margins of the Qinghai-Tibetan (Q-T) Plateau. Located on the southern margin of
the Q-T Plateau the new drilling site lies well within the spatial extent of the
monsoon system. Dominance of monsoonal circulation produces distinctly annual
cycles in oxygen isotopic ratios and in the deposition of visible dust which
permit the reconstruction of high resolution (annual) records of climatic and
environmental conditions. Dasuopu is located just north of the Himalayas with
annual precipitation about 300 mm water equivalent (H2O eq.). The high elevation
of this site ensures that ice temperatures will be well below OoC, hence this
glacier may be "polar: in character and is likely to contain a long, well-
preserved record. The initial field program includes a complement of geophysical
and surface studies designed to determine the suitability of this glacier for
the recovery of high resolution, well-preserved ice core records. Studies of the
climate of China are plagued by the absence of data from major sections of the
(Q-T) Plateau and the surrounding high mountain ranges. The successful retrieval
of previous records (Dunde and Guliya) suggest that ice cores from carefully
selected ice caps in Asia are excellent archives for climatic and environmental
histories. These records are essential to fill one of the major spatial gaps in
the Earth's climate history.