* 9523111
* Parallel Simulation of Manufacturing and Communication      Systems through Time Segmentation
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Sigrun Andradottir, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 03/31/2001
* USD 210,000.00

9523111 Andradottir The research objective is to investigate how the efficiency
of simulation can be improved by conducting the simulation experiment on
parallel processors. The parallel simulation approach envisioned in the research
involves segmenting the time horizon allocating processor to simulate the entire
system over a fraction of the total time horizon. This is equivalent to
allocating only a portion of the total time segments to a processor. A major
difficulty in applying time segmentation to simulate stochastic systems on
parallel a processor is finding efficient ways of generating a valid sample path
of the underlying system. This is complicated by the fact that the initial
conditions for the simulation on all but the first processor or time segment are
unknown when the simulation is started. The new approach in this research is
concerned with determining both the scope of applicability and the efficiency of
a parallel simulation approach. The investigation will determine when parallel
simulation approachs can be used to efficiently analyze complex systems.
Simulation is a key tool for studying and analyzing complex and dynamic systems.
Its application domain is large and includes engineering, economic, and social
systems. One common criticism in the use of simulation is the amount of
computational effort required before meaningful data can be generated. The
parallel simulation approach, investigated in this research, is a move towards
speeding up the simulation process on computers. If successful, the technique
will see immediate application and incorporation into commercial simulation
software. Large scale application will produce significant savings in time and
money and shorten the length of time required to perform a simulation study.