* 9523048
* Modeling and Solving Large-Scale Production, Location and   Distribution Problems for Time-Sensitive Products
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Arthur Hurter, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence M. Seiford
* 08/31/1998
* USD 195,005.00

9523048 Coullard This research addresses several related problems in the areas
of manufacturing and distribution. The research seeks to develop models and
methodologies that can be used to simultaneously make decisions on the location
of manufacturing and distribution facilities, production quantities, assignment
of products to facilities, and quantities of each product type to assign to a
given distribution center. In particular, using the models, the following
decisions can be made: (1) determination of the types of production and
distribution systems to be built or maintained and where they should be located,
(2) the assignment of products to facilities and the timing of production, (3)
the allocation of shipment quantities of each product type from each facility to
each distribution center, and (4) the shipping route to be used from each
production facility to each distribution center. This is a research that
integrates several subproblems in both production and distribution. Some of the
items to be optimized are strategic in nature (e.g., facility location) while
others are tactical (production schedule and production quantities) Each of the
subproblems in the integrated model is difficult to solve by its own right.
Thus, the integrated problem would obviously be large and much more difficult to
solve to simultaneously optimize on the various subproblems included in the
model. However, to overcome the size problem, the following three major goals
are established: (1) develop realistic and flexible optimization models that
incorporate in a reasonable manner the tactical and strategic issues that are
involved, (2) employ a solution approach that is based on the branch-and-price
and row generation technique that takes advantage of special structures of the
model, and (3) develop systematic techniques for evaluating the robustness of
the strategic decisions made by the model. Although, integrated models as
addressed in this research pose major solution and computational challenges,
they do , however, provide some major benefits. Equipped with these models, a
decision maker will have a direct knowledge of the impact of strategic choices
on tactical issues, and can thus make intelligent strategic decisions.
Furthermore, such models provide an integrated framework to analyze the
sensitivity of a system on various decision elements. The models developed are
integer programming models. This work involves identifying the right tree
management scheme for solving integer programs by branch and bound and the right
column management scheme for solving the linear programs within the branch and
bound. In so doing, this research also advances the knowledge in solving integer
programming models.