* 9523729
* Gate Control of Light Emitting and Lasing Thyristors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Vladimir Mitin, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2000
* USD 305,474.00

9523729 Mitin The development of new principles of optoelectronic device
operation is a problem of great importance for modern optoelectronic integrated
circuits, optical computing and optical communication systems. III-V direct band
gap PnpN thyristor-like structures are currently used as efficient light-
triggerable power devices, optical amplifiers, dynamic optoelectronic memories,
and two- and three-terminal optoelectronic switches. Progress in fabrication
technology has led to a significant improvement of the parameters of thyristor-
like devices, which in turn has led to new optoelectronic applications. Our
proposed use of the intermediate incomplete turn-off regime constitutes a new
principle, which can essentially extend functional capabilities of these
potentially key components of optoelectronic computing and optical-fiber
communication systems. The proposed research is aimed at utilizing the
incomplete turn-off regime of gate controlled light-emitting and lasing
thyristors for modulation of light intensity and switching purposes. In this
regime a part of the middle p-n junction is reverse biased and blocks the
current, while the remaining part of the structure is highly conducting and
light-emitting. The size of the light-emitting area and the light intensity in
this region can be controlled using small gate signals. Moreover, gates make it
possible to control the position of the light emitting region. These features
allow decreased switching times of optoelectronic switches and the creation of
new types of optical devices for the high-frequency modulation of emission
intensity and logic circuits. In the proposed regime of operation the mechanism
of carrier removal is based solely on the effects of the electric field, and is
completely free of recombination lifetime limitations, which define the speed of
conventional operation regimes. The goal of this project is to develop a new
type of multifunctional optoelectronic device. The research will be based on a
computer simulation of gate-controlled light-emitting devices and lasers.
Simulation of stationary and nonstationary squeezing of electron-hole plasma in
partially turned-off optothyristors will be carried out, to investigate
squeezing effects on the parameters of light radiation. Optimum conditions for
effective control of light power and decreasing of switching times will be
determined. ***