* 9523076
* Partial Support of Ninth International Conference on Liquid and Amorphous Metals to be held in Chicago, August 27 -     September 1, 1995
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1996
* Takeshi Egami, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Bruce A. MacDonald
* 06/30/1996
* USD 6,000.00

9523076 Egami This grant supports the Ninth International Conference on Liquid
and Amorphous Metals. The conference provides a forum for bridging basic and
applied aspects in a variety of materials ranging from composites and nano-
materials to amorphous and liquid semiconductors. About 300 participants from
academic, industrial and government laboratories are expected. The Conference
takes place in Chicago, Illinois, from August 27 to September 1, 1995. The
conference highlights advances in liquid and amorphous metals, encompassing
noncrystalline semiconductors and molten salts and the conference proceeding
will be published. The following topics will be covered in the conference:
liquid and amorphous metals and alloys; metal-nonmetal transitions; liquid and
disordered semiconductors; clusters; composite materials; quasicrystals;
metal/molten salt mixtures. Atomic structure determined by x-ray, neutron and
electron diffraction; dynamics, electrical transport and electronic, magnetic,
optical and thermodynamic properties, are addressed, including theoretical and
computational as well as experimental approaches. Results obtained from new
techniques, taking full advantage of recently commissioned synchrotrons, pulsed
neutron sources and high-flux reactors to explore domains and properties
previously not accessible, are emphasized. %%% Highlighted topics include new
structural materials and applications in energy conversion, electronics,
optics/electro-optics, and waste storage. ***