* 9523419
* Towards an Architecture and Theory for Agent Coordination
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Victor Lesser, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/1999
* USD 415,238.00

This research involves the development of a domain independent approach to real-
time, distributed coordination of multiple agents. It is based on the
GeneralizedPartial Global Planning (GPGP) approach which views coordination as
modulating local control, not replacing it. This process occurs via a set of
domain-independent coordination mechanisms associated with each agent that posts
constraints to the local real-time scheduler about the importance of certain
tasks and appropriate times for their initiation and completion. Each
coordination mechanism is defined as a response to certain features in the
current task environment. In order to construct a generic approach to
coordination, it is necessary to have an underlying framework that can represent
the wide diversity of tasks, task properties, and task relationships in order to
arrive at effective coordination among the activities of different agents in a
wide variety of domains. The framework is called TAEMS (Task Analysis,
Environment Modeling, and Simulation). It is a framework with which to represent
the important aspects of complex computational task environments that is
compatible with both formal agent-centered approaches and experimental
approaches. The result of this research will lead to the development of a
generic coordination module which can help desiginers of multiagent systems to
build coordination strategies.