* 9523635
* Collaborative Project: Perception, Function and Development of Complex Vocal Signals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1999
* William Searcy, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* John A. Byers
* 05/31/1999
* USD 38,961.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY Nowicki &amp; Searcy, IBN 9408360, Perception, Function and
Development of Complex Vocal Signals Animal communication plays an important
role in many biologically critical arenas, particularly social behavior,
including territorial defense and the attraction and choice of a mate. Bird song
is one of the most spectacular cases on this type of behavior, and much of what
has been learned about the development and evolution of animal communication has
been the result of studies of bird song. In this research project, Dr. Searcy
will investigate several aspects of a common characteristic of bird song,
different song types. In many songbirds, the males sing variable songs which can
be classified into a small number of song types. For example, male song sparrows
sing five to thirteen different song types each. This pattern is found in many
species but little is known about either how such variability in song develops
in the individual or about how it functions in an evolutionary sense. A series
of experiments conducted in both the laboratory and the field will investigate:
(1) the abilities of song sparrows to discriminate variation both within and
between song types; (2) the ways in which such variation contributes toward
either attracting a mate or discouraging other territorial males: (3) the extent
to which song sparrows differ in the amount of variability in their songs in
different regions of the country; and (4) the role of learning and cultural
transmission in the development of song type variability. Taken together, the
results of these studies will advance the understanding of the evolution and
development of animal communication.