* 9523612
* MMIA: Hierarchical Approach to Integrated Assessment of     Climate and Land Use Changes with an Application to the     Central United States
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Thomas Kirchner, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 09/30/1999
* USD 585,619.00

9523612 Easterling The complex interplay of human activities and the global
environment has been examined for over a decade with modeling schemes that focus
on discrete problems that are decoupled from the complex whole (e.g., single
sector studies, lack of feedbacks between component parts, partial
representation of key relationships, poorly specified linkages between human and
biophysical systems) thus making such schemes weak policy tools. Integrated
assessments (IA) are needed to more completely model whole human-environment
systems. Several IA efforts are under way, most of a highly spatially and
sectorally aggregated form. Little attention has been given to the question of
how much spatial and sectoral detail is necessary in order to achieve reliable
estimates of land use and ecological changes in regional, national, and global
modeling assessments; such is the question to which this proposed research is
addressed. It is hypothesized that a spatial hierarchy of modeling is needed to
present complex human-environmental systems. The research objectives here are:
(1) to develop information linkage between the Century terrestrial ecosystem
model and the FASOM economic model in order to assess changes in the human-
environmental system of the U.S. Great Plains in response to climate changes;
(2) to identify and quantify the critical human environmental factors
controlling land use decisions at local and regional scales; and (3) to evaluate
the sensitivity of the human-environmental system of the U. S. great Plains to
local scale land use decisions relative the aggregated regional analysis.