* 9523881
* Relative Roles of Stream-Subsurface Hydrologic Exchange     and Microbial and Chemical Transformations in Controlling   Heavy Metal Transport
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Robert Arnold, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/2000
* USD 240,000.00

9523881 Conklin The specific aims of this project are to determine the
constraints on heavy-metal transport in a shallow groundwater aquifer with low
dissolved oxygen that intercepts oxic surface water in a perennial stream.
Heterogeneous chemical and biological reactions are enhanced in shallow
groundwater flow paths that are recharged from the stream (hyporheic zone), due
to mixing with oxic streamwater and increased contact with geochemically and
biologically active sediment coatings. Our central hypothesis is that the
secondary hydrologic residence time in the hyporheic zone and the increased
contact of the streamwater with the sediment are adequate to permit
microbial/chemical transformations of heavy metals to be the dominant removal
mechanism for a coupled stream-aquifer system. We plan to identify the most
important hydrologic, biological and chemical factors that enhance oxidation of
dissolved metals in the hyporheic zone. The proposed work spans point
measurements (batch experiments) to field measurement at the kilometer-scale.
The field situation that we will study in a contaminated alluvial basin in
Arizona (Pinal Creek) is typical of heavy-metal contaminated stream-shallow
groundwater systems. Previous mass balance work at the field site indicated that
interplay between hydrologic and microbial/chemical processes in the hyporheic
zone at Pinal Creek significantly reduced basin-wide exports of dissolved
manganese (the principal metal contaminant at this study site) to downstream
areas. In this study we will use a combination of measurements in the laboratory
(batch, column, and sandbox), along with field experimental data and modeling
analysis to determine the relative importance of physical and chemical
processes. Specifically, we will identify the dominant mechanism of Mn(II)
oxidation in the hyporheic zone and determine the relative roles of biological
and chemical factors, and hydrologic mass transfer limitations. We will adapt
and extend the Transient Storage Mod el for application as a reactive transport
model for stream-shallow groundwater systems. Our multi-scale study will allow
us to determine the role the hyporheic-zone processes have on the mass balance
of manganese in the entire contaminated alluvial drainage basin. This system
provides a unique opportunity to separate hyporheic zone processes from basin-
wide processes; the parameters determined from this study will be used to
constrain a coupled stream-shallow groundwater transport model with applications
in other drainage basins.