* 9523297
* Polymerized Bicontinous Cubic Lipid Assemblies
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Neal Armstrong, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 04/30/1998
* USD 180,000.00

9523297 O'Brien The formation of nonlamellar lipid structures in biological and
model lipid membranes has been extensively investigated in recent years, because
of the interest in the possible biological function of nonlamellar structures.
At certain conditions of temperature and concentration polar lipids form
geometrically complex liquid crystalline structures. These nonlamellar phases
include bicontinuous cubic phases (QII) and the inverted hexagonal phase (HII).
Whatever may be the biological significance of nonlamellar phases, it is clear
that stabilized nonlamellar structures offer novel technological materials, In
the first two years of our research into the polymerization of nonlamellar
phases we have successfully demonstrated a strategy for their stabilization. The
objective then of the continuing research is to utilize this proven strategy to
prepare a family of stabilized QII as well as HII phases in a manner that
preserves both the lipid and aqueous phase networks and retains the
biocompatibility of their interface. In order to accomplish these goals the
research will involve the design and synthesis of new polymerizable lipids, the
characterization of the phase behavior of the hydrated unpolymerized lipid
assemblies, and the controlled polymerization of the lipids in nonlamellar
phases with careful attention to the nature of the polymer, i.e. the location
and size of the polymer chains, and the extent of polymer crosslinking. The
phase behavior and stability of the polymerized nonlamellar assemblies will then
be determined. The nonlamellar phases will be stabilized in a manner that
extends the range of temperatures and concentrations that favor the existence of
the desired nonlamellar structure, as well as increases the resistance of the
assembly to dissolution by surfactants or organic solvents. This research will
provide researchers with novel biomaterials to probe the physics and chemistry
of lipid-water assemblies. Since several QII phases are known that vary in sy
mmetry and the size of the aqueous channels, therefore polymerizable lipids will
be designed to form QII phases of each of the commonly found groups in order to
generate a family of stabilized organic zeolites. The interpenetrating networks
of the QII phase suggests potential applications of these organic zeolites,
which take full advantage of the lipid membrane surface for the localization of
reagents, the immobilization of antibody fragments or abenzymes, or the
incorporation of proteins for chemical or biological conversions, diagnostics,
and/or separation applications. Polymerized HII phases are expected to provide
regular hexagonal arrays with uniform pore sizes in the highly desirable ca. 3
to 8 nm diameter range, i.e. large enough to permit the flow of globular
proteins or water soluble random coil polymers. The proposed research will
provide a scientific basis for the technological utilization of nonlamellar
assemblies. The research will seek to provide a coherent understanding of the
effect of the formation, location, and nature of polymer chains on the
characteristics of nonlamellar phases. ***