* 9523629
* MRA: Network-Based Training and Access to HPC using NERO--  the Network for Engineering and Research in Oregon
* CSE,OAC
* 12/01/1995,05/31/2000
* Cherri Pancake, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Hirsh
* 05/31/2000
* USD 1,446,801.00

9523629 Pancake This NSF Metacenter Regional Alliance(MRA) will Link the Oregon
Joint Graduate School of Engineering to the San Diego Supercomputer Center. The
objective is to improve access to high performance computing (HPC) for engineers
and scientists in the Pacific Northwest. Facilitating this collaborative work
will be a high speed fiber optic network, the Network for Engineering and
Research in Oregon (NERO), which was first deployed in 1994. The proposed MRA
will exploit that infrastructure to expand the HPC user community through
distributed access to HPC platforms, to tools and environments supporting
parallel programming, to online training materials and example applications, and
to key human resources via several types of remote collaborative sessions. The
MRA will exploit the NERO infrastructure to provide: a distributed, network-
based repository of information on HPC tools and environments network-based,
interactive training materials and example applications developed specifically
for non-computer scientists network-wide interactive broadcasts of seminars,
remote user group meetings, and interactive consulting sessions, both real-time
and as after-the-fact replay desktop videoconferencing, shared white boards and
shared file system for MRA collaboration over the NERO wide area network
highspeed network access to parallel computing platforms within Oregon dedicated
network access to the San Diego Supercomputer Center a framework for
collaboration with other national and regional metacenters