* 9524129
* Grassland-Atmosphere Interactions:  Analyses Using Coupled  Ecophysiological, Ecosystem, Micrometeorology, and Mesoscale Atmospheric Models
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Roger Pielke, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 08/31/1999
* USD 250,000.00

9524129 Coughenour This research is to develop capabilities for numerically
assessing the responses of grassland ecosystems to atmospheric changes
associated with increasing levels of greenhouse gases, particularly carbon
dioxide (CO2). Currently, there are at least three major deficiencies in our
abilities to perform these assessments. The first is a lack of computer models
which have been calibrated and tested against field CO2 exposure experiments in
grasslands. Accordingly, a focus of this research will be to collaborate with
scientists working on an ongoing field exposure study in Kansas. An existing
model of grassland ecosystem function and plant responses to CO2 and weather
will be used for this purpose. Secondly, models that faithfully represent
current understanding of plant physiology must be coupled with models that
represent soil processes such as decomposition, nutrient cycling and water
storage and flows to understand how whole ecosystems respond to atmospheric
change. For example, it is possible that nutrient cycling rates will constrain
otherwise positive plant growth responses to elevated CO2. Linked state-of-the-
art plant physiological and soil process models will be employed in the proposed
research. Thirdly, terrestrial ecosystem processes of water, carbon and energy
exchange with the atmosphere have potentially significant effects on ecosystem
responses to atmospheric change but have been poorly examined in past modeling
research. This research will link ecological and atmospheric models to assess
the role of atmospheric processes, particularly large-scale fluxes of water
vapor and energy. These results will feedback onto plant growth through altered
plant water use efficiency, and resultant responses of nutrient cycling rates.
Grasslands, climate, and the interactions between climate and grasslands will be
explored through linking these various models.