* 9524758
* Development of Geomorphological Artificial Neural Networks  (GANNs) for Modeling Watershed Runoff
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Rao Govindaraju, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1998
* USD 123,625.00

9524758 Govindaraju This proposal deals with the development of a
geomorphological artificial neural network (GANN) model for predicting the
nonlinear rainfall-runoff relationships of watersheds. GANN represents a
massively interconnected network of processing units called neurons. The network
is characterized by weights, which determine the strength of each connection,
and the threshold values of neurons which dictate their activation level. The
network of overland flow planes, streams and subsurface flow pathways, which
drains the water from the watershed, will be mapped into the topology of
artificial neural networks (ANNs). This model will draw on strengths of the
geomorphological representations of the watershed, and will also be capable of
capturing the nonlinear response of watersheds to precipitation events. GANN
models will be further utilized to study the influence of temporal and spatial
scales, and to investigate the significance of various surface and subsurface
flow pathways. The performance of GANN models will be tested in several ways.
Four watersheds in Kansas have been identified based on size and availability of
data for rainfall, soils, temperature, topography, and other variables which
govern water movement within the watershed. The network will be trained using a
portion of the data. Simultaneously, a physically-based model and a regression-
based empirical model will be calibrated using the same historical record. These
models will then be tested in prediction mode through the remaining portion of
the rainfall-stream flow records. This will not only help evaluate the GANN
model in terms of how well it predicts stream flow given rainfall, solar
radiation, and temperature records, but will also form a basis for comparing its
performance with respect to other types of models. ***