* 9524078
* Forest Change in a Boreal Transition Region: Productivity,  Nutrient Cycling and Biodiversity at Multiple Scales
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Peter Reich, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 09/30/1998
* USD 428,275.00

9524078 Reich Forest Change in a Boreal Transition Region: Productivity,
Nutrient Cycling and Biodiversity at Multiple Scales. The actions of human
society have profound impacts on boreal forests worldwide. Land use such as
timber harvesting, climate, elevated carbon dioxide levels, and altered fire
regimes all contribute to changes in the composition (species make-up), function
and biodiversity of boreal forest ecosystems. This project will assess how
forests are changing, and why, in relation to key regional and global factors
such as logging, fire, elevated carbon dioxide, and climate. Why is it important
that we better understand what those impacts are at present, and may be in the
future? First, boreal forests contribute to the economic well being of the USA
and globally as a source of fiber for the forest products industry. Second,
boreal forests play an important role in global carbon cycles, and thus
influence global carbon dioxide levels. Third, boreal forests represent the
largest intact forest biome on the planet and house a better balanced flora and
fauna than any other forest biome. This last point has importance economically
as well as ecologically. Regions with major boreal forest coverage are used by
native peoples and support a growing recreational industry that depends on
wildlife, clean water, and natural beauty. Changes that alter the productivity
or long-term soil fertility of boreal forests, or that alter the plant and
animal diversity of such regions, are likely occurring. However, a critical
question is whether they are altering such processes in ways that are
beneficial, neutral, or detrimental to our long-term goals for such regions, and
equally critical is the question of the magnitude of such changes, both on a
forest stand basis and for a forested region as a whole. The answers to such
questions will help us in two main ways. First they aid in our overall
assessment of forest response to global atmospheric change and its associated
climate impacts. Secon d, they enable better design of timber harvesting (and
other management options), with respect to scope, type, timing, and landscape
configuration. Just how much timber harvesting can occur, and how and where,
with minimal detriment to the environment, is a very difficult question (and
usually quite controversial) but one that is important to society .