* 9524544
* Quantification of Bacterial Transport Processes in          Subsurface Environments
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Roseanne Ford, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/1999
* USD 120,000.00

9524544 Ford In situ bioremediation relies on the ability of bacterial
populations to biologically transform chemical contaminants such as chlorinated
hydrocarbons into less toxic substances. A critical factor in successfully
implementing this technology is assuring sufficient contact between the bacteria
and contaminant to allow degradation to proceed. Therefore, mathematical models
capable of predicting the dynamic distribution of bacterial populations within
contaminated aquifers are necessary for determining the changing contaminant
levels due to bacterial degradation. Many soil-inhabiting bacteria which degrade
chemical contaminants are motile and capable of directing their migration in
response to chemical concentration gradients (chemotaxis) The goal of this work
is to evaluate bacterial transport coefficients in terms of fundamental
properties which can be measured in simple laboratory experiments. Reliable
values for these coefficients are required as input for advection-dispersion
models which describe bacterial migration in subsurface environments. Current
methods for evaluating these coefficients are highly empirical and typically not
generalizable to a variety of subsurface conditions. Progress toward achieving
this goal will be guided by the following specific objectives: 1. To develop and
experimentally confirm a theoretical expression for calculating the effective
random motility coefficient for bacteria in the absence of advective flow. 2. To
develop and experimentally confirm a theoretical expression for the bacterial
dispersion coefficient based on a microscopic-level characterization of the
swimming behavior of bacteria, the porous matrix and the fluid flow. 3. To
quantitatively assess the impact of motility on irreversible attachments to the
porous matrix and its relationship to collector efficiency as defined by colloid
filtration theory. 4. To unify theoretical relationships from solute transport,
chromatography and colloid filtration currently u sed to describe bacterial
transport into one consistent theory based on microscopic-level
characterization. A combination of mathematical modeling, laboratory-scale
experiments and computer simulation will be used to study the behavior of E.
coli, P. putida, and soil isolates (A0500 from the Savannah River Deep
Subsurface Collection, P. fluorescens Pf0-15 adhesion mutant and E1B2 from a
field site in Oyster, VA). The swimming behavior of individual bacteria will be
analyzed in terms of speed, run length and turn angle distribution with a
tracking microscope. Random motility coefficients for the bacterial population
will be measured in the stopped-flow diffusion chamber (SFDC) and compared to
theoretical predictions determined from the single cell properties. More complex
experimental systems with advection and porous media will be studied in sand
columns and micromodels with well-defined porous patterns to obtain effective
random motility, dispersion and irreversible adsorption coefficients.
Theoretical relationships for these coefficients based on analogies to solute
diffusion and transport, colloid filtration theory, and cellular dynamics
computer simulations will be evaluated in terms of bacterial properties, flow
characteristics and porous media geometry in an effort to unify the various
approaches. Values for these macroscopic transport coefficients are required in
advection-dispersion models to describe bacterial distributions in subsurface
environments. The tracking microscope, SFDC assay and cellular dynamics
algorithms, capabilities unique to the PI's state-of-the-art experimental and
computational laboratories, provide an ideal environment for the proposed
development of mechanistic-based models for predicting large-scale migration.
Future studies will apply the same combination of mathematical modeling,
laboratory experiments, and computer simulation to determine apparent velocities
and reversible adsorption/desorption coefficients used in models for bacterial
transport.