* 9524514
* Characterization of Metal Ion Complexation and Aggregation  of Humic Substances
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Cynthia Larive, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 08/31/1999
* USD 221,401.00

This award in the Chemistry Division supports research by Cynthia K. Larive of
the Chemistry Department, University of Kansas, for the development of a new
method for characterizing metal ion complexation and the aggregation of humic
and fulvic acids isolated from ground and surface waters. The award is made in
the Environmental Geochemistry and Biogeochemistry section of the Water and
Watersheds activity of the 1995 NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research.
Collaborating on the project is W. Robert Carper of the Chemistry Department,
Wichita State University. Pulsed field gradient nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy will be used to determine the aggregation state of humic and fulvic
acids and the degree of metal-ion induced aggregation. Potentiometric titration
methods will be used to measure metal ion complexation, and NMR relaxation rates
will indicate metal ion exchange rates and formation constants. This broad-based
approach will enable investigators to construct a model of competitive metal ion
binding and exchange rates in fulvic and humic acids. Samples from the Suwannee
and Wakarusa Rivers will be used in initial tests of the generality of the new
method. Humic and fulvic acids leach into ground and surface waters from soil
and plant organic matter and are inherently heterogeneous in nautre. They are
the major constituents of dissolved organic carbon and, as a group, interact
with organic pollutants such as pesticides and herbicides, increasing their
solubility. For this reason, they play an important role in the transport and
bioavailability of anthropogenic organic contaminants. This research is focused
on the participation of humic and fulvic acids in the complexation of metal ions
and the development of new methods for analysis which will simultaneously
determine metal ion concentration, complexation, and aggregation in samples from
natural systems.