* 9524144
* Ecosystem Responses to Stratospheric Ozone Reduction
* BIO,IOS
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Martyn Caldwell, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 02/28/1999
* USD 444,000.00

9524144 Stratospheric ozone loss, resulting primarily from chemicals generated
by human activities, results in an increased amount of solar ultraviolet-B
radiation reaching the earth. Ultraviolet-B radiation is capable of damaging
biological systems, including DNA. Only a modest amount of research, however,
has been directed toward the potential biological consequences of stratospheric
ozone depletion, and virtually nothing has been done at the level of terrestrial
ecosystems. This research is an ecosystem-level study of the responses to
elevated solar ultraviolet-B resulting near Ushuaia, Argentina. The site is on
the southern tip of South America across the Drake Passage from the Antarctic
Peninsula. This location experiences more pronounced ozone reduction than at
anywhere else in the world where terrestrial ecosystems with appreciable plant
cover occur. Three phenomena contribute to this: The so-called "ozone hole" can
pass directly overhead, parcels of ozone-depleted air can float northward from
the ozone hole, and a general erosion of the ozone layer is most prominent at
high latitudes and in the Southern Hemisphere. At the study site, extremely high
fluxes of ultraviolet-B can occur when skies are clear and, when cloudy, there
can be very high ultraviolet-B relative to total solar radiation. Thus, this
will be an extreme case study to determine ecosystem-level effects of ozone
reduction. A three-year, on-site field study of a shrub-grass community will be
conducted. Effects of elevated ultraviolet-B will assessed for both acute
exposures, such as when the ozone hole passes overhead and as chronic, growing-
season and multi-season exposures to elevated ultraviolet-B. For responses to
acute exposures to high ultraviolet-B and high ultraviolet-B/(total solar
radiation) ratios, damage to DNA and photosynthesis will be determined. Acute
exposures will be studied both as natural events (tracking the precession of the
ozone hole by downloading satellite-based images and anticipating overhead
passage) and by simulating such occurrences with special UV lamp systems. Most
of the effort will be directed to effects of chronic exposures at the population
level (e.g., reproduction and expansion or contraction of plant populations) and
at the ecosystem level. Researchers will determine changes in competitive
balance among species, timing of annual biological events, plant consumption by
insects, and decomposition of plant litter. If solar ultraviolet-B affects such
ecosystem-level processes, there are many implications for the function and
integrity of these systems. Preliminary evidence collected recently in Argentina
shows large effects of sunlight ultraviolet-B on DNA damage, plant growth and
insect herbivory. Changes in litter decomposition may affect ecosystem carbon
balance and atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations. Knowledge of the
direction and magnitude of such changes is essential if we are to predict the
biological consequences of changing atmospheric chemistry and develop rational
management strategies.