* 9524068
* Shortgrass Steppe Ecosystem Dynamics and Trace Gas Exchange Under Elevated CO2
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Arvin Mosier, Agricultural Research Services
* Interagency Agreement
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1998
* USD 429,933.00

9524068 Future atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations will almost certainly
be at least twice as high as current concentrations. It is crucial that research
address how such a dramatic change will affect ecosystems, especially those
needed for food production. The vast semiarid grasslands of the Great Plains has
been grazed extensively for thousands of years, and is comprised of grass
species that have "normal" (C3) and water-efficient (C4) photosynthetic
pathways. It is not known how elevated atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration
will affect the shortgrass steppe ecosystem of the western United States.
Increasing carbon dioxide concentrations will likely impact the productivity of
arid and semiarid ecosystems through increased carbon, nitrogen and water use
efficiencies in individual plants and may affect the competitive balance between
C3 and C4 plants because of their different responses. Changing patterns of
growth, nutrient use, and species composition may alter soil nitrogen and carbon
cycles and affect the long term viability of the grassland. This research
couples the use of large, open-top chambers for field carbon dioxide enrichment
with studies of plant physiology and soil nutrient balance through soil nitrogen
cycling and trace gas flux measurements. There are three basic objectives in
this research. First, it will determine the impact of doubling carbon dioxide on
photosynthesis, productivity, water and nitrogen use efficiency, plant water
relations, and allocation of carbon and nitrogen above- and below-ground in two
dominant grass species, one a C3 grass and the other a C4 grass. Second, it will
determine the impact of doubling carbon dioxide on soil water and nitrogen
dynamics. The knowledge gained from these studies will be incorporated into
simulation models that will allow for realistic extrapolation through tim e and
space of soil moisture, nutrient cycling, plant productivity, and overall
ecosystem response. This program will provide insight into the effect of
elevated carbon dioxide on this ecosystem to help maintain long term viability
of the shortgrass steppe.