* 9524986
* Supercritical CO2 and CHF3 as Alternative Solvents for      Pollution Prevention
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* James Tanko, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 08/31/1998
* USD 240,001.00

This award in the Chemistry Division supports research by Dr. James M. Tanko of
the Chemistry Department, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University,
on the use of supercritical fluids as environmentally benign solvents for
chemical reactions. The award is made in the Technology for a Sustainable
Environment activity of the 1995 NSF/EPA Partnership for Environmental Research.
Carbon dioxide and fluoroform will be examined for their potential as solvents
for radical reactions. Both solvents are expected to be inert toward free
radicals and are known to become supercritical at moderate temperatures and
pressures. The goals of the project are to identify the scope and limitations of
radical reactions amenable to supercritical fluid conditions, to develop new
synthetic methods for the synthesis of high-value organic materials, and to
explore the implications of the use of supercritical fluids for fundamental
physical principles of organic reactivity. Many organic reactions proceed by a
mechanism which involves a reactive species with an unpaired electron called a
free radical. Example reactions are those involving addition of chlorine or
bromine to hydrocarbons or lengthening of hydrocarbon chains. In these
reactions, it is important that the solvent not react with the free radical.
Often the solvent also plays a role in the formation of the radical species. In
many cases benzene and carbon tetrachloride are effective solvents for such
reactions, but they are environmentally harmful. In this research two alternate
solvents which are environmentally benign will be tested for suitability in
organic reactions involving free radicals.