* 9524036
* Effects of Elevated CO2 on a Mojave Desert Ecosystem
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Jeffrey Seemann, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 415,000.00

9524144 Current atmospheric carbon dioxide levels are more than 25% higher than
pre-industrial levels. Projections based upon the present rate of carbon input
into the atmosphere indicates that the atmospheric carbon dioxide content will
double in less than a century. Although there is debate as to whether this
increase will result in significant global warming, there is little doubt that
this increase will have potentially dramatic effects on plant production and
will possibly result in changes in plant composition of major world ecosystems.
There is a need to understand the spectrum of responses that will occur over the
major ecosystem types of the world as a consequence of rising atmospheric
greenhouse gas concentrations, most notably carbon dioxide, and it is critical
that these experiments be conducted in intact ecosystems, not in artificial
conditions such as greenhouses or growth chambers. Deserts account for the
largest percentage of the earth's land surface area, and through the process of
global desertification, are showing the most rapid increase in surface area.
Deserts are also the ecosystem type that are predicted to be the most sensitive
to global change because elevated carbon dioxide relaxes the effects of water
stress in plants. Elevated carbon dioxide may significantly impact the
productivity and biodiversity of desert ecosystems and result in a substantial
change in the function and land-use patterns of this prevalent ecosystem type.
However, there have yet to be any large-scale studies of the effects of global
change on desert ecosystems. The Mojave Desert is one of the most arid deserts
in North America and most resembles true deserts in other parts of the world,
giving the potential to serve as a model system for the study of the response of
desert vegetation to elevated carbon dioxide. A Free Air carbon dioxide
Enrichment (FACE) system is currently being constructed on the Nevada Test Site
within the Mojave Desert of southern Nevada. This technology entails a series of
experimental "rings" in which elevated carbon dioxide is constantly supplied to
an intact ecosystem within each ring, and does not otherwise alter the climate
of the site with artificial enclosures. Specific experiments to be conducted in
this study include analysis of the responses of plant production, reproduction
and survival, and landscape water balance to elevated carbon dioxide. These
specific experiments will be integrated through a series of ecosystembased
models that will be developed specifically for the Mojave Desert site. The
modeling effort will particularly emphasize two integrating concepts: (1) under
the extremely dry and infertile soils of deserts, intense competition between
plants controls the function of the ecosystem, and elevated carbon dioxide may
change the competitive balance that currently exists; and (2) recruitment and
survival of plants in deserts are determined by episodic conditions (droughts
and abnormal wet cycles), and elevated carbon dioxide may change plant responses
to these episodic conditions. Desert ecosystems may become more productive and
will use water more efficiently under elevated carbon dioxide, but complex
ecosystem feedback processes may limit this response over the long term.
Experiments like this will provide the data we need to predict how these changes
will affect arid lands.