* 9525942
* Theoretical and Experimental Investigation of InP-Based PNP Heterojunction Bipolar Transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Kenneth Roenker, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/1998
* USD 199,559.00

9525942 Cahay This is a collaborative research effort between University of
Cincinnati and Hughes Research Laboratory to enhance the performance of InP-
based PNP Heterojunction component of the research will consist of establishing
and developing an approaches, the first based on use of a drift-diffusion model
using a commercial numerical simulator, and the second based on the development
of an Ensemble Monte Carlo simulator which includes the effects of hole
tunneling at the emitter-base junction and the effects of band-mixing between
heavy and light holes throughout the device. Subsequently, the two approaches
will be coupled to provide a comprehensive model of device operation.
Furthermore, the thermophysics of device self-heating will be investigated
through a self-consistent solution of the equations describing heat flow through
the structure and the physics of charge generation and flow during device
operation. To assure the accuracy of the device models, comparison of the device
electrical characteristics and high frequency performance will be made with
detailed measurements on devices fabricated in the laboratory and with results
reported on commercially fabricated devices. In collaboration with this effort
the industrial partner Hughes Research Laboratory, will provide the starting
multi-layer epitaxial substrates from which the PNP HBT devices will be
fabricated and will provide technical guidance in the development of the HBT's
fabrication process. ***