* 9525843
* The Somerset Laboratory:  An Open Facility for              Experimentation in Safety-Critical Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* John Knight, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* D. Helen Gill
* 09/30/1998
* USD 40,000.00

The Somerset Laboratory is a facility being developed at the University of
Virginia that provides a focus for experimental research in safety-critical
software engineering. Over the long term, the intent of the laboratory is to
establish empirical research with safety- critical systems as a sub-field of
software engineering. The laboratory provides the following to researchers World
wide, via the Internet: (1) A comprehensive set of artifacts associated with a
small number of safety-critical applications that, to the extent possible,
describe the applications accurately and comprehensively. There are sufficient
artifacts and the artifacts are of sufficient quality that researchers can
perform substantial experiments which will be very similar to those that they
could be perform if they had direct access to the actual applications. (2) A
repository of the results of research projects undertaken using the available
applications. This repository contains contributed artifacts, tools, research
papers, data files, and contact information. As well as allowing dissemination
of results, the repository facilitates cooperative research by alerting
researchers to the status, plans, and work of others. (3) A vehicle for accurate
comparison of software engineering techniques for safetycritical systems. Using
the artifacts associated with the safety-critical applications in the
laboratory, researchers are able to evaluate tools and techniques and then
compare and contrast different tools and techniques. The comparisons are
especially significant in this case because data is obtained by applying them to
precisely the same applications. By carrying out experiments using extensive
material from actual safety-critical applications, researchers are presented
with the complex details of such applications. Dealing with these details helps
to ensure the relevance and practical value of the research that is undertaken.
In addition, once a solution concept or approach is devised, it can be evaluated
(at least in part) by applying it to one or more sample safetycritical
applications thus providing a believable assessment. The first safety-critical
application that the laboratory has chosen to support is a nuclear reactor. The
reactor is a lowpower, research reactor that employs a conventional
electromechanical control system. Though a small reactor, it presents
significant challenges to researchers interested in softwarebased control and
safety systems. The artifacts being developed for the laboratory include details
of the reactor's physical structure, the safety rules that must be enforced,
digitized images of key elements of the physical equipment, sample traces of all
the reactor's sensors, a reactor simulator, and complete wiring diagrams. The
goal of this planning grant is to obtain an assessment of the likely level of
interest in the laboratory by the research community and to develop a detailed
plan for the implementation of the laboratory. ***