* 9525761
* Kinetic Measurements of Catalytic Converter Reactions by    Using Modern Surface Sensitive Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 09/30/1998
* USD 121,086.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9525761 This project employs a molecular approach to characterize
the kinetic details of catalytic processes relevant to the functioning of
automotive catalytic converters for environmental control. Modern ultrahigh-
vacuum techniques are used in conjunction with atmospheric-pressure catalytic
reactors. The oxidation of carbon monoxide on platinum and the reduction of
nitric oxide (by carbon monoxide or oxygen) on rhodium are studied by measuring
sticking coefficients and reaction rates using the method of King and Wells in
which the partial pressures of the gases are recorded with a mass spectrometer
while a collimated gas beam impinges directly on the surface. The experiments
emulate competitive adsorption either by exposing the substrate to a mixture of
gas species or by preadsorbing one species before exposure to another. Gaseous
species studied are those in combustion exhaust, including water and carbon
dioxide. Experimental results are modeled using a Monte Carlo computer simulator
algorithm. The oxidation of methane over palladium is also studied. This study
is based on experimental models for the catalytic systems used in automotive
exhaust control. However, it is also relevant to pollution control of emissions
from other (stationary) combustion systems including power plants, heating
systems, incinerators, and steam plants.