* 9525771
* The Americas Program: International Symposium on            Statistics in Agriculture and the Environment;              Santa Marta, Colombia, June 1995.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/15/1995,08/31/1995
* David Marx, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Beverly Diaz
* 08/31/1995
* USD 7,380.00

9525771 Marx This Americas Program award will fund travel and related expenses
for six U.S. scientists to participate in an international symposium on
statistics in agriculture and the environment, to be held in Santa Marta,
Colombia, in June, 1995. Organizers are Dr. David R. Marx, University of
Nebraska, Lincoln, and Dr. Jorge Martinez, Universidad Nacional de Colombia,
Bogota. This is a joint meeting of three organizations: the Colombian National
University, the International Biometric Society for the Caribbean, Central
America, Colombia and Venezuela, and the Interamerican Statistical Institute,
with headquarters in Panama City, Panama. The conference's objectives will be to
bring together statisticians and biologists from the Caribbean, Central America,
Colombia and Venezuela to promote scientific exchanges, delimit common research
areas, and to stimulate relationships between universities and research
institutions in Latin America. Applications of statistics to censuses and social
sciences are commonly used throughout Latin America. Biometrical and
environmental applications are less well known. The existing serious
environmental problems in the region call for such applications and require
well-designed studies. It is important for statisticians and mathematicians to
work jointly with biologists in developing statistical techniques to solve these
serious problems. This meeting is designed to bring these various groups
together. ***