* 9525902
* Basidiomycetes of the Greater Antilles, Especially the      Luquillo LTER Site
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Leif Ryvarden, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence M. Page
* 03/31/2001
* USD 512,786.00

9525902 Lodge Basidiomycetes (fungi) of the Greater Antilles, especially the
Luquillo LTER site, PI's: D. Jean Lodge, T.J. Baroni, K. Nakasone, and L.
Ryvarden. A large international team of mycologists and local cooperators has
been assembled to survey basidiomycetes on the islands of Puerto Rico,
Hispaniola, St. John, and Jamaica in the Grater Antilles. Over 2,000 species of
basidiomycets (excluding the rust fungi) in 12 orders, 36 families and 320
genera are expected, including over 12% undescribed species. Collection data and
keys in both Spanish and English will be accessible on the Internet through the
Luquillo LTER gopher under subdirectory &lt;&lt;fungi.survey.dat at
sunceer.upr.clu.edu&gt;&gt; as they become available, and illustrated
identification manuals will be produced. Through comparisons with mycotas that
are published or are underway in Venezuela, Costa Rica, and the Lesser Antilles,
questions about island biogeography and evolution in basidiomycetes will be
explored. Fungi adapted to dry forests are hypothesized to be widespread, while
species of wet forests are more likely to become isolated and differentiated on
islands. Effect of soil organic matter concentrations on abundance and diversity
of decomposer agarics on soil, and diversity of canopy trees on leaf decomposer
agarics at the Luquillo LTER site in Puerto Rico will also be studied.