* 9525806
* Modeling the Transport and Exchange of Krill between the    Antarctic Peninsula and South Georgia
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* John Klinck, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/2000
* USD 235,999.00

9525806 Hofmann Increasing evidence indicates that krill populations surrounding
South Georgia are supplied by krill exported from the Antarctic Peninsula
region. However, little knowledge of the potential krill transport pathways
exists. General circulation patterns for the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea
regions are known. However, recent observations have shown considerable
mesoscale structure to the flow on the continental shelf west of the Peninsula,
in Bransfield Strait, around Elephant Island and in the Scotia Sea, which
potentially influences krill transport and retention. Moreover, local
hydrographic and current conditions have considerable influence on the
development and growth of krill. Hence, understanding and elucidating krill
transport pathways or possible retention regions requires knowledge of the
mesoscale current and water mass distributions. The overall goal of the research
is to investigate transport of krill between the Antarctic Peninsula region
across the Scotia Sea to South Georgia. To accomplish this general objective the
following specific research objectives will be pursued: (1) implement a
circulation model for the Antarctic Peninsula-Scotia Sea region; (2) interface
an energetically based model for the development of krill from larva to adult
with the circulation model; and (3) use the circulation-krill model to
investigate the retention and/or transport of krill in the Antarctic Peninsula
to South Georgia. This modeling study is a joint effort between E. Hofmann and
J. Klinck at Old Dominion University and Dr. Eugene Murphy at the British
Antarctic Survey (BAS) in Cambridge, England. It will provide a framework for
analyzing, synthesizing and integrating the large environmental and krill data
sets collected by BAS around South Georgia with those from the Antarctic
Peninsula region that have come from historical sources (e.g., BIOMASS) and the
Palmer Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) Program and those from the Bransfi
eld Strait and Elephant Island regions from the U.S. Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (AMLR) program. Moreover, the proposed modeling studies are relevant
to the key science questions set forth by U.S. GLOBEC (GLOBEC, 1990) and
International GLOBEC (GLOBEC, 1993) for the Southern Ocean. In particular, it
addresses issues related to the role of circulation and biological processes in
structuring Antarctic krill populations. Also, quantifying the krill transport
(flux) between the Peninsula and Scotia Sea has been identified as a high
priority issue by the Convention for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living
Resources (CCAMLR).