* 9525763
* Collaborative Research: NEODAT II: An Inter-Institutional   Database of Fish Biodiversity in the Neotropics
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* William Fink, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 02/29/2000
* USD 178,881.00

9632672 Humphries The original NEODAT data base project was the first large-
scale effort to build a centralized multi-institutional collection catalogue in
ichthyology. This effort was aimed at improving the infrastructure for, and
facilitating access to, computerized collections resources with a specific focus
on Neotropical fishes. There are two primary emphases in this renewal proposal.
The first is to continue the progress of the NEODAT project in accumulating and
distributing catalogue-based specimen data, and associated literature and
species descriptions. The second emphasis is to create a network-based
infrastructure for Neotropical ichthyology, incorporating technological advances
made in Internet access methods since the original grant was funded. Currently,
there are nearly 300,000 catalogue records from over 74,000 localities in the
NEODAT system. The system receives approximately 800 searches per month.
Additional records are now available, and when entered the database will have
over 450,000 catalogue records. The technological advances in Internet services
allow for greater user-friendly service to those using the database. Thus, as
part of the second goal, software and hardware modifications will be implemented
to improve the utility of the database. NEODAT is an important international,
multi-institutional cooperative effort. All products of this effort are made
available to the international scientific and lay communities through the
Internet. In addition, this project, in particular, can serve as a model for
other large-scale database development efforts.