* 9525019
* Selective and Regenerable Metal Sorbing Vesicles for Metal  Ion Recovery
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Harold Monbouquette, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas W. Chapman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 210,000.00

CTS-9525019 Monbouquette UCLA The central goal of this research is to
demonstrate the feasibility of novel metal-sorbing vesicle media for the
selective recovery of toxic heavy metal ions, such as Cu2+, Cd2+ and Pb2+, from
dilute aqueous solution in a continuous process. Metal-sorbing vesicles, which
are submicron-diameter, surfactant bilayer membrane capsules, have been
engineering to scavenge and to concentrate metal ions by virtue of a lipophilic
metal carrier in the vesicle wall and a water-soluble, meal-chelating agent
dissolved in the aqueous vesiclle interior. The carrier facilitates transport of
the charged metal ion across the otherwise impermeable lipiid bilayer while the
encapsulated chelating agent provides the driving force for metal ion uptake.
Batch results show that suspensions of engineered metal-sorbing vesicles, which
present 103-104m2 of surface area per liter of suspension, can selectively
reduce Pb2+ or Cu2+ concentrations from 1-5 ppm to low ppb levels in minutes or
less while concentrating the metal by 3 orders of magnitude. These results were
used to design a bench-scale continuous metal-ion extractin process where the
vesicles and the feed stream were contacted using a hollow-fiber ultrafiltration
cartridge. Lead ions were selectivly separated in this continous systems, which
was described well by a simple mathematical model. However, this continuous
system did not include a vesicle regeneration stage for metal ion release such
that the vesicles could be reused repeatedly. During the proposed three-year
project, this separations technology will be brought forward in three areas
critical to the establishment of technical feasibility: design for selectivity,
continous processing with vesicle regeneration, and vesicle stability
enhancement. The overall selectively of the metal-sorbing vesicle depends in a
non-additive way on the relative affinity of both carrier and chelator for the
ions present in solution. A proposed qualitative model of this fundamentally new
mechanisms in separations shows that the overall systems can be orders of
magnitude more selective than the carrier or chelator alone if their selectivity
profiles are properly matched. The selectivity of vesicles harboring carefully
chosen carrier and chelator pairs will be determined to confirm the
qualititative model of metal-sorbing vesicle selectivity. As for vesicle
reusability, preliminary data indicates that metal-laden vesicles can be
regenerated in minutes at slightly elevated temperature and a moderate pH of
2.0. A metal-sorbing vesicle regeneration process will be further investigated,
optimized and integrated into a bench-scale continuous metal-ion recovery
system. A descriptive mathematical model of the system, useful for process
design, will be constructed and tested by comparison to experimental results.
Finally, polymerized vesicles of various chemistry will be tested for improved
stability at the elevated levels of detergent, alcohols, and Ca2+ ions, for
example, that could be encountered in an actual process stream. Coupled to this
study will be an assessment of the permeability and regenerability properties of
the polymerized vesicles, as these properties have a direct impact on the
efficacy of the proposed continuous metal recovery systems. Currently there is
no data available in the literature on carrier mediated transport across
polymerized vesicle bilayers.