* 9525105
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Associative       Polymers for Suppression of Misting of Machining Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Esin Gulari, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 09/30/1999
* USD 350,000.00

9525105 Manke Suppression of machining fluid misting is an area of major
importance to automotive manufactures and related metalworking industries
because of health concerns related to worker exposure to machining fluid mist in
manufacturing plants. Previous research has led to the use of high molecular
weight polyisobutylene (PIB) additives to reduce misting of straight oil
machining fluids, and this mist control method is now being implemented in many
automotive manufacturing facilities. This research will extend to water based
machining fluids which are used much more widely than straight oil in the
machining industry. Water-soluble polymers such as polyethylene oxide (PEO) have
proven to be effective in suppressing misting of water-based machining fluids,
which are used for about eighty percent of metalworking applications. But water-
based machining fluids have much lower viscosities than straight oils, thereby
requiring polymers of very high molecular weight to accomplish mist suppression,
and they are often circulated at much higher flow rates. Consequently,
mechanical degradation of water-soluble antimisting polymers and the need for
frequent replenishment presents an economic barrier to widespread use of polymer
mist control agents in water-based fluids. This research will investigate the
behavior of: (1) unsubstituted PEO in a surfactant-oil emulsion where
interactions between the PEO and surfactant micelles lead to associative
thickening of elongational viscosity; (2) PEO chain ends substituted with
hydrophobic blocks, which promote end-to-end associations in addition to
polymer-micelle interactions; and 3) a Kraton triblock copolymer-oil system that
will provide fundamental information on the elongational flow behavior of
associative-thickening polymer systems. These systems will be investigated by
light scattering, elongational flow rheometry, and mechanical and optical shear
rheometry to elucidate associative structures and characterize the rheology of
these structures b oth at equilibrium and under flow conditions. This research
will seek to isolate and optimize associative interactions leading to high
elongational viscosity. Atomization experiments will be carried out to evaluate
associative mist suppression mechanisms directly. The outcome of this research
is expected to be the development of practical associative polymers for mist
suppression of water-based machining fluids. Machining fluids play a key role in
determining the efficiency of the machining process. By far, the most ubiquitous
fluid for machining and grinding is water based fluids which contain many
additives to impart machining efficiency. However, when such a fluid is inhaled
as a mist during working conditions, there is cause for concern of the
operators' health. By successfully developing an economical, long lasting
antimisting additive, this research has the potential to make the working
environment safer in the metal working industry.