* 9525797
* Interactions of Metal Clusters with Pore Walls
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Gary Haller, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 11/30/1998
* USD 360,531.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9525797 This is a fundamental study of the role of radius of
curvative in an oxide pore in catalytic interactions. It has not been possible
to study this effect systematically until now; the discovery of mesoporous
aluminosilicate molecular sieves provides a means of preparing oxide supports
with uniform pores of varying sizes. The interactions of small platinum clusters
with the walls of mesoporous (1.5-2.5 nm) molecular sieves (MCM-41 materials)
having silicon/aluminum ratios greater than 3 are investigated. The principal
tools are solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and X-ray
absorption spectroscopy. Chemisorption, physical adsorption, small-angle X-ray
diffraction, and infrared, ultraviolet, and visible spectroscopies are also
used. Three catalytic test reactions are employed: n - hexane aromatization to
probe for small-particle stabilization against sintering and coke deactivation;
neopentane hydrogenolysis and isomerization as a probe of metal-support
interactions; and competitive hydrogenation of benzene and toluene to observe
effects on adsorption. Mesoporous molecular sieves offer a control of the
surface environment not heretofore available. It has not yet been established
that this control can be exploited for practical ends. This project will provide
a basis for evaluating the possibilities. ***