* 9525756
* Laboratory for Molecular Sciences (LMS): Caltech's Multi-Disciplinary Activities for Studies of Fundamental    Processes in Complex Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2002
* Ahmed Zewail, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Donald M. Burland
* 11/30/2002
* USD 6,000,003.00

This award from the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities of the Directorate of Mathematical and Physical Sciences supports the
research of Professor Ahmed Zewail and colleagues at the California Institute of
Technology for the establishment of a multidisciplinary research laboratory for
the study of fundamental processes in complex molecular systems with atomic
scale resolution. The Laboratory for Molecular Science (LMS) will involve eight
members of the Cal Tech faculty and will involve research in the following five
thrust areas: 1) Dynamics of Ionic Solvation and Weak Interactions; 2)
Femtosecond Dynamics by Photoelectron and Photodetachment Spectroscopy; 3)
Structure and Dynamics of Electrocatalysts and Interfaces; 4) Atomic-scale
Structure and Function of Receptor Proteins; 5) Electron and Energy Transfer in
DNA and Condensed Phases. The purpose of the LMS is to advance the understanding
of molecular and biological function in the five thrust areas at the microscopic
level for complex molecular systems. The LMS will bring to bear state-of-the-art
instruments with temporal and spatial resolution at the atomic scale.
Femtosecond time resolution achieved with light, electron, and eventually X-rays
will make it possible to relate structures at the most fundamental level to
functions in real systems. In addition to the Principal Investigator, Ahmed
Zewail, the members of the LMS include Fred C. Anson, Jacqueline K. Barton,
Dennis A. Dougherty, Rudolph A. Marcus, B. Vincent McKoy, Mitchio Okumura, and
Douglas C. Rees. Over the last 15 years great strides have been made in both
spatial and temporal resolution of chemical systems down to the atomic scale.
This capability has provided new opportunities for studying molecular structure
and dynamics in chemistry and biology. From the elementary dynamics of reactions
and protein folding to the dynamics of molecular assemblies and condensed
phases, theory and experiment at the fundamental scale of atomic resolution
provides the key to our understanding of molecular function and materials
properties. The field of molecular sciences is indeed witnessing a revolution,
especially at the interface between chemistry and biology where new experimental
tools can be exploited to elucidate the structure and dynamics of complex
molecular systems.