* 9525127
* Intelligent Decision Making and System Development for      Comprehensive Waste Minimization in the Electroplating      Industry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Yinlun Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/1998
* USD 105,668.00

Abstract - Huang - 9525127 The manufacturing of precious metal products usually
involves electroplating. There are over 3,000 electroplating plants in the U.S.
which utilize more than 100 chemicals to electroplate parts with any one or a
combination of over 100 different metal coatings. This has given rise to the
generation of large volumes of waste streams. Techniques for waste minimization
(WM) have been developed, but they have not permeated the plants, partly because
they have not been well classified and compared in terms of cost and efficiency.
Also, implementation of these methodologies and techniques requires various
kinds of experience in order to achieve not only WM efficiency, but also the
lowest cost and the highest productivity. The PIs plan to use artificial
intelligence techniques to realize comprehensive WM. A knowledge base for source
reduction, in-process recycling, and source waste (pre)treatment will be
developed. Two decision making algorithms are planned for optimizing the use of
both first-principles and heuristic knowledge residing in the knowledge base.
The ultimate goal of this project is to develop an intelligent decision support
system for WM in the plating plants of any size. The system will perform at an
expert level and will be a tool with which the plating industry can improve WM
practice with the lowest possible cost. It is expected that the source reduction
part of the system will help electroplaters evaluate current WM levels and
identify new opportunities for further waste reduction in various types of
plating processes. The source wastewater treatment (with in-process recycling)
part of the system will provide decisions on selecting the most efficient and
cost-effective (pre) treatment processes. Reductions of about 10 percent of
wastewater and sludges will be targeted. This system is expected to be initially
tested by 50 selected plants over the project period, and eventually to be
introduced into the plating industry, with arrangements by the AESF Society and
technical help from Hughes Research Laboratories.