* 9525803
* Physical-Biological Interactions Controlling Larval Krill   Development and Early Survival: Implications for Population Recruitment and Demography of Euphausia Superba Dana
* O/D,OPP
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Peter Franks, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/30/1999
* USD 172,199.00

9525803 Franks This project will investigate how spatial and temporal
variability in physical-biological features affects the development, condition
and survival of Antarctic krill larvae (Euphausia superba). It is believed that
adult spawning behavior and regional differences in primary productivity and
temperature are significant forces controlling krill mortality, population
demography and recruitment. Using a modified stage-structured larval population
model, the effects of spawning behavior and variations in stage durations and
mortalities on demography and recruitment will be examined. The model results
will be compared with observed larval distributions to determine which processes
best account for the observed population structures. Using a detailed metabolic
model with stage structure and realistic external forcing, we will determine how
much of the variability in stage durations and mortalities can be explained by
the effects of food availability and temperature. Larval lipid metabolism will
be incorporated into the model for elucidating the influences of physical and
biological variability on larval krill condition. Models will integrate the
effects of multiple parameters and will intimately coupled to field observations
and laboratory experiments. This study will provided a valuable contribution to
the understanding of interactions between marine populations and physical
processes in the Southern Ocean ecosystem. The results from this study will be
applicable to concurrent research investigating the physical-biological
interactions affecting Euphausia superba in the Southern Ocean, and Euphausia
pacifica in the California current. The ultimate intent is to quantify the
impact of physical-biological patchiness associated with physical features and
phenomena on larval condition, demography and recruitment in euphausiid
populations. Understanding species' responses to physical perturbations will
elucidate how environments have evolutionarily constrained life- history
patterns to maximize survival in inherently patchy and variable systems. Through
this understanding, this study will provide insights into the potential effects
of climatic change on euphausiid populations and their ecosystems.