* 9525091
* Bioengineering of Biosurfactants for Cleaning and Degreasing Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Richard Gross, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1999
* USD 189,198.00

9525091 Gross Surfactants are needed that have a high affinity for oil and can
form stable oil-in-water (o/w) emulsions for a number of important applications
such as in cleaners that will effectively remove oil-type residues from tankers,
various storage vessels and metal parts during manufacturing/surface cleaning
processes. From a toxic use reduction perspective, it would be desirable for
such surfactants to use non-toxic renewable resources in their production.
Furthermore, these functional products should show low/no toxicity and must
biodegrade upon disposal. Moreover, it would be advantageous if the surfactants
could easily be tailored so that optimal performance characteristics could be
obtained for different cleaning and degreasing requirements. Currently,
environmental factors are the guiding principles in the design of such
functional surfactant products by manufactures that are looking towards "Green"
processes and products. For example, soap and detergent producers are beginning
to realize that many customers will pay more for products that are
environmentally sound. Therefore, it is proposed herein that microbial
fermentation processes that involve conversion of various renewable fatty acids
will be used as routes to new biosurfactants that have enhanced performance
characteristics. The key feature of this work is that the surfactant structure
will be varied by alteration of the fatty acid carbon source used and by
inhibiting de novo pathways for fatty acid biosynthesis. The latter will be
accomplished by the use of specific and non-specific fatty acid biosynthesis
inhibitors in cultivation media. Previous work in our laboratory using these
approaches for the biosynthesis of the composition and degree of substitution of
the resulting polymeric surfactants. Thus, the idea that a family of surfactants
can be formed by a microbial production system has now been demonstrated. The
bioengineering of surfactant structure is of fundamental important since it
shows that the a cylation of sugar units by an acyltransferase enzyme systems
can potentially take place with a wide range of acyl doner molecules to optimize
produce performance. This proposal seeks to extend this finding to the
production of rhamose and sophorose lipid surfactants by candida bombicola and
pseudomonas aeruginosa. The flexibility of these microbial production systems
for the formation of novel biosurfactants will be explored by systematic
investigations using a wide range of fatty acid carbon sources of variable chain
length and unsaturation. The direct incorporation of hydroxyacids will also be
studies. Also, mutant strains of A.calcoaceticus that produce emulsans with
enhanced ability to emulsify heavy oils will be selected and studied. The
effects of changes in biosurfactant structure on surface tension and critical
micelle concentration values as a function of substrate will be evaluated. In