* 9525790
* Concept-Based Categorization and Search on Internet:  A     Machine Learning, Parallel Computing Approach
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Hsinchun Chen, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* C.  Iacono
* 08/31/1998
* USD 200,755.00

IRI-9525790 Chen, Hsinchun University of Arizona $200,755 - 36 mos Concept-based
categorization and search on Internet: a machine learning, parallel computing
approach The research is grounded on automatic textual analysis of Internet
documents and (homepages) attempts to address the Internet search problem by
first categorizing the content of Internet documents and subsequently providing
semantic search capabilities based on a concept space and a genetic algorithm
spider (agent). As a first step, a multi-layered neural network clustering
algorithm employing the Kohonen self- organizing feature map categorizes the
Internet homepages according to their content. The category hierarchies created
could serve to partition the vast Internet services into subject-specific
categories and databases. After individual subject categories have been created,
domain-specific concept spaces (graphs of terms and their weighted
relationships) are generated for each subject category. The concept spaces can
then be used to support concept-based information retrieval, a significant
improvement over the existing keyword searching and hypertext browsing options
for Internet resource discovery. Lastly, using homepages in each subject
category, a genetic algorithm client-based "spider" (agent) that can perform a
global, stochastic search on the Internet based on individual searchers'
preferences will be developed. While focused on Internet, the concepts and
results of this research are expected to be generally applicable in other
networked environments.