* 9525791
* Conference: Symposium on Multiphase Flow, Microstructured   Media, Diffusion and Biological Transport at the 26th Annual Meeting of the Fine Particle Society
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/1995,08/31/1995
* Ludwig Nitsche, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/1995
* USD 8,300.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9525791 Nitsche, L.C., Nitsche, J.M. University of Illinois Chicage
It is proposed for the NSF to help support a Symposium on Multiphase Flow,
Microstructure Media, Diffusion and Biological Transport being organized for the
26th Annual Meeting of the Fine Particle Society (Chicago, 22-25 August 1995).
Beyond furnishing a forum for exposition of the most recent advances in
transport phenomena, the Symposium has two key objectives. First, the program
has been carefully designed to bring researchers in fluid mechanics and
transport phenomena together with specialists in the fields of pore and surface
diffusion, microstructure media (liquid crystals, zeolites, membranes, etc.) and
cell biology (gap junction channels, exocytotic fusion pores, etc.). This
amalgamation will promote interdisciplinary contact to an uncommonly broad and
comprehensive extent. Second, the Symposium will serve as a focal point for
contact between researchers in fluid mechanics/fluid-particle systems and the
sizable industrial constituency of the Fine Particle Society, representing
nanoparticle and magneto-particle technology, particle characterization and
separation, filtration, powder technology, clean room technology, and
pharmaceuticals. Novel features of the Symposium include (I) subsidized graduate
student participation and a poster session dedicated to graduate research; and
(ii) a round-table discussion for the identification of key open problems at the
interface between transport and biology, and between transport and
microstructure materials. Results of the Symposium and the round-table
discussion will be disseminated in a dedicated issue of the journal Particulate
and Processing Science and Technology.