* 9525991
* MOTI:  Decision Making with Incomplete Information in an    Integrated Product and Process Development Enterprise -- A  Management Decision Tool for Cost Modeling &amp; Affordabili
* ENG,IIP
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Wyllis Bandler, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1998
* USD 240,000.00

9525991 Kohout Analysis of cost and realistic cost/benefit analyses in the
product design phase must involve determining the affordability of a design that
has never before been manufactured and making technical and business decisions
based on incomplete, uncertain data. This project will develop a systematic
accounting including incomplete or conflicting information, constraints, and
consequences during engineering design and planning for advanced jet propulsion
systems. A new methodology focusing on the use of fuzzy logic theory will be
developed to supplement existing parametric and probabilistic tools to perform
realistic and appropriate cost and benefits assessments at the component level
through the system level. The use of fuzzy attributes for cost models and
affordability applications addresses the problem of the limited or unavailable
empirical data, for example in new materials characterization or new
manufacturing processes. The use of verbal descriptors parallels the knowledge-
gathering exercise and will provide the ability to assign different levels of
accuracy, precision, or certainty to each element such as cost, material input,
or processing condition. A proof-of-concept manufacturing process trade study
will be carried out for an existing turbine engine component, such as one made
with gamma titanium, with a limited manufacturing base. Demonstration of the new
methodology and its validation with empirical data will be done using data taken
in an existing jet engine manufacturing environment in collaboration with an
industrial partner. The results of this research could allow the development of
software tools for integrated product and process design that can be used when a
designer has only incomplete or uncertain information.