* 9525964
* Workshop on Biodiversity, Ecology and Evolution of Thermo-  philes from Yellowstone National Park:  Overview and Issues to be held Sept. 17-20, 1995 in Yellow Stone National Park
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Norman Pace, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 12,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ;Y MX C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l ( MX ( MX 4 @ , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9525964 Reysenbach In the past decade there has been
a surge of interest and research in the ecology, biology, and biotechnology of
microorganisms from extreme environments. As a result, microbiological research
at Yellowstone National Park (YNP) has expanded significantly. Much of the
earlier work at YNP was pioneered by Thomas Brock laying the foundations for
microbiological research in the Park. It is the organism isolated by Brock et
al. From Mushroom Pool, Thermys aquaticus that is the original source of Taq
polymerase enzyme in the polymerase chain reaction. The usefulness of Taq
polymerase has now focused interest on the biotechnological potential of
thermophilic microorganisms, and on YNP thermal springs. In addition, the many
ecological studies, in particular those utilizing molecular phylogenetic
techniques to assess microbial diversity, have identified a plethora of novel
microbial and metabolic diversity. As a result, park officials are faced with a
new dimension of administrative policy: administering the microbial resources of
YNP in a way that is both realistic and beneficial fo r the Park and the
industrial and academic communities. Microbiological research at YNP has
expanded significantly in recent years, and much has been published about
microbiology at Yellowstone. Yet, no synthesis of the research has been
assembled. This workshop addresses the following objectives: (1) recent advances
in microbial ecological research, (2) biotechnological potential of microbial
resources, and (3) park policies and initiatives for microbiological research at
YNP thereby consolidating the interests of the National Park Service, the
scientific community, and industry. The workshop will result in a published
document that will include contributions of the symposium. *** ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D
h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9525964 Shelley S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i
o n ( + A. Graves Shelley A. Graves @ KX @ VLX @ ym MX @ d Microsoft Word 6.0 3
; e = e j j j j j j j A ? # # T = A j A j j j j ~ j j j j 6 9525964 Reysenbach
In the past decade there has been a surge of interest and research in the
ecology, biology, and biotechnology of microorganisms from extreme environments.
As a result, microbiological research at Yellowstone National Park (YNP) has
expanded significantly. Much of the earlier work at YNP was pioneered by Thomas
Brock laying the foundations for microbiological research in the Park. It is the
organism isolated by Brock et al. From Mushroom Pool, Thermys aquaticus that is
the original source of Taq polymerase enzyme in the polymerase chain reaction.
The usefulness of Taq polymerase has now focused interest on the
biotechnological potential of thermophilic microorganisms, and on YNP thermal
springs. In addition, the many ecological studies, in particular those utilizing
molecular phylogenetic techniques to assess microbial diversity, have identified
a plethora of novel microbial and metabolic diversity. As a result, park
officials are faced with a new dimension of administrative policy: administering
the microbial resources of YNP in a way that is b