* 9525881
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for         Energetic Materials
* ENG,EEC
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Pharis Williams, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 01/31/1997
* USD 43,000.00

ABSTRACT EEC-9525881 Persson This award is to continue funding for the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center on Energetic Materials at the
New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology. The main research focus of the
Center is on the safety of energetic materials. The quantities of these
materials being manufactured, transported, stored, and used in the United States
poses particular risks for mass explosion or detonation. Other current research
efforts are directed towards reducing the environmental effects of large
explosions, fire hazards, and increased safety of energetic materials. Specific
research topics include detonation and shock initiation, development of small-
scale tests to determine the hazards during development, manufacture,
transportation, storage, and use of energetic materials, thermal hazards of
energetic materials, safety engineering of energetic materials, minimum burning
rates and pressures, and ignition energies. Additional funding is provided in
this award to support one undergraduate female student to conduct research
performed on Project 3, Small Scale Safety Test Methods, in the Center. The
student will evaluate the relationship between the level of response of
explosives samples tested in 40 mg samples and the reaction violence observed in
large charges.