* 9525582
* Methods Development in Using Constructive Survey Approaches to Value Nonmarket Environmental Resources
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1999
* Robin Gregory, Decision Science Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Hal R. Arkes
* 02/28/1999
* USD 200,000.00

Survey instruments, ranging from those designed to elicit contingent valuations
to those that collect attitudes and opinions about policy options, are used as
information sources to determine environmental policy and program actions.
However, the current survey methods do not accurately represent the
multidimensional and nonmonetary nature of the resource values that must be
considered in the policy process. Therefore, this project develops a research
program on two promising new environmental survey approaches, which appear to
offer distinct advantages in providing comprehensive and focused databases on
public responses to the issues and concerns policy makers are expected to
address. The decision pathways approach asks respondents a series of
interrelated questions, each of which has several answers. The choice of answers
creates a decision path for each respondent, which in turn reveals the preferred
resource management options and the reasoning strategies. The value integration
approach begins by identifying the components of value relevant to the issue and
assists respondents in using this knowledge to make informed tradeoffs across
alternative environmental policies. Both proposed survey approaches reflect the
insights of behavioral decision theory and recognize the constructive nature of
complex environmental values. This project is supported by the EPA/NSF Valuation
for Environmental Policy funding opportunity.