* 9526394
* Design and Synthesis of Thermoplastic Elastomers with Liquid Crystalline Soft Segments
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Paula Hammond, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/1999
* USD 185,000.00

9526394 Hammond This project will attempt the design and synthesis of
thermoplastic liquid crystalline elastomers (LCTPE's) which can be processed
using traditional plastics processing techniques. These polymer systems consist
of block or segmented copolymers in which hard or rigid blocks alternate with
flexible side chain liquid crystalline polymer. The reversibility of the
thermoplastic "crosslink" with temperature will provide new routes to the
formation of highly anisotropic elastomeric systems through orientation induced
during plastic processing. A new level of control in the supramolecular ordering
can be achieved with these systems that is not accessible with crosslinked
liquid crystalline elastomers; the degree and type of orientation in an LCTPE
sample may be altered simply by changing thermoplastic processing parameters.
The resulting elastomeric materials are expected to exhibit enhanced mechano-
and electro-optic properties. The synthesis of LCTPE's will further our
understanding of liquid crystalline behavior in two phase polymer systems,
particularly, elastomeric two phase systems. The effects of domain interfaces on
nematic, smectic and chiral smectic phases will be examined, as well as the
effect of domain confinement on liquid crystalline electro-optic and mechano-
optic behavior. %%% It is hoped that this work will form the basis of a new area
of research in the coupling of liquid crystalline behavior with the
supramolecular structures possible from two-phase polymer morphologies and the
added control and orientation gained from thermoplastic processing. ***