* 9526499
* U.S.-Mexico Cooperative Research:  The Development and Study of Strengthening Agents for Limestone Using Sol-Gel and    Coupling Agent Technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1999
* C. Jeffrey Brinker, Metropolitan Museum of Art
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 02/28/1999
* USD 21,760.00

9526499 Wheeler This Americas Program award will support collaborative research
between Drs. George Segan Wheeler and Elizabeth Stevenson Goins of the Sherman
Fairchild Center, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, Dr. J. C. Brinker,
University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, and Dr. Juan Mendez Vivar, Universidad
Autonoma Metropolitana- Iztapalapa, Mexico. The primary scientific objective of
the project is the development and study of sol-gel materials and coupling
agents for strengthening limestone. The past performance of sol-gel-derived
strengthening agents, (referred to as consolidants), on limestone has been poor
because of the lack of adhesion between the gels and the grains of calcite
comprising the limestone. This project will examine the ability of
organoalkoxysilanes to serve as adhesion promoters between calcite and inorganic
gels. An important, long-term benefit can accrue from the development of these
consolidants by extending the life of a significant portion of Mexican and
United States architectural and sculptural heritage represented in limestone.
This heritage is at serious risk due to the high susceptibility of limestone to
degradation by acid rain as well as other deterioration processes. ***