* 9526204
* Innovative Laser Techniques for the Higher Resolution       Electronic Spectroscopy of Molecular Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Philip Johnson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 09/30/1999
* USD 378,400.00

The Experimental Physical Chemistry Program is providing support for Philip M.
Johnson of the State University of New York-Stony Brook to develop a new method
of laser spectroscopy, called photoinduced Rydberg ionization spectroscopy
(PIRI), which promises a substantial improvement in the resolution attainable in
the spectra of molecular cations. This technique relies upon the fact that the
optical properties of neutral molecules with one electron excited to a high
Rydberg state are almost identical to those of the corresponding ion. The method
proceeds by preparing a neutral molecule in a high-n Rydberg state just below
the first ionization limit. The ion cores of these Rydberg molecules are then
electronically excited by a tunable laser, resulting in autoionization when an
ion transition occurs. The production of ions with respect to wavelength
produces spectra which are equivalent to photoelectron spectra but are not
restricted by the resolution of electron energy analyzers. PIRI is able to
examine the excited electronic states of ions which are not accessible to
previous high resolution threshold ionization techniques such as zero kinetic
energy electron spectroscopy and mass analyzed threshold ionization
spectroscopy. This new technique will be applied to several small molecules of
atmospheric interest in order to explore the parameters and capabilities of the
method while gathering new information about these important species.
Photoinduced Rydberg ionization spectroscopy or PIRI will enable the electronic
spectroscopy of molecular cations to be observed with a resolution previously
unattainable. For the first time, rotational and vibrational information on
congested excited electronic states of ions will be acquired. Initial
experiments will focus on ionic states of oxygen, water, carbon dioxide,
hydrogen chloride and sulfur dioxide.