* 9526343
* "Tectonic Evolution of the Gulf of California and its       Margins"  (Partial Funding for a Penrose Conference)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Joann Stock, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 12/31/1996
* USD 14,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F l C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l l l 4 @ + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9526343 Stock The PIs have received approval from the
Geological Society of America (GSA) to hold a Penrose conference of The Tectonic
Evolution of the Gulf of California and Its Margins during April, 1996. They
plan to involve about 60-70 investigators (including graduate students) from the
US, Mexico, and other nations on discussing specifics of the evolution of the
rift system and comparison to other rift systems of the world. This should allow
them assess the state of knowledge of the Gulf of California, and to identify
important problems for future work in the region, both onshore and in the Gulf
of California. There are three major scientific reasons why a Penrose conference
on this topic is extremely timely. (1) A re-evaluation of the post-25 Ma
evolution of the San Andreas fault system has occurred in recent years. This is
directly relevant to development of the Gulf of California because the San
Andreas fault system is the northern continuation of the Gulf of California
because the San Andreas fault system is the northern continuation of the Gulf of
California transform-rift syst em. (2) More detailed and better constrained
models of the evolution of the Pacific-North America plate boundary have
improved correlations between tectonic events in the Gulf region and changes in
relative plate motion. (3) A series of analytical and experimental models of the
structural evolution of oblique-rift plate margins have been published in the
past few years, but these generally lack thorough testing by field studies. The
margins of the Gulf of California are an ideal place to conduct such research.
Support is provided Earth Sciences (Tectonics) and Ocean Sciences (Marine
Geology and Geophysics) for partial coverage of participant support costs. Oh +'
0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9526343 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @
Qı S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( * @ Qı @ | @ H' Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ;
e = e j j j j j j j P 1 Õ 2 T ı 5 P j P j j j j Õ ~ j j j j Õ = 9526343 Stock
The PIs have received approval from the Geological Society of America (GSA) to
hold a Penrose conference of The Tectonic Evolution of the Gulf of California
and Its Margins during April, 1996. They plan to involve about 60-70
investigators (including graduate students) from the US, Mexico, and other
nations on discussing specifics of the evolution of the rift system and
comparison to other rift systems of the world. This should allow them assess the
state of knowledge of the Gulf of California, and to identify important problems
for future work in the region, both onshore and in the Gulf of California. There
are three major scientific reasons why a Penrose conference on this topic is
extremely timely. (1) A re-evaluation of the post-25 Ma evolution of the San
Andreas fault system has occurred in recent years. This is directly relevant to
development of the Gulf of California because the San Andreas fault system is
the northern continuation of the Gulf of California because the San Andreas
fault system is the northern continuation of the Gulf of