* 9526823
* Tectonic Setting and Magmatic Evolution of Eastern Laurentia in Late Paleozoic Time:  Constraints from High Precision   U-Pb Dating of Alleghanian Granites
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1995,05/30/1998
* Scott Samson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 05/30/1998
* USD 99,885.00

; R o o t E n t r y F u C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l u u 4 @ , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; \WW60\CLIPART AUTOSAVE-PATH=R:\WWUSER PROGRAMDIR=N:\WW60
TOOLS-PATH=N:\WW60 STARTUP-PATH=R:\WWUSER\STARTUP INI-PATH=R:\WWUSER DOC-
PATH=R:\WWUSER Hyphenate 1033,0=N:\WW60\HYPH.DLL,N:\WW60\HY_EN.LEX Grammar
1033,0=N:\WW60\GRAM.DLL,N:\WW60\GR_AM.LEX 9526823 Samson One of the least
understood aspects of the Alleghanian orogeny in the southern Appalachians is
the origin of the granitic magmas that accompanied orogensis. Determining the
tectonic setting of the granites is directly linked to our understanding of the
tectonic evolution of eastern Laurentia during late Paleozoic time. Various
models have been proposed to explain the origin and tectonic setting of the
Alleghanian plutons, including their formation in a west dipping subduction
system, generation by lithospheric delamination, generation by thermal
blanketing, and formation in a transpressional regime by crustal arching. The
wide variation in these models reflects the lack of a coherent geochemical data
base for the plutons and a paucity a high precision crystallization ages for the
granites. Recent work has produced a large chemical and isotopic data set for
the Alleghanian granites that places significant new constraints on likely
source regions. However, the current lack of precise ages of the granites limits
our ability to detect temporal trends in the geochemical data, constra in the
tectonic setting of the granites, and to decipher the nature of the unexposed
portions of Appalachian terranes. This study will determine crystallization ages
of Alleghanian plutons from all of the major southern Appalachian lithotectonic
belts by using high-precision U-Pb zircon and monazite geochronologic technique.
The goals of the study are to (1) determine the initiation and duration of
Alleghanian magmagenesis; (2) determine whether temporal geochemical trends
exist (3) determine further the nature of unexposed Appalachian crust by dating
zircon xenocrysts; and (4) constrain the timing of deformation events in
selected terranes by dating pre-, syn- and post-tectonic plutons. ; Oh +' 0 $ H
l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9526823 Felicia S u m m a r y I n f o r m a
t i o n ( + Smith Felicia Smith @ @ @ @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e j j j j j j
j Q 1 3 T 5 Q j Q j j j j ~ j j j j &gt; 9526823 Samson One of the least
understood aspects of the Alleghanian orogeny in the southern Appalachians is
the origin of the granitic magmas that accompanied orogensis. Determining the
tectonic setting of the granites is directly linked to our understanding of the
tectonic evolution of eastern Laurentia during late Paleozoic time. Various
models have been proposed to explain the origin and tectonic setting of the
Alleghanian plutons, including their formation in a west dipping subduction
system, generation by lithospheric delamination, generation by thermal
blanketing, and formation in a transpressional regime by crustal arching. The
wide variation in these models reflects the lack of a coherent geochemical data
base for the plutons and a paucity a high precision crystallization ages for the
granites. Recent work has produced a large chemical and isotopic data set for
the Alleghanian granites that places significant new constraints on likely
source regions. However, the current lack of precise ages of the granites limits
our ability to detect temporal trends i