* 9526112
* Terahertz Microwave Generators from Submicron n+ -n-n+      Diodes
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Vladimir Mitin, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 01/31/2000
* USD 83,000.00

9526112 Mitin Solid state millimeter and submillimeter wave systems find wide
application in communications, radar, diagnostics, and other fields. Millimeter
wave system (frequency range: 30-300 Ghz) are relatively well developed.
Submillimeter wave (300-3,000 Ghz) systems are still far from practical
realization, due to a lack of suitable submillimeter radiation sources (SRS).
For the theoretical design of SRS, we will employ submicron diodes in a
nonconventional regime, i.e., charge accumulation due to transient overshoot
rather than stationary negative differential conductivity. Preliminary results
demonstrate that nonconventional regime devices can operate at frequencies as
high as 500-800 Ghz. To attack this problem, we have developed a complex of
programs for the numerical simulation of microwave power generation in two-
terminal devices which account for the external resonant circuit. One package of
programs is based on a full kinetic description of device operation in an
external circuit using the Monte Carlo particle (MCP) technique. A second
package is based on a modified hydrodynamic method (MHM) we have developed for
the analysis of dc and ac hot-carrier transport in semiconductor materials and
devices. Using MHM and MCP methods, we will extensively investigate the
possibility of obtaining microwave diode generators in the terahertz regime. ***