* 9526581
* Optoelectronic Semiconductor Nanostructures Fabricated      using Biochemical Templates (SGER)
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Robert Pirtle, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 07/31/1996
* USD 49,793.00

9526581 Pinizzotto This research aims, using polynucleotides combined with II-
VI inorganic materials, to explore a new and innovative approach to the
synthesis and fabrication of optoelectronic nanometer structures. Recognizing
the many advantages of precise replication and ordering available from
polynucleotides, divalent metal ions are to be loosely bound to specific sites
of single stranded polynucleotides to provide an initial ordering/spacing; after
preparation of a substrate for suitable adsorption this metal/polynucleotide
complex is deposited on a substrate, and treated with a gaseous chalcogenide
precursor to form nanoparticles at the metal/polynucleotide sites. A combination
of chemical and stereo-specific factors are expected to combine to yield an
array of nanoparticles of narrow size distribution. It may be feasible, for
example, to form uniform assemblies of II-VI materials such as CdS along the
polynucleotide chains, and therefore to be able to use polynucleotide structures
to dictate the structure, position, and size, of semiconductor particles as well
as the configurations of particle arrays. %%% This project will explore a new
and innovative approach to the synthesis of optoelectronic nanometer structures
from the broad perspectives of chemistry, physics, materials science, and
biology. The idea being explored is the potential use of polynucleotide chains
as templates for the fabrication of quantum dot structures of inorganic
materials such as cadmium sulfide. This project sets specific goals and methods
for an initial study to test these ideas. The proposed research has potential
for high pay-off to a broad range of new possibilities in optoelectronic
materials, and several key issues can be appropriately addressed and resolved by
the project. ***