* 9526047
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Investigation of the Kinematics of Brittle Deformation Expressed through Patterns of Seismic P and T Axes and Fault Slickenlines using Micropolar Theory
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Robert Twiss, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 01/31/1999
* USD 106,534.00

; R o o t E n t r y F N C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t E O b j e c t P
o o l N N 4 @ % & ' ( ) * + , - . / F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; v v ^ & & _ u u f M ^ & W & G V F ^ & GXP v v '5 F ~ t j ^ &
w,& w* S o5 F ~ t v v ^ & & _8 F f M f M EU VW ^ & W & G V F ^ & W & G ^ & O & _
; u ; t O1 u ^ & w & w O6 ^ & O & O u 9526047 Twiss This is a collaborative
project to continue investigation of the application of micropolar continuum
theory to the analysis of brittle deformation. This research consists of
theoretical and applied elements, both of which have significant implications
for the study of active tectonics. Seismic events and slickenlines on fault
surfaces are manifestations of slip on shear planes that occurs in the brittle
part of the Earth s crust. The slip accommodates a specific geometry of
deformation of defined by the orientation of the fault and the direction of
slip. The set of all such shearing events in a given volume accommodates the
brittle deformation of that volume. If we assume that this brittle deformation
is an accurate reflection of the tectonic deformation imposed, that we can
invert the seismic focal mechanism data or the shear plane/slickenline data to
determine the geometry of the tectonic deformation. The inversion of such data
requires a deformation model that one fits to the observations. The micropolar
model of deformation is a continuum model that includes the effects o f the
rotation of rigid fault blocks on the slip directions in any given shear plane,
which other deformation models do not include. Thus, using this model permits
the extraction of more kinematic detail from the data than other inversion
techniques provide. ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a
r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( $ 9526105 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @ M?L @ @ M?L
@ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e a E a j j j j j j j 1 " " " A m T 5 j j j j j ~ j
j j j x 9526047 Twiss This is a collaborative project to continue investigation
of the application of micropolar continuum theory to the analysis of brittle
deformation. This research consists of theoretical and applied elements, both of
which have significant implications for the study of active tectonics. Seismic
events and slickenlines on fault surfaces are manifestations of slip on shear
planes that occurs in the brittle part of the Earth s crust. The slip
accommodates a specific geometry of deformation of defined by the orientation of
the fault and the direction of slip. The set of all such shearing events in a
given volume accommodates the brittle deformation of that volume. If we assume
that this brittle deformation is an accurate reflection of the tectonic
deformation imposed, that we can invert the seismic focal mechanism data or the
shear plane/slickenline data to determine the geometry of the tectonic
deformation. The inversion of such data requires a deformation model that one
fits to the observations. The micropolar model of deformation is a continuum
model that includes the effects of the rotation of rigid fault blocks on the
slip directions in any given shear plane, which other deformation models do not
include. Thus, using this model permits the extraction of more kinematic detail
from the data than other inversion techniques provide.