* 9526386
* The Panaca Formation, Nevada, and Resolution of the         Hemphillian/Blancan Boundary
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Everett Lindsay, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 139,999.00

Lindsay 9526386 This project is for biostratigraphic and magnetostratigraphic
study of the Panaca Formation in eastern Nevada. This dominantly lacustrine
deposit is more than 300 meters thick, representing aggradation in basins formed
by tectonic extension. both Hemphillian (latest Miocene-early Pliocene) and
Blancan (middle-late Pliocene) mammals are known from the Panaca Fm.; our
objective is to establish a sequence of magnetozones in the Panaca Fm. using
both marker beds and magnetostratigraphy, and to assemble this data to resolve
the boundary between Hemphillian and Blancan land mammal ages. North American
sites with Blancan and Hemphillian mammals are probably more common than sites
of any other pre-Pleistocene land mammal ages; superposition, however, of
Blancan over Hemphillian mammal sites is rate. When superposition can be
demonstrated, relative to Hemphillian and Blancan faunas, correlation and
calibration of the boundary has never been securely established. The Panaca Fm.
provides a combination of thick and well exposed sediments, diverse and locally
abundant fossils, and strong, stable magnetic minerals. The combination of these
factors in the Panaca Fm. promises to provide a robust data base for resolution
of the Hemphillian/Blancan boundary. The geochron of the Panaca Fm.,
approximately 3 to 6 m.y., was an interval of dynamic mammal radiation. The
early radiation of microtine rodents (e.g., voles and lemmings) in Holarctica,
the appearance of hominids in Africa, and the Great American Interchange all
occurred in that time span. It is interesting that here in North America, where
mammal chronology is most securely established, the boundary between Hemphillian
and Blancan land mammal ages is so poorly constrained. This project is designed
to correct that weakness; when securely calibrated, the boundary between
Hemphillian and Blancan land mammal ages will be a firm cornerstone for global
correlation of biotic and geologic events during the late Cenozoic Era.