* 9526035
* Microwave-Enhanced Solid State Reactions in Ionic           Crystalline Solids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Reid Cooper, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/2000
* USD 172,900.00

The primary goal of this research project is to isolate and characterize a
microwave-field-enhancement effect on ionic transport in ionic ceramics. The
investigation will emphasize experiments to establish whether this microwave
driving force is a dominant mechanism responsible for enhanced solid state
diffusion and of interface chemical reactions. Measurements will made using
halide salts, a 14 GHz microwave source, and a nonresonant waveguide applicator.
Theoretical analyses will be conducted in collaboration with researchers from
the Institute of Applied Physics, Russian Academy of Science (Nizhny Novgorod).
Design of the experiments, the experimental applicator, and experimental
operation will be completed in collaboration with a researcher from Rockwell
International. Two sets of experiments are planned: (1) measurements of
microwave effects on grain boundary diffusion of K+ ions into NaCl and Na+ ions
into KCl, and (2) measurements of microwave effects on interface-limited solid-
state reaction rates for (pseudo) binary compound formation. In both cases, th e
reactions will be compared for microwave-irradiated and microwave-free samples
as a function of sample temperature, microwave field strength, and electric
field polarization. In addition, the PIs plan experimental studies of
temperature distributions within microwave-heated ceramic specimen. This will
address questions of accurate thermometry in microwave heating/materials
processing and whether reports of enhanced reactions in microwave-heated glasses
and ceramics can be (at least partially) explained by core-to surface
temperature differentials of up to several hundred degrees Celsius.
Specifically, the PIs will characterize internal temperature gradients due to
inverted temperature profiles through the experimental examination of solid-
state compound formation in microwave-heated oxide particulate composites in
which the two component oxide phases in the starting compact react to form one
or two quasi binary compounds. The results will be compared to predictions based
on heat transport and microwave absorption modeling in oxide particulate
composites.