* 9526951
* Hydrodynamics of Overpressuring in the Sacramento           Valley, California
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1996,09/30/1998
* Grant Garven, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 09/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9526951 Garven Regional overpressuring is a phenomenon characteristic of the
Sacramento Valley and the Coast Ranges of California. The creation and
maintenance of high fluid pressures in any sedimentary sequence require two
basic conditions: (1) low-permeability confining units and (2) geologic forces
which increase the pore pressure within these rocks. The forces may be tectonic,
thermal, or even chemical in nature. The intent of this study is to determine
which factors play a role in the creation of overpressure zones in the Central
Valley of California and to quantify the contribution of each in order to
successfully model the high pressures currently found in the region. Sedimentary
basins in the Great or Central Valley of California host regional aquifers and
at greater depths host large petroleum reservoirs. Geological and geochemical
data are abundant, as the Valley has been extensively explored and mapped for
these natural resources. The Sacramento Basin in the north is rich in natural
gas and geothermal resources, and deep groundwater (depths greater than 700 m)
is noticeably overpressured in the western part of the basin near the Coast
Ranges. Despite the long history of geologic exploration, very little
hydrogeologic work has been done to quantify the nature of deep groundwater flow
of geologic processes such as overpressuring in the Great Valley. This proposal
seeks to increase our basic understanding of how the deep groundwater flow
systems have evolved over geologic time in the Sacramento Basin. Earlier studies
on the Sacramento Basin suggest that the origin of anomalously high fluid
pressures is related to tectonic compression. According to the conceptual model
of Berry (1973), east-west compression associated with the San Andreas Fault and
the Basin and Range province "squeezed" the Great Valley sediments like a
tectonic vise, driving deep pore waters upward. These forces generated high
pressure zones due to the low permeability of the thick marine mudstone sectio
n. However, other mechanisms for overpressuring may be important. Petroleum
generation, dehydration reactions, crustal heating, and rapid subsidence are
other mechanisms that need to be considered and quantified hydrodynamically. A
primary objective of this proposal therefore is to use hydrogeologic modeling as
a tool for quantifying the relationship between the deep ad shallow flow systems
in the Valley and test the viability of conceptual models for overprssuring .
Various types of field observations will be used to place constraints on the
hydrogeologic models, but mostly we will compile pressure data from deep
exploration wells. The work proposed here represents the first effort to
quantify "deep" groundwater flow dynamics in the Great Valley of California.
Hydrologic testing of geologic concepts with coupled mathematical models form
the heart of the study: hydromechanical model of the Sacramento Basin ought to
shed basic light on other causes for for the origin of overpressures I the
Earth's crust. Furthermore, water resources are precious in the Valley which
contains one of the largest fresh-water aquifer systems in the world. Improving
our understanding of the basin groundwater systems may have significant
practical benefit with regard to understanding of the potential salinity
contamination of the shallow, fresh-water aquifers as development continues to
satisfy an over increasing demand for potable water.