* 9526861
* Geometry and Timing of Gneiss Dome Formation, Southern      Tibet, China
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Phillip Gans, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 03/31/2000
* USD 207,419.00

; R o o t E n t r y F " C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t D O b j e c t P
o o l " " 4 @ + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9526861 Lee An integrated geological investigation, to be
completed in collaboration with Professor Chen, Wenji and Dr. Hao Jie, Institute
of Geology, State Seismological Bureau, Beijing, China, is proposed to test and
refine postulated mechanisms for the formation of the gneiss domes in southern
Tibet. Field-based investigations will focus on the little-studied Kangmar dome
and unstudied Lhagoi Kangri dome. Integrated investigations include geologic
mapping, structural, kinematic, geochronologic, and thermochronologic
investigations within these two domes to document the geometry, kinematics
direction, and magnitude of ductile and brittle deformation, the relative timing
between pluton emplacement and deformation, and the age of intrusions, ductile
deformation and fault motions. These data, integrated with ongoing seismic
reflection data by other workers, provide an opportunity to document the space-
time evolution of gneiss dome formation within an overall lithospheric
convergent setting. The processes that lead to their creation have important
implications for the tectonic evolution f the Tib etan plateau. Therefore, an
accurate characterization of the development of these gneiss domes in terms of
their structural, kinematic, and temporal evolution will have significant
implications for the formation of overthickened crust and perhaps the timing
that high elevations were achieved on the Tibetan plateau. This project provides
an excellent opportunity for structural geologists and geochronologists from the
USA and China to collaborate on an integrated field and analytical research
project that addresses fundamental questions about processes of gneiss dome
formation in a continent-continent collisional tectonic setting. ; Oh +' 0 $ H l
D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9526684 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @ S u m m
a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( * @ @ @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e D j j j j j j
j 1 ! ! ! @ l T 5 j j j j j ~ j j j j w 9526861 Lee An integrated geological
investigation, to be completed in collaboration with Professor Chen, Wenji and
Dr. Hao Jie, Institute of Geology, State Seismological Bureau, Beijing, China,
is proposed to test and refine postulated mechanisms for the formation of the
gneiss domes in southern Tibet. Field-based investigations will focus on the
little-studied Kangmar dome and unstudied Lhagoi Kangri dome. Integrated
investigations include geologic mapping, structural, kinematic, geochronologic,
and thermochronologic investigations within these two domes to document the
geometry, kinematics direction, and magnitude of ductile and brittle
deformation, the relative timing between pluton emplacement and deformation, and
the age of intrusions, ductile deformation and fault motions. These data,
integrated with ongoing seismic reflection data by other workers, provide an
opportunity to document the space-time evolution of gneiss dome formation within
an overall lithospheric convergent setting. The processes that lead to their
creation have important implications for t