* 9526384
* PALE Steering Committee, Data Coordination, and Community   Radiocarbon Dating
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Gifford Miller, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 08/31/1999
* USD 535,270.00

Abstract ATM-9526384 Miller, Gifford University of Colorado Title: PALE Steering
Committee, Data Coordination, and Community Radiocarbon Dating This award
supports activities that are central to the success of Paleoclimates from Arctic
Lakes and Estuaries (PALE), a project within the Arctic Systems Science (ARCSS)
Program, but which are beyond the scope of individually funded research
projects. The general contribution of PALE to the ARCSS program is the
description of temporal and spatial variations in late Quaternary (150,000 years
to present) Arctic climates are determined by multiple proxy indicators
preserved in lacustrine and estuarine sediment records. These data, when coupled
with paleoclimatic models, provide a fuller understanding of possible mechanisms
and feedbacks that affect both circumarctic and regional high latitude climate
changes. Such knowledge improves predictive capabilities for assessing possible
environmental responses to future climatic fluctuations. This award will support
the activities of the PALE Steering Committee for coordination among national
and international scientific programs. A data coordinator is also supported as
being vital to PALE as the major facilitator for compilation, storage, and
exchange of data with other paleoclimatic programs. Support for radiocarbon
analyses will ensure the high quality chronologies necessary to PALE.