* 9526459
* Atlas of Glacimarine Features
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Thomas Davies, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 02/28/1998
* USD 34,833.00

Davies OPP 9526459 Abstract This award supports editing and preparation work to
develop an Atlas of Glacimarine Features. Late Cenozoic glaciation directly
affected sedimentation on more than half the Earth's continental shelves. Ice
continues to be a dominant influence on sedimentation around Greenland and on
the shelves facing the Arctic ocean as well as around Antarctica. Elsewhere,
glacimarine sedimentation is of particular significance on the shelves of North
America, north of, northwest Europe and Russia, which were strongly influenced
by the Late Cenozoic Glaciation, though now ice is a minor factor. The features
of these shelves include true glacimarine features, i.e. those formed in a
marine environment in proximity to, or strongly under the influence of, ice, and
diamictons resulting from ice rafting. Also found, since large areas of the
shelves were exposed during the Pleistocene lowering of sea level, are
terrestrial glacial and periglacial features, e.g. fluvial outwash valleys and
associated deposits, tunnel valleys, drumlin fields, lodgement till, which have
subsequently been submerged and modified by marine influences. Better
understanding of present-day glacimarine environments will enhance
interpretation of the stratigraphic record in terms of past environments and the
possible global climate changes implied by these interpretations, while from an
immediate practical standpoint, recognizing and understanding the features of
glaciated shelves will become increasingly significant as the search for energy
and mineral resources extends to higher latitudes and into submerged regions.
The planned Atlas of Glacimarine Features will provide a reference for
professionals, teachers and students showing typical examples of sea floor and
sub sea floor features seen in glacio-marine environments, as these appear in
seismic records (single and multi-channel seismic reflection, high resolution,
side scan). Likely users of the atlas will include Qua ternary scientists,
marine geologists, geophysicists, geotechnical engineers, and surveyors working
in universities, research institutions and government agencies, as well as those
in industries with offshore interests (petroleum and hard mineral exploration
and production, civil engineering, waste disposal, environmental concerns,
etc.). The atlas will be assembled under the guidance of an international
editorial committee from contributions submitted by members of the scientific
community. Publication is planned for late 1996.