* 9526987
* Cross-Site:  Stream Flow Hydrology Comparisons and Synthesis at Long-Term Ecological Research Sites - Links with        Climate Terrestrial Ecosystems and Stream Ecology
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Julia Jones, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1999
* USD 171,634.00

This project is designed to further understanding of relations among climate,
vegetation, and streamflow across a range of ecosystem conditions and to advance
intersite activities among LTER and nonLTER sites. The overall objective of this
proposal is to describe streamflow hydrology in a wide range of sites by
elucidating streamflow response to a range of climatic, vegetation, and
disturbance factors operating at time scales ranging from decadal to diel. We
expect to demonstrate how steamflow responds to vegetation and climate at each
of these scales, and how this inherent coupling of climate, vegetation and
streamflow controls streamflow response to disturbance and hence aspects of
stream ecology. The initial research phase of the project involves comparative
analysis of long-term steamflow records from Andrews, Coweeta, and Hubbard Brook
LTER sites and the Caspar Creek Experimental Watersheds site (USDA Forest
Service/State of California). These forest sites encompass a broad range of
climatic (e.g., precipitation amount and seasonality, degree of snow influence)
and vegetation (e.g., deciduous vs. conifer, leaf area index) conditions.
Subsequently, they will involve a much larger group of LTER and other sites in a
workshop and associated activities designed to develop site characterization and
cross-site analysis for broader range of site conditions. This work will include
use of hydrologic models to examine hypothese concerning controls on water
balances at the time scales of interest. Representatives of the Climate and
Stream Ecology Committees of LTER will take part in workshop planning and
conduct. Products of the overall effort will include: (1) on -line data bases
with common variables/time resolution between sites, (2) an LTER publication
similar to the Stream Research in the LTER Network Publication No. 15, and (3)
journal articles from the comparative analyses conducted for the small set of
sites and for the larger set of sites.