* 9526736
* Conference:  Gordon Research Conference on Nonlinear Optics and Lasers to be held in Tilton, New Hampshire on July 30-  August 4, 1995.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1995,02/29/1996
* Carlyle Storm, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Athena C. Harvey
* 02/29/1996
* USD 6,000.00

9526736 Storm This proposal requests a grant of $6,000 in support of the 1995
Gordon Research Conference on Nonlinear Optics and Lasers to be held at the
Tilton School, Tilton, New Hampshire, July 30 - August 4, 1995. As in previous
years, the purpose of this conference is to provide an informal forum for the
presentation and discussion of new work on selected topics in nonlinear optics
quantum electronics and lasers, and their applications to physics, chemistry and
engineering. An informal atmosphere with a strong emphasis on discussion is
intended to encourage the exchange of ideas in a manner not possible at regular
meetings of professional societies. Particular effort is made to provide an
opportunity for graduate students and postdocs to interact in this informal
atmosphere with foremost experts in the field. A total attendance of
approximately 135 scientists from universities, industry and government is
anticipated. It is proposed that the estimated total expense for the conference
of 440,000 be shared by the National Science Foundation ($6,000), the Office of
Naval Research ($5,000), the Air Force Office of Scientific Research ($10,000),
the Army Research Office ($4,000). The remainder ($15,000) is obtained from
registration fees paid by Gordon Conference attendees. The National Science
Foundation funds will be used to assist graduate students and selected junior
faculty who, because of limitations of their own sources of funding, require
financial assistance to attend the conference. No honoraria will be paid. ***