* 9526142
* Parallel Computation and Decentralized Control of Large     Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Dragoslav Siljak, Santa Clara University
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 03/31/2000
* USD 323,112.00

9526142 Siljak Transient stability simulation is among the most important and
frequently performed computation in power systems analysis. Accelerating this
process efficiently with parallel computers is of enormous practical
significance, and is the focal point of the proposed research. Our specific
objective will be to design and test parallel simulation algorithms based on the
balanced Border Block Diagonal (BBD) decomposition, which is ideally suited for
mapping sparse matrix problems onto multiprocessor architectures, and secures
both good load balancing an low intercommunication between the processors. To
significantly broaden the scope of the proposed parallel transient stability
simulation, well established epsilon decompositions will be applied to sparsify
the Jacobian that arises in solving the discretized algebraic-differential
equations by Newton's method. Preliminary results indicate that in electric
power systems very significant sparsification can be achieved by discarding
sufficiently small elements in blocks of matrices L and U where the fill-in is
substantial. In this context, and additional objective will be to develop
algorithms for identifying coherent groups of generators in large power networks
via epsilon decompositions of the Jacobian, which will be linear in complexity
and serve as a basis for transient stability computations. The balanced BBD and
epsilon decompositions offer a new approach to the design of decentralized
control of large power systems. The BBD structure will be used to parallelize
the solutions of Lyapunov and Riccati matrix equations, which are of fundamental
importance in the decentralized stabilization and optimization of dynamic
systems. Initial experiments indicate that this method can be used to stabilize
very large systems with as many as several thousand state variables. ***