* 9526421
* Recovery and Science Coordination of an Ice Core at Siple   Dome, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2003
* Kendrick Taylor, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Julie Palais
* 05/31/2003
* USD 802,279.00

This award is for support for the recovery of a 1000-meter ice core from Siple
Dome, Antarctica and the coordination of a science management office for the
scientific program. The proposed project is part of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet
(WAIS) program, which seeks to understand the current behavior of the West
Antarctic ice sheet and to decipher its past climate history. Siple Dome is
located between ice streams C and D and is well-situated to investigate coastal
climate conditions and the dynamics of the Siple Coast ice streams which drain
the West Antarctic ice sheet. The annual accumulation at the site is 7 to 11 cm
of ice per year and it is anticipated that annual layers will be identifiable to
an age of at least 6,000 years before present. The length of the usable climate
record will extend to at least 80,000 years before present. This proposal
provides the background for the Siple Dome drilling program and develops the
opportunity for individual scientists (who have submitted separate proposals) to
work on the ice core . This proposal would establish a Science Coordination
Office that would coordinate the activities of the various organizations
involved in the project, including the National Science Foundation (NSF), the
Polar Ice Coring Office (PICO), Antarctic Support Associates (ASA), and the
National Ice Core Laboratory (NICL).