* 9526165
* Autostoichiometric Vapor Deposition - Precursors, Reactions and Deposition of Ferroelectric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2001
* Ren Xu, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2001
* USD 205,338.00

9526165 Xu This research project uses a unique combination of precursor
molecular structure and reaction dynamics to conduct deposition and growth
studies of multi-component ferroelectric oxides. The investigation focuses on
autostoichiometric vapor depostion, which takes advantage of the
stoichiometrically associative double alkoxide precursors, and deposition
reactions that allow for the conservation metal-to-metal ration during
deposition. Basic understanding of various gas phase and surface reactions, such
as free-radical pyrolysis, hydrolysis-assisted pyrolysis and hydrolysis-
polycondensation, and their implications on the stoichiometric nature of thin
and thick film deposition of ferroelectric materials. Characterization methods
employed include mass spectrometric, X-ray, as well as optical scattering and
loss measurements of waveguide structures fabricated during the project. %%% The
knowledge and understanding gained from this research project is expected to
contribute in a general way to improving the performance of advanced
ferroelectric materials and optoelectronic components used in computing,
information processing, and telecommunications by providing a fundamental
understanding and a basis for designing and producing improved materials. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. ***