* 9526686
* Toward the Origin of Whales:  Eocene Cetacea from Pakistan
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* S. Taseer Hussain, Northeast Ohio Medical University
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2000
* USD 189,982.00

Thewissen 9526686 This project investigates the transition of cetaceans (whales,
dolphins, porpoises) from terrestrial quadrupeds to obligate marine swimmers.
This transition is one of the few paleontologically documented examples of
macroevolutionary change in mammals. The project will interpret patterns of
macroevolutionary change in two systems that underwent pervasive modifications,
locomotion and hearing, and evaluate its paleoecological context. Hypotheses.--
Seven hypotheses will be tested. Two of these make predictions about changes in
the modes of locomotion in early cetaceans. Three hypotheses make predictions
about evolution and function of the cetacean middle and inner ear. Another two
hypotheses address the physical environment under which this transition took
place, making prediction about paleoecology. New fossil material will be
collected from freshwater and shallow marine sediments of the Kuldana and Kohat
Formations of Northern Pakistan, the only area where the earliest and most
plesiomorphic cetaceans are found. This material will allow testing of the
hypotheses. Kuldana/Kohat cetaceans lived across a variety of depositional
environments in what is now a structurally complex area, requiring detailed
geological study. Sedimentological study will elucidate the physical setting of
the transition. Related, ongoing work includes analyses of modern cetacean ear
development and function, and an analysis of physiological constraints, based on
stable oxygen isotopes. Significance.-- Cetacean origins is one of the best
documented examples of land-water transitions among vertebrates, and showcases
several form-function complexes that underwent pervasive change. Cetacean
swimming evolved from quadrupedal paddling to dorsoventral oscillation of the
broadened tail, and the Kuldana cetaceans display intermediate modes. The ears
of cetacean ancestors were tuned to mid-frequency airborne sounds, whereas
modern cetaceans hear underwater high- (odontocete) or low- (mys ticete) sounds.
The position of the Kuldana cetaceans is unclear, but their auditory morphology
is different from their terrestrial sister group and modern cetaceans. Fossil
morphologies interpreted in an established phylogenetic context and against a
background provided by modern aquatic mammals elucidates these evolutionary
patterns. Studying the sedimentology of the rocks that document these
morphological patterns clarifies the ecological setting of the land-to-water
transition. This study is of broader significance for the higher phylogeny of
mammals. It will provide morphological data to test phylogenies of the
affinities of sperm whales (odotocete paraphyly) and the relationship of
cetaceans to artiodactys (artiodactyl paraphyly). These phylogenetic hypotheses
were proposed on the basis of molecular data, and are greatly disputed by
morphologists. Studies of faunal evolution have suggested that Indo-Pakistan
contacted Asia in the Cretaceous. Geological data dispute this claim. This study
will provide a critical test for the Eocene paleontological data.