* 9526127
* A National Center for Computational Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Karl Hess, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 06/30/2000
* USD 484,710.00

9526127 Hess The National Center for computational Electronics, founded in 1988
at the University of Illinois and later expanded in 1992 to include a second
site at Stanford University, has played a role in advancing on a national level
various aspects of research and education in computational electronics. Over 60
groups from academic institution s and industry are affiliated to the center.
NCCE has provided services to the scientific community, and has pursed
cooperative projects on interdisciplinary research, involving academic and
industrial groups, and national laboratories. This is a continuation of the
funding provided by the National Science Foundation to partially support the
operation of the NCCE site at the Beckman Institute of the University of
Illinois. The proposed activities encompass several areas, from research to
education and services. The focus of research will be in the formation of
collaborative groups working on key research problem in computational
electronics. Major challenges exist in the areas of deep submicron silicon
device simulation, optoelectronics device simulation, as well as quantum
transport in nanostructures. The role of NCCE is to create conditions for
improved communications and technology transfer between the various components
involved with semiconductor research and development. Different goals and
uncorrelated efforts have created wide gaps and a lack of standardization. By
creating wide interdisciplinary collaborative groups, which involve the broad
expertise necessary for problems that go well beyond the capabilities of single
investigators or even single institutions, NCCE intends to create an environment
where the proposed collaborative themes will be developed in a more efficient
way, while the models and the computer software will evolve in a consistent and
standardized fashion. NCCE is now organizing two major working groups on full
band structure Monte Carlo simulation for silicon devices and on semiconductor
laser simulation. Sever al other groups are involved in simulation of quantum
nanostructures, numerical approaches for hydrodynamic simulation models, and
interactive environments based on the World Wide Web for research and education
activities. NCCE has gained over the last two years considerable experience in
the development of interactive distributed MOSAIC environments for
computation/visualization in research and education, and taken advantage of the
WWW for technology transfer to industry. This activity will be expanded in close
collaboration with the other NCCE groups and with the the natonal Center for
Supercomputing Applications, to improve access to information on the WWW for
NCCe affiliates, realize environments for remote distributed collaboration,
improve mechanisms of technology transfer, and generate new educational
materials for computational electronics. NCCE will continue to provide a wide
range of services tot the computational electronics community. These services
include a Visitor's program at the Beckman Institute which has been instrumental
in fostering collaborative interactions, a newsletter which will be expanded in
scope to take advantage of the distributed WWW capabilities to create an
electronic information system, release of software for large scale simulation
and education, and the organization of the International Workshop on
Computational Electronics.