* 9526795
* Physical and Chemical Heterogeneity of Aquifers:            A Quantitative Geological Investigation
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Robert Harter, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/1999
* USD 165,000.00

9526795 Davis One of the major challenges facing hydrogeologists today is the
prediction of solute movement in the subsurface. It has been generally
recognized that the spatial variation of aquifer permeability is one of the
dominant controls on the evolution of a contaminant plume. In addition, recent
studies suggest that the spatial variation in aquifer chemical properties may
also influence solute movement. One very promising approach to quantifying
subsurface variability and the associated contaminant transport is the
geostatistical approach. Geostatistical, or stochastic, models represent aquifer
properties with spatially correlated random field. In recent years, a wide
variety of statistical models have been proposed in the literature to represent
the spatial variation of permeability. Some of these models have also been
applied to the spatial variation of chemical properties. In general, each model
is based on a different method for mathematically representing, or
computationally generating, spatially correlated random variables and each
exhibits overall differences in appearance. This research investigates how the
various statistical models relate to the geological processes of deposition and
how geologic information can be used to select and parameterize the most
appropriate model. Results from previous work indicate that a quantifiable
relationship exists between the sedimentological features of fluvial bounding
surfaces and the geostatistical properties of modality and spatial correlation.
Fluvial bounding surfaces are hierarchical in nature and it has been observed
that, in general, the higher the order of the bounding surface, the higher the
probability that the surface separates regions with different mean permeability.
The regions of different mean permeability in turn are the dominant control on
modality and spatial correlation structure of the statistical models of
heterogeneity. With regard to the spatial variation of aquifer chemical
properties, very little fi eld data on the spatial patterns of variability. This
research will obtain important data on the nature of chemical heterogeneity and
its relationship to the geological processes of deposition. The primary
objectives of the proposed research are to: 1) empirically investigate the
relationship between the correlation structure of permeability and the spatial
distribution of hierarchical bounding surfaces; 2) investigate the relationship
between the spatial variation of chemical properties and geologic features; and
3) develop an algorithm for coding sedimentological information of depositional
environment for the simulation of the physical and chemical heterogeneity. The
first phase will investigate the spatial variation of both permeability and
chemical properties (mineralogy, grain coatings, surface area, porosity, and
cation-exchange capacity) of deposits exposed in New England gravel pits. The
results of the field work will be used to develop an algorithm of simulating
aquifer heterogeneity. It is anticipated that the algorithm will treat different
scales of heterogeneity separately using the indicator formalism and Bayesian
statistics. Each geologic setting is unique and any particular outcrop study
will not be directly transportable to other sites. However, if the physical and
chemical heterogeneity can be related to general geologic properties and
sedimentological features, the results of this research will enable much more
portability between different geologic settings.