* 9526888
* Identification of Preferential Flow Paths at Sites of       Groundwater Contamination
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Carl McElwee, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/1997
* USD 49,998.00

9526888 Butler A considerable body of research has identified the spatial
distribution of hydraulic conductivity as a significant control on the movement
of contaminants in the subsurface. A number of theories have been developed to
quantify the influence of spatial variation of hydraulic conductivity on
contaminant transport using stochastic processes or fractal representations to
model the conductivity variations. It is increasingly apparent , however, that
the modeling of the conductivity variations at a site using, for example, the
first two moments of a stationary stochastic process estimated from core data
may have limitations in unites composed of a complex mixture of lithologies.
Clearly, site-specific features of the hydraulic conductivity distribution of a
larger scale need to be quantified in order to reliably predict contaminant
movement in such systems. In particular, knowledge of the existence of laterally
contiguous zones of high hydraulic conductivity, which serve as preferential
flow paths, is often critical for the successful modeling of contaminant
transport a site. The field identification of such somes, however, has proven to
be a rather difficult task at site. The field identification of such zones,
however, has proven to be a rather difficult task. Conventional field techniques
only provide information of a highly averaged nature or information restricted
to the immediate vicinity of the test well. The ultimate objective of the
research proposed here is to develop a completely new field method for the
estimation of spatial variations in hydraulic conductivity. Although developed
for the general task of estimation of hydraulic conductivity variations in
saturated formations, this method would be especially effective for the
identification of preferential flow paths. This new methodology involves three
primary elements: (1) a recently proposed methods for hydraulic tomography, (2)
multilevel sampling wells commonly employed in large-scale tracer tests for
obtaini ng vertically isolated water samples, and (3) miniature fiber-optic
pressure sensors recentlydeveloped for biomedical applications. One of the
primary constraints on the field application of hydraulic tomography has been
the need for detailed information about vertical variations in pumping-induced
head changes. The use of miniature fiber-optic pressure sensors in the small
tubing of the multilevel samplers, however, should enable that constraint to be
overcome and the considerable potential of hydraulic tomography to be realized.
An initial one-year assessment of the methodology is the primary purpose of the
work proposed here. This assessment will include a theoretical
extension/analysis of the hydraulic tomography approach and a preliminary field
evaluation of the methodology at a very heavily instrumented field site where
some information about the interwell variations in hydraulic conductivity is
available from a previous large-scale tracer test. The coupling of the detailed
head data provided by miniature fiber-optic sensors in multilevel samplers with
the tomographic inversion method has the potential of providing extremely useful
information about the site-specific hydraulic features controlling contaminant
transport. The incorporation of such features into a site model should
dramatically improve the quality of the resulting model predictions, thus
leading to more reliable risk assessments and a more efficient allocation of
resources for site characterization and remediation activities. In addition,
this methodology should produce much more detailed description of hydraulic
conductivity variations than has previously been possible. These more detailed
descriptions should help refine existing approaches for the modeling of
conductivity variations and, hopefully, help better tie the conductivity
variations to their geologic basis. ??