* 9526628
* Effects of Space-Time Dynamics of Surface Processes on      Land-Atmosphere Interactions at the Mesoscale
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Shafiqul Islam, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2000
* USD 140,000.00

9526628 Islam The goal of this proposal is to investigate the space-time
dynamics of land-surface processes on land-atmosphere interactions at the
mesoscale. The achieve this goal, a well coordinated observational data analysis
and numerical modeling approach will be pursued. Following are the main tasks of
this research: *Explore the use of MM5 as the atmospheric module to refine the
coupled land-atmosphere model *Compare the land surface response of the coupled
land-atmosphere model with the FIFE data. *Establish a spin-up time scale as a
function of initial atmospheric states and initial land surface states. Examine
the dependence of spin-up time on the nature of forcing data. *Develop a
methodology to asses the effects of spatial heterogeneity on the response of
near-surface atmospheric processes. Evaluate the relationships between
characteristic scales of variabilities in soil wetness and space time dynamics
of evapotranspiration and near-surface atmospheric variables. Identify the
physical mechanisms that control the space-time scales of soil wetness
anomalies. This proposal is designed to characterize the space-time dynamics of
land surface hydrology and atmospheric response by using a coupled land-
atmosphere model and measured datasets from the FIFE and Washita '92 sites.
Resulting information from this research would provide the incremental knowledge
needed for accurate interpretation and widespread application of mesoscale
models and field experiments for land-atmosphere interaction studies. They will
aid in addressing the spin-up and scaling properties of mesoscale models and in
developing realistic land-surface hydrology parameterizations for atmospheric
models. In addition, this effort is directly relevant to scaling of water and
energy fluxes and testing and evaluation of coupled land-atmosphere model
segments of the GCIP GEWEX (Global Energy and Water Cycle Experiment)
Continental-Scale International Project and EOS (Earth Observing System) science
plans.