* 9526997
* A New Method of Assessing Trophic Levels in Fossil          Organisms Using Calcium Stable Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Donald DePaolo, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 08/31/1999
* USD 110,000.00

DePaolo 9526997 The proposed research seeks to develop and test a new method of
assessing trophic level using stable isotopes of calcium, and to apply this
method to fossil organisms, particularly vertebrates, not amenable to other
methods of trophic level determination. The study will focus on marine food
chains, but the method developed should apply to continental food chains as
well. A preliminary survey of a variety of organisms suggests that biogenic
calcium carbonate and calcium phosphate is consistently isotopically lighter
(lower 44Ca) than source (dietary) calcium, and that the trophic level shifts
are much greater than shifts due to temperature-dependent fractionation. The
work proposed involves collaboration between the PI, who has expertise in
isotope geochemistry and mass spectrometry, and a graduate student in vertebrate
paleontology. Because biological processing appears to be a major factor
determining the distribution of calcium stable isotopes in terrestrial settings,
including seawater, the proposed research will also allow preliminary
interpretation of possible changes in seawater 44Ca over geologic time. The
research plan consists of three parts: Determining the extent to which 44Ca
decreases between trophic levels in modern marine food chains, and identifying
other factors that can influence 44Ca. These results will have implications for
the mechanisms of biological Ca transport and fixation. Establishing how well
fossil skeletal materials preserve their original calcium isotopic makeup.
Measuring enough other types of geological samples to get an overall view of
isotopic fractionation in the Ca cycle of the earth's surface environment.
Preliminary data indicate that biological scavenging of light calcium isotope is
one of the main controls on the calcium isotopic value of seawater. If we are
successful in establishing a technique for determining the trophic level of
fossil organisms that does not require well-preserved organic material, it
should be immediately useful to paleontologists attempting to reconstruct the
ecological relationships of extinct animals. By increasing understanding of how
biological processing affects calcium isotopic rations, the proposed research
will illuminate the workings of a possibly important, but little understood,
stable isotope system. Once the major parameters controlling calcium isotope
abundaces in terrestrial materials are quantified, changes in the ocean 44Ca
through geologic time may provide a new paleoceanographic tool.