* 9526501
* Partial Support of the Board on Earth Sciences of           Resources and its Activities
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Thomas Usselman, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 09/30/1998
* USD 407,800.00

This award provides partial support for the Board on Earth Sciences and
Resources (BESR) over the next 30 months. NSF provides approximately 20% of the
total cost of core support for BESR; additional support is also requested from
the Department of Energy, Department of Interior, and the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration. BESR coordinates the National Research CouncilOs
advice to the federal government on solid earth science issues. The Board
identifies opportunities for advancing basic research, reports on applications
of earth sciences in such areas as disaster mitigation and resource utilization,
and analyzes the scientific underpinnings and credibility of earth science
information for resource, environmental and other applications and policy
decisions. The BoardOs actions address the overall health of the earth sciences
and the education or earth scientists that is vital to maintaining and
increasing the nationOs capability to make wise use of the Earth and its
resources. As enunciated in the BoardOs 1993 report, OSolid-Earth Sciences and
SocietyO, the challenge to the earth science community is to develop an
integrate approach to the solid earth and its resources. Worldwide improved
living standards and population increases combine to pose new problems extending
from basic issues of the physics and chemistry of the earth to complex
considerations of resources, environment, and land utilization. The Board is
giving increased emphasis to the impact of transition from a field traditionally
focused on resource discovery, assessment, and extraction to one increasingly
dominated by environmental concerns.