* 9526963
* Collaborative Research:  Lithospheric Evolution in Response to Triple Junction Migration: Seismic Images of the         Mendocino Triple Junction Region
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1996,07/30/1998
* Alan Levander, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Leonard E. Johnson
* 07/30/1998
* USD 50,407.00

9526963 Levander The coastal region of northern California from latitude 39oN
to42oN represents a region in which the active tectonic regime changes abruptly
from subduction to transform motion at the Mendocino Triple Junction (MTJ).
Knowledge of the crustal and upper-mantle structure in this region, when
combined with information on the plate-tectonic history, geologic structure,
seismic activity, and timing and extent of heat influx and consequent surface
volcanism, places constraints on the processes that control continental growth
and evolution. Because the triple junction has been migrating north along the
coast of North America, an understanding of crustal structure and evolution in
this region will provide insights into the geologic history of the entire U.S.
west coast continental margin and will contribute to better assessments of the
seismic hazards represented by the Cascadia subduction zone and northern San
Andreas Fault system. In 1993 and 1994 the principal investigators collected a
network of large-aperture seismic profiles to image the crustal and upper-
mantle structure beneath northern California and the adjacent continental
margin. The data include approximately 650 km of onshore seismic
refraction/reflection data, 2000 km of offshore multichannel seismic (MCS)
reflection data, and simultaneous onshore and offshore recording of the MCS
airgun source to yield large-aperture data. Scientists from more than 12
institutions were involved in data acquisition, which was led by a team of
principal investigators from Oregon State, Lehigh, Rice, and Stanford
Universities and from the U.S. Geological Survey. This award provides a fourth
year of support from the Continental Dynamics program to permit the principal
investigators to complete data analysis and presentation. Support for a workshop
is also provided during which they will discuss their seismological results with
the broader community of earth scientists interested in geological, g eodynamic,
and natural hazard issues associated with plate interactions in along the
western margin of North America. ***