* 9526718
* MRPG: Velocity Spectrum Stacking to Determine Layer         Thickness from Scale Length of 250 km to 250 mm
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Harold Gurrola, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 10/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

Abstract: The objective of the proposed work is to process and interpret seismic
and GPR data to determine depth to velocity discontinuities and to modify
techniques used to process and interpret these data. Recordings of teleseismic
P-phases will be used to interpret P-to-S conversions for upper mantle
discontinuities. Regional events will also be processes to determine the
feasibility of augmenting the teleseismic information with interpretation of
reflected energy from upper mantle discontinuities. The results will be used to
design additional seismic experiments with the ultimate goal of producing a
detailed map of the thickness of the transition zone (the interval between the
410 and 660 km discontinuities). Laboratory experiments using scale modeling of
GPR reflections will be used to refine the interpretation techniques. The
advanced understanding of interpretive work in the electrical and seismic
techniques will be combined to improve the resolution of both methods. The PI
will attend a short course on GPR methods to polish his skills in this
technique, which is relatively new to him. GPR studies on physical models permit
refinement of the interpretive methods. These refinements may then be used to
improve interpretations of seismic data. At the same time, the PI has
demonstrated the ability of the velocity spectrum stacking method to resolve
thickness of a layer more accurately than absolute depth. This technique may be
especially valuable for interpretation shallow reflection data where absolute
depth my be well known from drilling. Anticipated products are a research
proposal to create a much more refined map of the thickness of the transition
zone, and an Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement proposal for
undergraduate instruction in field GPR techniques.