* 9526714
* Pleistocene-Holocene-Modern Evolution of Groundwater        in a Limestone Aquifer:  Geochemical and Geochronologic     Links
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jay Banner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/2000
* USD 105,200.00

9526714 Banner The proposed research will investigate how a limestone aquifer
evolves through time. Barbados's uplifted coral-reef terraces comprise a 10-km
scale meteoric groundwater flow systems with unique stratigraphic, lithologic,
and hydrologic properties that are ideally suited to understanding the pathways
and time scales of groundwater flow and fluid-rock interaction. These unique
properties include (I) variations in aquifer-rock composition, mineralogy and
age, soil composition, and porosity-permeability that all vary in predictable
patterns within and between tectonically-uplifed groundwater catchments: (ii)
access to water, rock, mineral, and soil samples from densely-spaced wells,
springs and caves; and (iii) the 0 to 1 million year time scale within which the
aquifer's evolution can be studied using newly-developed isotope techniques. To
reconstruct the aquifer's Pleistocene-Holocene-modern evolution, samples will be
taken of groundwater, limestones, and soils from the modern flow system, and
carbonate minerals that grew as speleothems and cements in the pore spaces of
the limestones during groundwater flow in the Pleistocene and Holocene epochs.
Recently developed and conventional isotopic techniques (e.g., 238U-234U-230Th,
87Sr/86 Sr, 13C/12C, 18O/16O, 15N/14N) will be used in order to determine 1) the
ages of growth zones in the speleothems and cements, 2) the sources of dissolved
ions in the modern groundwaters and in the groundwaters from which the cements
grew, and 3) temporal variations in the sources of dissolved ions for the
groundwaters during the past million years. In determining high-resolution
temporal variations in the sources of dissolved ion in an active, well-
constrained groundwater flow systems, this study will be unprecedented. An
initial study of a stalagmite provides a time series record for the past 5500
years. Sr isotope variations in groundwater recorded in the calcite growth
layers of this sample reflect changes in the amount of rainfall tha t recharged
the Pleistocene limestone aquifer during the mid to late Holocene, Similar
records will be constructed for other parts of the aquifer and over extended
temporal scales. These will be integrated with a detailed study of the modern
flow system. The petrologic, geochemical, geochronologic, and hydrologic
analysis of this aquifer will improve our understanding of (I) the controls of
karsification patterns, porosity, aquifer rock mineralogy, soil development, and
climate change on groundwater migration and chemical evolution, and (ii) the
impact of industrial and agricultural pollution on groundwater quality. Such
data on the rates of groundwater evolution represent an important step toward
developing predictive models for the development of carbonate aquifers.