* 9526255
* United States Representation to IFMBE
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Dov Jaron, AIMBE
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 09/30/1998
* USD 14,650.00

9526255 Jaron The International Federation of Medical and Biological Engineering
(IFMBE) has the aims of encouraging research and the application of knowledge,
the dissemination of information, and the promotion of collaboration between
engineers, scientists and educators within the medical and biological
engineering community. The IFMBE Administrative Council meets twice each year to
oversee the management of the IFMBE, to develop projects such as a new journal
in Tissue and Cellular Engineering, a dictionary of Biomedical Engineering and
the planning of specialized international technical conferences. This project
provides partial support of the United States representation to the
Administrative Council of the IFMBE to attend its semi-annual meetings over a
period of three years: 1995 (Israel), 1996 (Finland and Holland), and 1997 (Hong
Kong and Nice). United States representation to the Administrative Council of
the IFMBE is under the aegis of the American Institute for Medical and
Biological Engineering (AIMBE). The principal investigator for the project, Dr.
Dov Jaron, a member of the Board of Directors of AIMBE, represents the U.S. on
the Council. Representation on the Council provides the United States with the
opportunity to develop new lines of communications and collaborative projects
among biomedical engineering researchers from many countries and thereby to
extend its leadership role in medical technology research and development. This
is particularly so in the newer areas of investigation in cost-reducing and
cost-effective health care technologies. Information about Council deliberations
is to be disseminated by AIMBE to a wide audience through special articles in
various technical publications, specialized workshops and seminars, and
electronically on the Internet. ***