* 9526134
* Networking Infrastructure for Native American               Education -AIHEC Consortium
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Luanne Belcourt, Stone Child College
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1997
* USD 1,149,550.00

Belcourt 95-26134 This project is designed to achieve educational purposes
through video and data interconnections. The educational purposes involve the
development of new networking and user service training programs for both video
and data networks, improvement of the teaching of SMET subjects in K-12 and
postsecondary institutions that are controlled by Indians, and the improvement
of education for American Indians in the health fields. The general concept of
this application is to maximize the impact that already existing SMET coursework
and programs have. This will be done by distributing the responsibility for
offering programs throughout the AlHEC's video and data networks. Because the 29
institutions that compose the American Indian Higher Education Consortium are
widespread, generally small, and chronically underfunded, there has always been
an emphasis on sharing resources. There is wide variance among the institutions
with regard to levels of SMET curriculum and the level of networking currently
available. This interest in sharing through networking led to the formation of
the AIHEC telecommunication project five years ago, in order to make use of
technology to make limited resources go further. Since that time, there has also
been a good deal of interest in the establishment of computer interconnectivity.
Approximately 1/2 of the colleges have such connectivity. This project calls for
funding for one year for developing programs that provide both short-term
training in such things as using the Internet, using Interactive video, and
technical support for networks. In the technology area, it also calls for the
development of Associate's degrees in areas that provide user support. A second
area of development in this first year is the Health Services area. AIHEC will
identify areas of greatest need with the Indian Health Service and develop
distributed programs in these areas. The colleges need certain things to make
these operations possible. First, it needs faculty with u pgraded academic
preparation in SMET areas and it needs students who are better prepared. Thus,
there is a component that provides for distributed graduate education for both
college and K-12 teachers. On the other side of infrastructure, many colleges do
not have connectivity yet. For this reason, all the Tribal Colleges in Montana
will be linked with a system that they have designed to provide maximum
capability for uperading. Finally, the AIHEC Telecommunications Network will be
utilized by providing uplinks to satellites at three sites, one each in
Minnesota, Montana, and North Dakota. These uplinks will be capable of feeding
instruction to all 29 colleges; 7 colleges will be able to originate
programming.