* 9526326
* Analytical and Experimental Analysis of the Use of Wide     Beam Frames in Active Seismic Zones
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* James Wight, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* John Scalzi
* 09/30/1999
* USD 122,429.00

Moment resisting R/C frames if properly designed and detailed they are very
ductile systems capable of enduring the most severe earthquake input motions.
There has been a substantial number of investigations of R/C beam to column
connections, but at least one common connection problem has not been adequately
researched, namely, connections in frame systems composed of wide shallow beams
and `normal` columns. Over the last decade they have also been used to a limited
extent in regions of moderate to high seismic risk. Due to the lack of
experimental studies for these frame systems, conflicting design recommendations
have been developed. Because wide beam connections are not uncommon in concrete
frame construction, and because there is a lack of information on the behavior
and resulting seismic response of concrete frames that contain such connections,
there is a clear need for a well planned analytical and experimental
investigation of reinforced concrete frames that contain such connections. The
goal of this research project is to combine prior experimental results with a
limited number of new test results to generate analytical models for simulating
the seismic response of wide beam frame structures. Then, combine the analytical
and experimental studies to develop detailing requirements as well as
recommendations for the proper use of wide beam frames, i.e., in what seismic
zones, for what number of stories and in combination with what other lateral
load resisting systems. This study will draw conclusive understanding to the
seismic behavior of reinforce concrete frame with wide beam connections through
laboratory experiments and finite element analysis and the results could form
the basis for updating seismic design provisions for such connections.