* 9526274
* Electronic Structure Based Simulations of Zeolites and      Related Complex Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Otto Sankey, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/29/2000
* USD 225,000.00

9526274 Sankey This is a new grant supporting work in a new area for the
Materials Theory program. The initial objective is to study the electronic
properties of porous materials such as zeolites and silica and the closely
related clathrates and clathrasils. The ground state electronic energy
calculations are carried out in an accurate, first principles, selfconsistent
way developed by the PI and along with quantum molecular dynamics capabilities,
allow determination of structural and dynamic properties of various possible
cage-like structures. New applications will also be explored. These include
self-assembled-caged semiconductor clusters and wires. These artificially
created quantum dots and wires may have "tunable" bandgaps and lattice spacings,
depending on the zeolite framework (or clathrates) and choice of semiconductor
compound. %%% Zeolites and related silica are used commonly in petroleum and
drug industries. Structurally they consist of cages connected by channels and
they are used mainly to exchange or "crack" foreign atoms and molecules within
these channels or cages. This grant is to conduct theoretical research for a
better understanding of the zeolites and similar clathrate compounds (have cages
but no channels) and their applications. The principal method of study is a
formalism developed earlier by the PI. ***