* 9526915
* Structural and Thermochronological Constraints on the Role  of Partial Melting During Late-Orogenic Extension
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Christian Teyssier, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 11/30/1999
* USD 128,176.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 4p C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l 4p 4p 4 @ - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9526915 Teyssier The goal of the proposed project is to
investigate the role that partial melting of crust plays during late-orogenic
extension. Orogenic evolution typically involves crustal shortening and
thickening which have important thermal consequences. In particular, thermal
relaxation is expected to lead to partial melting of the mid-to lower crust
after a characteristic time of approximately 20-30 million years. The late
stages of orogenic evolution are commonly characterized by crustal extension.
Therefore, it is proposed that a fundamental link exists between partial melting
of crust, which results in mechanical weakening, and late-orogenic extension
produced by gravitational collapse of the thickened crust under its own weight.
The proposed working hypothesis involves extension of the rigid upper crust
accommodated by ductile flow and migmatite-dome development in the lower crust.
The test will be conducted in the Shuswap metamorphic core complex, British
Columbia, which displays, at present exposure level, a cross section of various
levels of the crust, from high-grade metamorph ic rocks and migmatites to
unmetamorphosed sedimentary rocks. Preliminary work as well as published data
suggest that partial melting in the core of this complex was coeval with
development of Paleogene extensional fabric in the overlying crustal layers. In
addition, existing isotopic data suggest that terrain cooled rapidly
(30-50(C/.yr) during Paleogene time. Therefore, it is proposed that rapid
cooling and exhumation of the terrain was coeval with partial melting of the
mid-to lower crust, and that the mechanical weakening associated with partial
melting was responsible for gravitational collapse of the orogen. An integrated
approach based upon the methods of structural and metamorphic geology as well as
isotopic dating will test the proposed hypothesis. ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( , 9526915
Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @ @ @ @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e ` ` j j j j
j j j S 1 5 T 5 S j S j j j j ~ j j j j @ 9526915 Teyssier The goal of the
proposed project is to investigate the role that partial melting of crust plays
during late-orogenic extension. Orogenic evolution typically involves crustal
shortening and thickening which have important thermal consequences. In
particular, thermal relaxation is expected to lead to partial melting of the
mid-to lower crust after a characteristic time of approximately 20-30 million
years. The late stages of orogenic evolution are commonly characterized by
crustal extension. Therefore, it is proposed that a fundamental link exists
between partial melting of crust, which results in mechanical weakening, and
late-orogenic extension produced by gravitational collapse of the thickened
crust under its own weight. The proposed working hypothesis involves extension
of the rigid upper crust accommodated by ductile flow and migmatite-dome
development in the lower crust. The test will be conducted in the Shuswap
metamorphic core complex, British Columbia, which displays, at present exposure
level, a cross section of various levels of the c