* 9526129
* Timing of Deformation in the Early Mesozoic Back-Arc Basin  of the Western U.S. Cordillera:  Luning-Fencemaker Fold and Thrust Belt
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Sandra Wyld, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1998
* USD 164,996.00

; R o o t E n t r y F L C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l y y 4 @ ( ! " # $ % & ' ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @ A B
C D E F G H I J F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; e = e
o o j j j j j j j Q 1 3 T 5 Q j Q j j j j ~ j j j j > 9526129 Wright Mesozoic
arc-related shortening is a widespread feature in the western U.S. Cordillera,
Jurassic shortening is most prominent within Mesozoic arc assemblages of the
westernmost Cordillera, whereas Cretaceous shortening is most prominent in the
back-arc region to the east. Recent work has suggested that the change is a
response to changing parameters of subduction (geometry and rate) along the
active plate margin. However, the Jurassic and Cretaceous episodes are not
completely separated spatially, and overlap particularly in the western back-arc
region. This project involves age dating of the various deformation events in
the Luning-Fencemaker fold and thrust belt. Results should clarify the timing of
the overlapping deformations and allow a more complete picture of how changing
subduction parameters affects spatial distribution of deformation. Oh +' 0 $ H l
D h R:\WWUSER\TE MPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 9526129
Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @ k @ @ k @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; o o ! ! ! K @
Normal a " A@ " Default Paragraph Font o o o o > Felicia
Smith-\\CLM12\EARTESHR\1995SEPT\ABSTRACT\WRIGHT.TXT @HP LaserJet IIID LPT3:
hppcl5a HP LaserJet IIID 8D R HP LaserJet IIID 8D R n n n n 1 Times New Roman
Symbol & Arial " h m Em E $ 5 9526129 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith ; ;