* 9526986
* Cross-Site: Microbial Loop Dynamics and Regulation of       Bacterial Physiology in Subtropical and Polar Marine        Habitats
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1998
* USD 158,118.00

The microbial loop has been shown to play an important role in marine and
freshwater plankton ecosystems in all climatic zones. Earlier research in two
contrasting habitats: an Antarctic coastal/ shelf/oceanic ecosystem and a
subtropical oceanic ecosystem, have shown significant differences in the
ecological role of the microbial loop and the physiology of bacterioplankton.
These two habitats are isolated from input of terrestrially derived organic
matter and so provide excellent opportunities to study bacterial metabolism of
autochthonous organic matter of phytoplankton origin. Strong contrasts in
plankton community parameters make these two sites ideal for this comparison.
This study will be embedded within on-going programs at each of these two sites
(US-JGOFS Hawaii Ocean Time-series in the North Pacific and Palmer LTER in
Antarctica) that provide both logistical support and supporting data on a wide
range of hydrographic, chemical and biological parameters, with extensive
documentation of spatial and temporal variation. Preliminary field results show
that bacterial communities in th ese two areas are physiologically distinct,
that bacterial physiology is regulated by the structure of the microbial
community and particularly by grazer recycling of nitrogen, that organic
compounds rare in seawater, especially histidine, play a large role in
regulation of bacterial ectoenzyme expression, and that photolysis of dissolved
organic matter by solar ultraviolet radiation also plays a role in regulation of
bacterial ectoenzymes. More thorough investigation of these phenomena in
ecologically distinct microbial communities will facilitate understanding of the
complex interactions between bacterioplankton and the rest of the microbial
community.