* 9526697
* Dissertation Improvement Grant:  Colorado River Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Keith Kintigh, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/1998
* USD 10,960.00

Under the direction of Dr. Keith Kintigh, Mr. Andrew Duff will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will examine a sample of archaeological ceramics
from late prehistoric sites in the Upper Little Colorado River (ULCR) region of
East-Central Arizona as well as others from related sites in adjacent areas. To
accomplish this, samples will be analyzed by neutron activation at the
University of Missouri reactor. The elemental determinations which result will
allow Mr. Duff to determine which ceramics came from the same sources and on
this basis to reconstruct patterns of trade and social interaction. Mr. Duff
wishes to examine links among the different pueblos located in the and their
differential ties with the larger prehistoric world. Preliminary work, based on
analysis of ceramic design, suggests that although ULCR communities were
spatially close, their trade networks varied significantly. A considerable
degree of social complexity was reached in the prehistoric Southwest and given
no other form of transportation than foot travel, archaeologists wish to
understand how individual communities achieved and maintained links with other
groups. A second interesting question concerns social strategies which permitted
survival in a highly variable and unpredictable desert environment. Researchers
hypothesize that systems were designed to allow the movement of goods to
compensate for the spatial variation in rainfall and productivity which
characterize deserts. To examine this question scientists must reconstruct
interaction networks and they use archaeologically recovered material remains to
accomplish this goal. Because clays from different deposits often vary in
chemical composition they can often be used to trace movements of goods and Mr.
Duff's research takes advantage of this fact. His work is important for several
reasons. It will shed new light on human adaptation to unpredictable
environments. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and will
also assist in the training of a promising young scientist.