* 9526322
* Exploratory Research on Controlled Passive Haptic Displays
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/1995,12/31/1996
* Wayne Book, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 12/31/1996
* USD 49,950.00

Robotic devices move autonomously, apply forces to objects in their
environment, react to forces applied to them to achieve desired velocities,
positions or impedances. Conventional robots use motors (active power
transduction devices) to achieve these ends. This research examines a passive
alternative to provide forces to resist motion initiated by a human or other
active agent for the purpose of haptic display of remote or virtual environments
or for guidance of the agent's motion. Ultimate applications are for virtual
reality displays, for teleoperation, for surgical assistance, for exercise and
for rehabilitation. The advantages of a passive approach include the elimination
of inherent dangers of an active device and the reduction of cost and complexity
when a power supply must be provided. This research will utilize a recently
constructed prototype passive arm known as PTER (Passive Trajectory Enhancing
Robot) as a test case. PTER has two degrees of freedom, coupled via
electromagnetic brakes so that energy can be diverted in a controlled manner
from one axis to the other. The research will explore the theoretical and
practical aspects of the control algorithms to accomplish this coupling for
purposes of haptic display such as PTER. The limitations of the passive
actuators provide the uniqueness and challenge of the control. The control
algorithm will be tested to determine effectiveness of the controlled passive
device against two alternatives: (1) a direct physical display (not
programmable) and (2) an electrically powered virtual display on an available
kinematically identical robot. The measures of performance be both quantitative
and subjective. The accuracy of the trajectory followed and the accuracy of
representation of an environment's impedance (force-velocity relationship) can
be quantitatively evaluated. Human operators will be employed to provide a more
subjective evaluation on the effectiveness of the passive display. Example task
s will be to follow a virtual maze as guided by the feel imparted by the device.