* 9526868
* U.S.-Australia Cooperative Research: Numerical Simulations  and Stochastic Modeling of Turbulent Mixing and Dispersion
* O/D,OISE
* 05/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Pui-Kuen Yeung, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* W. Y. B. Chang
* 01/31/1999
* USD 24,900.00

9526868 Yeung This award will support the travel costs, over a two year period,
to enable Dr. Pui-kuen Yeung of the Aerospace Engineering Department at the
Georgia Institute of Technology, and for Catherine Moseley, a graduate student
in the Department, to conduct collaborative research with Dr. Michael S. Borgas
from the Division of Atmospheric Research of the Commonwealth Scientific and
Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO) located at Mordialloc, Victoria. The
cooperative research will focus on simulation and stochastic modeling of
contaminant transport and dispersion in turbulent airflows. In air pollution
problems the mean concentration region arising from localized pollution sources
is primarily determined by a disorderly motion of fluid elements best described
using the Lagrangian approach of fluid mechanics. The data, which are difficult
to measure, may be extracted from numerical simulations of the exact,
instantaneous momentum and scaler transport equations in turbulence. This
research is of particular timeliness in enhancing the development of stochastic
models of turbulent dispersion in the environment. The CSIRO laboratory conducts
a large atmospheric research program, and that combined with the parallel
computing facilities available at the Georgia Institute of Technology, will
enable this study to be realized. Support in Australia is provided through the
Department of Industry, Science and Tourism (DIST).