* 9526881
* Geographic Distribution of Chlorine-36 in Post-Pleistocene  Ground Water
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* Stanley Davis, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 01/31/2000
* USD 159,966.00

9526881 Davis The purpose of the proposed research is to determine the nature
and cause of spatial variability of 36Cl in water which has entered the
subsurface between 50 and 10,000 years ago. Information concerning geographic
variations is necessary for interpretation of hydrologic studies of ground-water
recharge in arid regions, of accumulation rates of glacial ice, of ground-water
"age", of the origin of chloride in saline lakes, of the origin of deep
subsurface brines in crystalline rocks, and of other studies related directly
and indirectly to the field of hydrology. In addition to providing critical
baseline information for other projects, the proposed research will include
sampling of water older than 10,000 years in a few carefully selected aquifers
to study changes in past rates of natural atmospheric production of 36Cl.
Primary data for the proposed research will be obtained from analyses of ground
water from various parts of the United States and from adjacent areas in Canada
and Mexico. Samples will be analyzed for major ions using chromatography and for
36/Cl/Cl using accelerator mass spectrometry. In addition, analyses for tritium
and 14C will be made to help determine isolation time of ground waters. In arid
western North America, where suitable water samples may not be available,
supplemental information may be obtained from 36Cl extracted from below the
depth of penetration of the weapons fallout in the soil profile. Additionally,
one or more samples will be obtained from glacial ice from mountains in western
North America.