* 9526645
* Model Structure Error and Model Complexity in               Groundwater Modeling
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1999
* Ne-Zheng Sun, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* L. Douglas James
* 10/31/1999
* USD 180,000.00

9526645 Yeh The reliability of groundwater modeling is often questionable,
primarily because the problem of model calibration has not been completely
resolved. In principle, the calibration of a distributed parameter model should
include the following two aspects: the determination of model structure and the
estimation of the unknown model parameters. To date, however, the determination
of model structure has received limited attention because of its inherent
difficulty. In practice, a complex aquifer is often represented by a simplified
conceptual model based on limited geological information and subjective guess.
As a result, model structure error is unavoidable. In most cases, model failure
is caused by significant model structure error. Literature review indicates that
there exist no systematic methods to estimate and to reduce such type of error.
If this challenging problem can be solved or partly solved, groundwater modeling
will be significantly improved and the reliability of model applications
significantly increased. Major objectives of the proposed research include: the
development of new concepts for model structure identification, the development
of efficient algorithms for model structure error estimation, and the
development of data collection strategy for model structure discrimination. The
overriding objective is the development of a systematical methodology for model
structure determination. The model structure error of using model A to replace
model B is defined as a weighted sum of their distances in both the observation
and prediction spaces. The calculation of model structure error is then
formulated into a maximum-minimum problem. When the real structure of an aquifer
system is unknown, a stepwise regression procedure will be used to estimate the
model structure error and to determine an appropriate level of model structure
complexity. A heuristic procedure that combines with the variational sensitivity
analysis will be used to solve the proposed maxim um-minimum optimization
problems. Field data collected at a major groundwater basin in Southern
California will be used to validate the proposed methodology.