* 9526865
* Factors Regulating Population Size and Colony Distribution  of Adelie Penguins in the Ross Sea
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* David Ainley, H.T. Harvey & Associates
* Continuing Grant
* Roberta Marinelli
* 01/31/2000
* USD 476,442.00

Abstract The collaborative project investigates the demographic mechanisms
responsible for dramatic growth in existing Adelie Penguins Pygoscelis adeliae
colonies, and the founding of new ones, in the Ross Sea. Research will also
investigate the possibility that growth is related to documented climate change
in the region by: 1) distinguishing the relative importance of the key resources
that constrain growth of colonies--availability of nesting habitat vs. access to
food -- and 2) examining behavioral mechanisms (philopatry -- the
immigration/emigration balance, and/or breeding effort/success) that influence
colony growth as a function of initial size and distribution. This will be the
first empirical a piori study to consider the geographic structuring of a
seabird population. Results will increase understanding of 1) population
regulation and patterns of dispersion, and 2) effects of climate change,
mediated through changes in sea-ice cover, on penguin populations. In addition,
results will provide a context in which to interpret conflicting data on penguin
population trends from existing programs that use Adelie penguins as an
indicator species for point source anthropogenic impacts on Antarctic resources
(e.g., fishery catches, disturbance by tourism). The 7 years of research (4 full
and 1 partial years funded by NSF) includes intensive field study conducted at
three Ross Island penguin colonies. The study will quantify reproductive effort
and success, food availability (access to food), diet quality, habitat use and
immigration/emigration relative to colony size and environmental conditions
(i.e., pack-ice cover). Methods will bring together several well-established
techniques that have been successfully but infrequently used in Antarctic
biological research: aerial photography to evaluate availability of nesting
habitat, microwave images of sea-ice concentration to assess availability of
feeding habitat, analysis of stable isotopes to evaluate food quality, radio
telemetry to assess overlap in colony feeding areas, and automatic systems to
log aspects of reproductive effort. The research builds on, and collaborates
with the efforts of Landcare Research New Zealand (LCRNZ), which will have
conducted two preliminary field seasons, including testing of new equipment,
will continue through the period of effort, and which is independently funded.
Researchers from the University of California Santa Cruz, University of
Wisconsin, and Avid Inc will collaborate with those from H.T. Harvey &amp;
Associates and LCRNZ to accomplish project goals.