* 9526709
* Timing of West Gondwana Assembly and Connections to         Laurentia:  Tests from the Amazon Craton
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Anne Grunow, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 11/30/1999
* USD 169,998.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ı C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l ı ı 4 @ ( ! " # $ % &amp; ' ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; &lt; =
&gt; ? @ A B C D E F G H I J F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; e = e R R j j j j j j j H 1 * y T 5 H j H j j j j ~ j j j j 5
9526709 Grunow Several important tectonic questions about the late precambrian
positions of South America and its relationship to Gondwana, Laurentia and
Scotland, as well as paleolatitude and paleoclimate reconstructions for this
time period are not satisfactorily answerable because of the lack of good
paleomagnetic, geochronologic and stratigraphic references from a stable part of
the craton. This project will investigate a portion of eastern Bolivia, where
the rocks have escaped both Andean tectonics and rifting associated with the
opening of the Atlantic ocean. The project is aimed at providing robust
paleomagnetic poles for the time period 1.0 Ga- 540 Ma and ancillary age and
stratigraphic control. Successful results will be applicable to many continued-
wide problems of paleogeography and paleoclimate of the southern hemisphere. ;
Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TE MPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i
o n ( 9526709 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @ @ @ @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; R R ! !
K @ Normal a " A@ " Default Paragraph Font R R R R 5 Felicia
Smith$\\CLM12\EARTESHR\1995SEPT\GRUNOW.TXT @HP LaserJet IIID LPT3: hppcl5a HP
LaserJet IIID 8D R HP LaserJet IIID 8D R ~ 1 Times New Roman Symbol &amp; Arial
" h $ 5 9526709 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith ; ;