* 9526983
* Crack-Anticrack Interaction in Faulting
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Raymond Fletcher, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 12/31/1998
* USD 91,155.00

; R o o t E n t r y F $&gt; C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l $&gt; $&gt; 4 @ ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; si 9526983 Fletcher Determination and qualification
of the micromechanics of faulting is an important problem, both in addressing
events prior to and during earthquakes, and in interpreting observations from
experiments and from the field. The role of mode I opening cracks has always
been a basic element in the formulation of the micromechanics of faulting.
Recently, a model for the organization of the fault of fault zone resulting in a
deep focus earthquake has been based upon the interaction and propagation of
mode I closing anticracks (Green and Burnley, 1989; Green, 1994, 1995), the
anticracks being thin laminae of the higher-density spinel formed in the
olivine-&gt; spinel phase transformation. Fault zones which arise from the
organized interaction of cracks and anticracks are observed in the deformed
limestones of the central Appalachians, and analogous structures have been
reported from other settings. In these occurrences, the cracks are represented
by veins, and the anticracks by solution seams. In view of the role of pressure
solution, the process of formation of these structures is slow, but the weakened
zone might eventually fail by rapid, seismic faulting. These structures are also
significant in their own tectonic setting, besides illustrating a process of
potentially broader scope. The aim of the proposed research is to study these
structures through detailed observation, at field mapping to thin-section scale,
and to develop mechanical models for their initiation and evolution, at
micromechanical and macroscopic levels. ; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
i o n ( ' $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9526983 Felicia Smith Felicia
Smith @ &gt; @ @ &gt; @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e j j j j j j j Q 1 3 T 5 Q j
Q j j j j ~ j j j j &gt; 9526983 Fletcher Determination and qualification of the
micromechanics of faulting is an important problem, both in addressing events
prior to and during earthquakes, and in interpreting observations from
experiments and from the field. The role of mode I opening cracks has always
been a basic element in the formulation of the micromechanics of faulting.
Recently, a model for the organization of the fault of fault zone resulting in a
deep focus earthquake has been based upon the interaction and propagation of
mode I closing anticracks (Green and Burnley, 1989; Green, 1994, 1995), the
anticracks being thin laminae of the higher-density spinel formed in the
olivine-&gt; spinel phase transformation. Fault zones which arise from the
organized interaction of cracks and anticracks are observed in the deformed
limestones of the central Appalachians, and analogous structures have been
reported from other settings. In these occurrences, the cracks are represented
by veins, and the anticracks by solution seams. In view of the role of pressure
solution, the process of formatio