* 9526405
* What Happened on Kilauea Volcano About 2,000 Years Ago?
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* John Rhodes, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/1996
* USD 32,500.00

9526405 Rhodes About 2000 years ago there was a profound perturbation in
Kilauea's magmatic plumbing system. The effects lasted almost to the present
Previous work has shown that, over most of this period, the lavas erupted at or
near Kilauea's summit area have ranged in major, trace and isotopic compositions
from lavas with the compositional characteristics of historical Kilauea magmas,
through intermediate compositions, to lavas that closely resemble Mauna Loa
magmas. There are two plausible explanations: either there were short-term
changes in the proportions of source components in the Hawaiian plume that
supply Kilauea, or magma from Mauna Loa invaded Kilauea' magmatic plumbing
system, possibly in response to catastrophic caldera formation and eruption of
the Uwekahuna Ash. This project is to complete this work and to test these two
contrasting hypotheses. To test these observations, I will systematically sample
sequential flows exposed continuously in the 100 m walls of Makaopuhi pit
crater. This crater is 13 km down Kilauea's east rift zone from the summit
caldera. Within the thick sequence of exposed flows are about 0.5-0.75 ka.
Makaopuhi Crater is, therefore, an ideal location to test whether there are
flows with anomalous Mauna Loa characteristics (1) that are older than the
Uwekahuna Ash, and (2) that are far-removed from the summit caldera.
Comprehensive major and trace element data will be obtained on these samples by
XRF and INAA to determine their compositional affinities. In addition, Dr. J. P.
Lockwood (USGS) and I will attempt to recover charcoal from beneath these flows
and the ash layer to provide temporal control by 14C dating. With these
questions resolved, we will be in a much better position to evaluate whether or
not the Mauna Loa-like flows are a consequence of magmatic invasion from Mauna
Loa, or whether there was a major perturbation in the proportions of source
components supplying Kilauea from the Hawaiian plume during this period.