* 9526846
* Collaborative Research:  The Role of Choice in Avian        Speciation
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Patricia Parker, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* None
* 08/31/1997
* USD 37,000.00

Non-technical Summary NSF IBN95-07514 The Role of Mate Choice in Avian
Speciation Nancy Tyler Burley, Principal Investigator A question of central
interest to scientists studying the process of evolution is how the formation of
new species ("speciation") occurs. Common mechanisms of speciation involve
physical isolation of populations for long periods of time: when sufficiently
isolated such that virtually no migration occurs between populations,
populations regularly diverge in their traits. If isolation continues long
enough, the result is speciation. Even occasional migration between populations,
however, leads to gene exchange that prevents genetic divergence of populations
from occurring, at least when the consequence of migration is joint reproduction
of individuals derived from different populations. Thus, the tendency of
organisms to accept as mates those individuals born in different populations
should affect the probability and rate of speciation. For organisms with good
powers of dispersal, physical isolation between populations may occur rarely,
and mate choice for members of one's natal population could have an important
role in speciation processes. This study experimentally investigates the
occurrence and significance of mate preferences for natal population in two
populations of longtailed finches. The longtailed finch is a small songbird
native to northern Australia; although it is a strong flier, natural populations
occurring at short distances from one another are highly distinctive.
Preliminary work has established that birds from one population refuse to mate
with birds from a different population. Additional work will determine the
causes and functions of this preference for natal population. Research will
include investigation of the cues birds use to recognize birds from their own
population; how early life experiences may modify a bird's p erception of what
constitutes "its own" population; and the role of preferences for associating
with kin in these population preferences. Results of these experiments will be
relevant to several broad areas of contemporary scientific exploration in
biology, including population biology, evolution, ecology, and animal behavior.
Results may be useful in furthering our understanding of captive breeding of
wild animals and management of threatened species.