* 9526119
* GOALI/IUCP:  Algorithmic Approach to Processing Geometry    Represented in Non-Uniform Rational B-Splines (NURBS) Form
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Leslie Piegl, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 10/31/2000
* USD 241,015.00

*** 9526119 Piegl This GOALI grant provides funding for the development of a new
geometrical framework and algorithms for the representation, design and
processing of Non-Uniform Rational B-splineS (NURBS) geometry. The developed
algorithms will provide tools for the robust and accurate design and processing
of engineering parts covered by free-form geometry. The emphasis is on utilizing
the extra degrees of freedom of the rational form to develop new techniques for
interpolation and approximation, shape modification, fairing, and various
fundamental algorithms such as symbolic operators, and degree elevation and
reduction. A B-spline-to-Bezier-to-B-spline approach is also proposed to take
advantage of Bezier methods and to reduce the complexity of B-splines. The
algorithms will be implemented in the context of an existing NURBS framework
that has tools for all supporting computational work. Experiments involving the
efficiency and usefulness of the developed algorithms will be performed by the
industrial partner within the framework of its modeling system. An experimental
system will also be built and evaluated according to specifications found in
most CAD/CAM systems. Upon completion, the results of this research will lead to
improvements in both NURBS theory and advanced algorithm development. It is
anticipated that new theoretical results will be obtained in spline theory and
associated tools such as symbolic operators, interpolation and approximation
with rational splines, data reduction, curve and surface fairing, and in the
theory of knots and weights as related to the proposed algorithms. New advanced
geometric algorithms will also emerge either as direct implementations of new
theoretical results or as direct algorithmic solutions of problems such as
optimal knot placement. A decomposition-Bezier-recomposition paradigm will also
be introduced to more efficiently solve a large set of problems such as degree
elevation and reduction, reparametrization, and various approximations . The
primary goal of this work is to gain a deeper insight into the power of the
rational form to obtain more efficient algorithms in terms of data storage,
flexibility and speed. Efficient algorithms will cut lead time, enhance the
robustness, reliability and efficiency of existing systems, and will ultimately
improve the quality of products such as engines and turbine blades. The Bezier
paradigm of NURBS will help in understanding many complicated algorithms and
hence will contribute to standardizing NURBS across various engineering
disciplines. ***