* 9526040
* Microwave Effects on Liquid and Solid State Materials       Processing
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* David Clark, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1997
* USD 150,000.00

The goal of this research is to develop a working understanding of microwave
interactions with materials that will enable targeted industrial operations to
apply microwave technologies to product manufacturing. The PIs plan the: (1)
development of experimental procedures to obtain quantitative, in situ
processing data on microwave interactions with materials in forms ranging from
liquid to solid states; (2) identification of the mechanisms leading to observed
differences between conventionally and microwave-processes samples; (3)
production of samples that illustrate the differences between conventional and
microwave processes; (4) data to serve as a basis for scale-up of microwave
equipment for continuous and/or large batch processing; (5) assessment of
temperature measurement techniques used in microwave processing; and (6)
technology transfer in this area. This grant is for the completion of a project
in progress in which the primary chemical systems under study are sol-gel
derived silica. A silicon alkoxide precursor mixed with water and alcohol is
being reacte d under the influence of both microwave and conventional heating
techniques. Using Fourier transform infrared (FITR) and Raman spectrosopies,
among other methods, for measuring the effects of microwave irradiation during
processing --- a cavity ring-down apparatus outfitted with a microwave
applicator, the effects of microwave energy and conventional heating on
molecular bond formation/dissociation of each individual component of the sol
are being examined. Dielectric property measurements are being performed on the
sol and its components at microwave frequencies (and temperatures) over which
the reactions take place. This approach enables a correlation between dielectric
properties, the molecular/phase changes, reaction extent and the resultant
properties of the chemicals/materials during the various stages of microwave
processing. Microwave irradiation increases significantly the rates of reaction
during sol-gel processing. Experiments are designed to determine the extent to
which microwave energy affects each of the processing steps.