* 9526708
* Collaborative Research:  Micromechanics of Eolian Sand Dune Development:  Computer Simulations and Field Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Gary Kocurek, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2000
* USD 172,723.00

Kocurek 9526708 New models and computational techniques in nonlinear dynamics
and improved instrumentation for field studies motivate a re-examination of the
problem of eolian dune formation. The goals of the proposed investigation are to
be advance models for the origin and evolution of eolian dunes and dune fields,
to work out the predicted consequences of these models, and to subject them to
rigorous field testing. The study will follow an integrated approach, bringing
together computer simulation, field observation and experimentation, and
analytical models. The work plan for the study proceeds in step-wise fashion
from consideration of sand patch (incipient dune) nucleation, continuing with
investigation of isolated bedforms, graduating to treatment of interactions
between bedforms, and ending with study of the overall dynamics of dune fields.
At the sand-patch level, computer simulations of saltation over sand patches
plus field experimentation are aimed at understanding why and how nucleation
first occurs and growth follows. At the bedform level, computer simulation of
airflow and saltation over developing bedforms, tested and constrained by
detailed field measurements, will be used to explore the conditions under which
evolution to dune forms with slipfaces occurs. At the bedform-bedform
interaction level, extensive field measurements of airflow lateral and downwind
from dunes will be performed to probe the regulating effects of dunes on their
neighbors. The interactions between a variety of constructed dunes under a range
of conditions will be documented to produce a functional map describing the
results of dune-dune interactions. These results will be compared to simplified
computer simulations of bedform mechanics. It is expected that an analytical
model of dune field development, based on simplifying assumptions emerging from
the simulation nd field efforts, will result. Throughout the entire study,
factors that may affect bedforms at any of the levels of development an d
interaction, such as wind velocity and variability and sand supply, will be
explored. Predictions of the resulting model will be compared with the
morphology of natural dune fields.