* 9526519
* Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Dimen-  sional Measurement and Control in Manufacturing - Machine-  Tool Chatter Prevention Through Spindle Speed Variation
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1998
* S. Jack Hu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 05/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

EEC-9526519 Ni This award provides funding for a "TIE" project between the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Dimensional Measurement and
Control in Manufacturing at the University of Michigan and the
Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Machine-Tool Systems at the
University of Illinois at Urbana- Champaign. Chatter limits the machining
productivity and affects the surface quality. It also causes loss of dimensional
accuracy of the workpiece and accelerates the premature failure cutting failure.
The proposed research is to investigate the process behavior and develop models
to control chatters by using the Spindle Speed Variation (SSV) method. In the
proposed work, the University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign will investigate
the relationships among the variable spindle speed trajectory parameters and the
dynamics response of the machining condition, and develop the speed selection
criterion based on the steady state vibration level. The University of Michigan
will develop and validate chatter model using a difference-differential equation
to suppress chatter via spindle speed variation. This will be a two-year joint
effort. This research aims to combine the individual strengths of each program,
integrated existing technologies, and develop new tools and methods in a
cooperative manner to solve critical problems in chatter suppression.