* 9526875
* Meltwater Flow Through Snow from Plot to Basin Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Tad Pfeffer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 04/30/2000
* USD 130,000.00

9526875 Williams The primary objective of this study is to develop a definitive
set of observations of spatial and temporal heterogeneity of: 1) surface
structure of a snowpack during melt, 2) internal flow paths, and 3) delivery of
water at the snowpack base. From these data we will the define the spatial
statistics of meltwater flow through snow. Modeling and additional field efforts
will build on this empirical data base to extend our understanding of meltwater
pathways through snow to the small basin scale (8ha). We concentrate in this
proposal on observations which will characterize and quantify the detailed
processes which determine infiltration and runoff. This more detailed knowledge
of the physics of snow hydrology will make possible more reliable modeling and
prediction of snowmelt runoff. We propose to quantify the spatial and temporal
variation of meltwater flow through snow using an extensive array of 116 snow
lysimeters that will determine i) the characteristic correlation lengths of
snowmelt runoff: ii) the spatial variance of meltwater flow; and iii) effective
hydraulic conductivity of the snowpack. Aerial photographs using near-IR
wavelengths will be used to provide a specific methods for inferring the onset
and degree of heterogeneous infiltration from remote sensing observations, and
to more accurately predict the discharge hydrograph of a ripening snowpack,
again from remote sensing measurements. The evolution of internal flowpaths will
be constructed from non-destructive temperature and comductance probes and from
destructive measurements of snowpack stratigraphy and dye tracers. The
information on snow physical characteristics will be used to parameterize an
existing meltwater infiltration model coupled with the development of a second
model that explicitly includes the dynamics of preferential flowpaths. Plot and
modeling efforts will be then be scaled to the 8 ha Martinelli basin to evaluate
the importance of spatial and temporal variations of meltwater infiltration at
the catchment scale.