* 9526794
* Kinetics of Dissolution and Crystal Growth of Silicates and Aluminosilicates in Aqueous Soultions at Low Temperatures
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Danny Rye, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/2001
* USD 441,445.00

Lasaga 9526794 It is proposed to continue the studies of the experimental
determination of the dissolution and precipitation kinetics of silicates and
aluminosilicates as functions of pH, temperature, ionic strength,
catalysis/inhibition and the Gibbs Free energy of reaction. We will examine the
surfaces of the reacted minerals using surface analytical techniques (XPS, AES,
SEM, AFM in particular), which when combined with rates determined from solution
shemistry using flow-through and column reactors will provide information on
surface reaction mechanisms. In situ observations of reaacting mineral surfaces,
using the AFM at lower temperature and new optical interferometric techniques at
hydrothermal temperatures, will provide a bridge between the conventional
kinetics experiments and ex-situ surface analysis. The new experimental findings
on the kinetics of mineral-fluid interactions will be coupled with extensive
molecular physics studies done in our group to ascertain the atomic dynamics
governing geochemical processes. Our experimental work continues to lead the way
in describing both dissolution and precipitation rates of major rock-forming
silicates and aluminosilicates as a function of G, as well as being the first to
measure precipitation rates in phases more complex than quartz. The non-trivial
full rate laws that have been developed in our prior work are proving to be very
important in successfully applying experimental rate data to model field cases,
such as the Pijiguaos, bauxite deposit in Venezuela using accurate two-
dimensional hydrodynamic fluid flow models. With the continuing work proposed
here, the coupling of experiment, theory and models should result in the first
completely quantitative physical and chemical model of water-rock interactions
from the atomic level to the field setting under a wide set of geological
environments including diagenesis in a dynamic sedimentary basin or the chemical
evolution in a major bauxite deposit.