* 9526390
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Integrated Structural and Fluid-   Inclusion Study of Rolling Hinges and Low-Angle Normal      Faults in Metamorphic Core Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Jane Selverstone, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 06/30/1999
* USD 91,593.00

; R o o t E n t r y F 3RW C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t F O b j e c t
P o o l 3RW 3RW 4 @ , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; n g b V O H A : 3 , % x q j c \ U N G @ 9 2 + ~ $ w
p i b T S L E R ( 9526390 Selverstone Controversy still surrounds the processes
that form metamorphic core complexes and extensional detachment faults.
Specifically, questions remain regarding the angle(s) at which detachment faults
are initiated and slip, the capacity of such faults to generate significant
earthquakes, the characteristics of the transition from crystal-plastic to
cataclastic to brittle deformation along the faults, the extent to which the
faults and their footwalls are deformed by isostatic forces induced by tectonic
denudation, and the mechanics of isostatically driven deformation of large
normal faults and their footwalls. To address these questions, and integrated
field and fluid-inclusion study of three faults and their footwalls will be
carried out: the Simplon line, central Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple
detachment, California; and the Raft River detachment, Utah. Results from these
areas will be compared to each other and to our previous results from the
Brenner line, eastern Alps, in order to avoid site-specific results and to allow
comparison between different orogenic settings. Stat istically significant
populations of orientation and kinematic data will be collected, along with
oriented samples for thin section study. Microthermometric analysis of fluid
inclusions along healed fractures of known orientation will permit direct
constraints to be placed on the depth-temperature conditions under which
specific sets of structures formed, providing a reliable context in which to
interpret the orientation and kinematic data. Whole-rock chemical data on
mylonites and cataclasites from Whipple Mountains minidetachment horizons will
also be collected in order to assess models for the role of fluids in the
initiation of cataclastic/brittle deformation and detachment faulting. ; Oh +' 0
$ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9526249 Felicia S u m m a r y I n f o r
m a t i o n ( + Smith Felicia Smith @ c?D @ @ c?D @ F # Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e
= e F j j j j j j j 1 " " " A m T 6 j j j j j ~ j j j j x 9526390 Selverstone
Controversy still surrounds the processes that form metamorphic core complexes
and extensional detachment faults. Specifically, questions remain regarding the
angle(s) at which detachment faults are initiated and slip, the capacity of such
faults to generate significant earthquakes, the characteristics of the
transition from crystal-plastic to cataclastic to brittle deformation along the
faults, the extent to which the faults and their footwalls are deformed by
isostatic forces induced by tectonic denudation, and the mechanics of
isostatically driven deformation of large normal faults and their footwalls. To
address these questions, and integrated field and fluid-inclusion study of three
faults and their footwalls will be carried out: the Simplon line, central Alps,
Switzerland; the Whipple detachment, California; and the Raft River detachment,
Utah. Results from these areas will be compared to each other and to our
previous results from the Brenner line, eastern Alps, in order to avoid site-
specific results and to allow comparison between diff