* 9526378
* A National Center for Computational Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Robert Dutton, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 12/31/1999
* USD 319,571.00

9526378 Dutton The main objective of this renewal proposal for NCCE (National
Center for Computational Electronics) is to develop a shared vision and
environment for computational electronics with primary emphasis on engineering
TCAD tools and methodology. Through validation of advanced modeling approaches
to solving the Boltzmann transport equation, including calibration of the
associated models, a hierarchy of macroscopic 2D device simulator capabilities
will be developed. Jointly with industry the tools and methodology will be used
to established predictability for design and analysis of semiconductor devices
of feature size as small as 0.1um. This will include helping to establish a
comprehensive set of benchmarks through international collaboration with NCCE's
membership. Other related goals are : (1) use of-state-of-the-art device
simulation models and their graphics representation for developing educational
course materials in device physics and electronics; (2) parameter extraction for
physical models based on both experiment and microscopic simulation (i.e. Monte
Carlo); (3) establishment of an electronic forum and pathway within the internet
for timely information sharing regarding the latest development in device
modeling. Microscopic transport phenomena will be studied using Monte Carlo
codes for solving the Boltzmann equation and used in support of developing and
calibrating macroscopic models. A leading Monte Carlo code, DAMOCLES from IBM,
will be used at NCCE and provides a wealth of physical models and materials
parameters for silicon as well as compound semiconductors. The overall path for
technology transfer and further development of educational materials for NCCE
will extend well-established methods such as open access to TCAD tools, short
courses, workshops with supporting documents, articles and textbooks. In
addition, the new opportunities using WWW provide an exciting paradigm shift
that will increase the effectiveness and impact of NCCE throughout the US and a
mong the international community.