* 9526136
* Modeling Studes of the Interannual Variability of Large-    Scale Waves and Circulation
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Ka-Kit Tung, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Anjuli Bamzai
* 08/31/1999
* USD 288,249.00

Abstract ATM-9526136 Tung, Ka Kit University of Washington Title: Modeling
Studies of the International Variability of Large-Scale Waves and Circulation
Previous NSF projects by the PI were concerned with (a) internal variability of
the large- scale planetary waves in the extra-tropics, and (b) year-to-year
variability of the extra-tropical waves and circulation caused by the equatorial
QBO. In the current proposed project, the PI will model the extra-tropical
stratosphere in response to (i) specified, variable, observed planetary wave
amplitude at the tropopause for a 12-year period and (ii) the changing phase of
the equatorial QBO in zonal wind. The numerical model containing the needed
ingredients and mechanisms has already been built and tested by Kinnersley and
has produced realistic climatology in waves and circulation and realisitic time-
dependent evolution for planetary waves one, two and three for the one-year
period May 1980 to April 1981. In the proposed project, the model will be run
with the observed tropopause planetary wave forcing from 1980 to 1992. A second
cause of year-to-year variability in the extratropical stratosphere, which is
perhaps the more important one as far as irreversible mixing of tracers and
forcing of mean circulation are concerned, is the effect of the phase of
equatorial QBO on the propagation and location of breaking of planetary waves in
the extra-tropical wave-guide. The mechanism was first proposed by Holton and
Tan involving the location of zero-wind lines. A modified mechanism was proposed
by the PI involving the effect of the equatorial QBO on the extra-tropical wave-
guide for stationary waves, and the effect of the wave-guide changes on the
breaking and mixing of the planetary waves. These mechanisms will be tested in
the proposed project. To validate the hypothesis, the simulated result will be
compared with observation. The comparison will involve zonal mean temperature
and zonal wind, planetary wave amplitud es, and meridional circulation as
inferred from the distribution of tracers. This research is important because it
seeks to advance the understanding of long-term variability of weather- and
climate- related atmospheric circulation features.