* 9526413
* The Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for     Quality and Reliability Engineering Research
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Douglas Montgomery, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 08/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

EEC-9526413 Elsayed This award provides funding for a planning meeting to
establish an Industry/University Cooperative Research Center for Quality and
Reliability Engineering Research jointly between Rutgers University and Arizona
State University. The Center will have two locations, the first is the
Industrial Engineering Department of Rutgers University and the second is the
Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering (IMSE) of Arizona
State University. It will supported by local/national industries, Rutgers
University, Arizona State University, and government and state agencies. The
mission of the Center is to conduct research and develop models of evaluating
system performance and improve quality and reliability of commercial products
and military systems. The Center's goal is to provide timely, high-quality and
cost-effective research, development, training, seminars and workshops, and
analysis in the quality and reliability areas. The Center has the necessary
elements for success: 1) With increasing competition and emphasis on the quality
of products and reliability perceived by the customers, there is need for
research that will lead to a strong foundation to support improved quality and
reliability of commercial products and military systems, 2) There is a strong
interest from local and national industry in the quality and reliability
engineering areas, 3) The Center utilizes the existing strength in quality and
reliability engineering and probabilistic modeling of the faculty of the
Department of Industrial Engineering at Rutgers University and the faculty of
the Department of Industrial and Management Systems Engineering at Arizona State
University, 4) The Center provides cost effective research and development
opportunities for small companies and subdivisions of large organizations, and
5) The Center provides exposure and training for graduate industrial engineering
students in the area of quality and reliability engineering. This planning
meeting will study the feasibility in establishing an Industry/University
Cooperative Research Center on Quality and Reliability Engineering. The goal of
the proposed Center is to conduct research and develop models for evaluating
system performance and improve quality and reliability of commercial and
military productq. Currently, four companies have expressed interests in
supporting the proposed research activities. A planning meeting has been planned
in January 1996 to develop a better research plan with invited companies. This
effort has been coordinated with Dr. Pius Egbelu, Program Director of the
Operations Research and Production Systems Program in the Division of Design,
Manufacture, and Industrial Innovation.