* 9526024
* Novel Inorganic/Organic Hybrid Photonics Material via       Laser Assisted Molecular Beam Deposition
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Paras Prasad, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 367,239.00

9526024 Prasad The research described in this proposal is designed to generate
novel composite materials for photonics applications. Thin films of the proposed
inorganic:organic hybrid materials will be fabricated via the laser assisted
molecular beam deposition technique. The structural, linear and nonlinear
optical characterization of these films will be conducted. The microenvironment
of the composite will be investigated using organic fluorescent probes whose
fluorescent peak, lifetime, quantum yield and anisotropy are highly dependent on
the microenvironment. The optical quality will be evaluated by measuring the
waveguide losses. For the investigation of the third-order nonlinear optical
properties, which can be used for all optical signal processing in photonics, a
combination of Kerr gate, transient absorption and degenerate four-wave mixing
will be performed using femtosecond laser pulses. Also, the third- order
nonlinear optical processes will be studied in planar optical waveguide
configuration and in the Fabry-Perot cavity mode. For second order nonlinear
optical investi- gations, necessary polar structure will be introduced in the
fabricated films via the poling process. The second-order nonlinear optical
materials will be studied using both second harmonic generation and electro-
optic modulation. %%% A frontier area of current material science is the
development of novel high performance mutifunctional materials for the
application of emerging state-of-the-art technologies such as photonics,
biophotonics and optoelectronics. A novel approach is presented in this proposal
for the fabrication of thin films of a new class of inorganic:organic hybrid
materials for photonics via laser assisted molecular beam deposition. The
proposed novel inorganic:organic hybrid materials produced by this technique
combine the high optical quality and environmental stability of inorganics with
the fast and large nonlinear optical response of organics. The laser as sisted
molecular beam deposition approach of generating inorganic:organic composites is
highly unique in that it involves direct low temperature seeding of an organic
vapor into a molecular beam expansion of the inorganic oxide produced by laser
ablation. Films are grown directly on a desired substrate which is situated
downstream in the path of the molecular beam. ***