* 9526034
* Observational Constraints on Binary Star Formation
* MPS,AST
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1998
* William Heacox, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 04/30/1998
* USD 74,397.00

9526034 Heacox The objective of the research to be carried is to deduce reliable
observational constraints on the theories of the formation of binary star
systems. There is very little currently known about the overall binary stellar
system characteristics which are relevant to their formation. In particular, we
do not know whether the masses of the secondary stars in binary systems are
distributed in the same manner as those of primary and single stars. There is
almost no knowledge of the values and ranges of the orbital angular momenta
values characterizing binary stars. This last issue is particularly important,
since binary star orbits may act as the repositories of the original angular
momentum of the dense cloud cores from which the systems form, thus aiding in
the formation of the central concentration of material necessary for star
formation. A reliable estimate of the joint distribution of semi-major axes and
secondary/primary mass ratios, characterizing binaries as a whole, is needed to
correct these deficiencies. The method for deducing this distribution is that of
statistical modeling, wherein the distributions of the desired intrinsic
characteristics (semi-major axes, mass ratios) are related to those of the
observable quantities (orbital periods, velocities, etc.) in a deterministic
manner that preserves all the information in the data. Mathematically rigorous
methods of developing such models will be used, as well as the use of the means
of their statistical inversion, to infer the desired intrinsic distribution from
that of the observables. Model outlines will be given for all observational
binary star types (spectroscopic, visible, etc.). These models will be used with
the data, from recent and future observationally unbiased surveys of binary star
systems, to determine the joint distributions of semi-major axes and mass rat
ios characterizing binary star systems of homogeneous primary types. These
distributions of characteristics may then be used to directly determine the
secondary mass function and distribution of orbital angular momentum values (and
other dynamic characteristics) characterizing binary star systems as a whole.
The resulting distributions will constitute the first truly meaningful
observational constraints on the dominant mode of star formation (most stars are
members of binary systems). This will help to determine the extent to which any
of the current theories of binary star formation are correct, and advance our
understanding of the process of star formation in general. ***