* 9526138
* Orographic Forcing of the Coastal Atmospheric Boundary      Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Clive Dorman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 02/29/2000
* USD 462,568.00

9526138 Rogers Coastal mountains form a barrier to the wind field that may
affect both the downstream and upstream evolution of the local air flow. Local
regions of high or low pressure generated by the coastal zone can become trapped
and propagate along the coastline. Energetic, disturbances that exist for
between two and six days are of particular interest. These features can cause
significant changes in the local weather in the coastal zone, for example,
replacing clear skies with clouds and fog, and causing intensification and
reversals of the wind field. These systems are well documented, but no studies
have characterized their dynamical structure, origin, interaction with the mean
boundary layer and the development of the cloud-capped layer that accompanies
these events. Accelerations of the flow associated with coastal barriers give
rise to strong wind forcing of the coastal ocean and rapid variations in the
speed of the low level air flow. These orographically-forced flows have a
significant effect on the exchange of heat, moisture, momentum and trace
constituents between the ocean and the atmosphere. Since these flows are
constrained by the topography, they are often stationary and persistent,
consistently affecting a particular area of the coastline. While the basic
structure of these features is known, they have been documented on only a few
occasions and no systematic study has been directed specifically to identifying
the dynamics of these features and their interactions with the thermal
circulation that is also a significant mesoscale feature of the summer-time
California coastal zone. This work will focus on in situ measurements of the
along shore and across shore structure of the boundary layer using aircraft and
surface based measurements. Aircraft instruments will provide direct
measurements of the mean and turbulent structure of the coastal atmosphere with
coincident lidar measurements of the deformation of the marine bounda ry layer
inversion and in situ cloud microphysical measurements of coastal clouds and
aerosols. An important result will be the ability to resolve the temporal and
spatial scales that dominate the variability of the mesoscale wind field along
parts of the California coast, which may have a significant impact of mesoscale
forecasting and numerical modeling in complex terrain. ***