* 9526470
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Active Tectonics of a Young ObliqueRifted Continental Margin, Loreto Area, Baja California     Sur, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Larry Mayer, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 11/30/1999
* USD 85,356.00

; R o o t E n t r y F C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t H O b j e c t P o
o l 4 @ ( ! " # $ % & ' ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = > ? @ A B C D
E F G H I J K F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; e = e w
H w j j j j j j j 1 # % % % D p T 5 j j j j j # ~ j j j j # { 9526470 Mayer The
eastern margin of Baja California is an example of a continental margin that has
experienced young (Plio-Quaternary) oblique rifting which appears to have
overprinted, slightly order orthogonal rifting. This style of deformation may
lead to formation of detached continental blocks that then travel parallel to
the margin, eventually becoming allochthonous terranes attached or reattached to
continental margins far from their point of origin. The goals of this
collaborative project to test the hypothesis that orthogonal rifting was
overprinted by oblique rifting, to document fault interactions, to investigate
segmentation of structures along the margin and to study the associated land
forms produced by these tectonic events. Results should help understand the
origin of the Gulf of California and, by analogy, may help understand
allochthonous terranes. Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TE MPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m
a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( 9526506 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith @ @ @ @
Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; w v w ! ! ! ! K @ Normal a " A@ " Default Paragraph Font
w w w w { Felicia Smith/\\CLM12\EARTESHR\1995SEPT\ABSTRACT\UMHOEFER.TXT Felicia
Smith,\\CLM12\EARTESHR\1995SEPT\ABSTRACT\MAYER.TXT @HP LaserJet IIID LPT3:
hppcl5a HP LaserJet IIID 8D R HP LaserJet IIID 8D R 1 Times New Roman Symbol &
Arial " h e e $ 5 9526506 Felicia Smith Felicia Smith ; ;