* 9526568
* An Investigation of Silurian Plant Remains from the Central Appalachians
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Paul Strother, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/28/1999
* USD 100,000.00

Strother 9526568 Evidence from fossil spores indicates that land-dwelling plants
probably originated during the Ordovician and diversified throughout the
Silurian. This transition in Earth history had profound consequences for all
subsequently evolving terrestrial organisms, yet we really know very little
about the origin and primary radiation of the land plants. The proposal is
designed to document and substantiate the presence of land plants throughout the
Silurian of the central Appalachian Basin. Such evidence consists fo sporomorphs
(cryptospores and trilete spores), microscmpic plant fragments, and macroscopic
plant thalli. The proposed work involves field collection, sample extraction and
preparation, microscopic examination, description, and comparison similar
remains known from Europe and Canada. Computer-based techniques in the analsis
and description of fossil spores and plant remains will developed and applied
for the first time to fossil spore studies. Results of this research will
provide the broader scientific community with basic facts about the origin and
early evolution of terrestrial ecosystems. Specialists will benefit from the
systematics and documentation of the plant fossil record during a period of
initial adaptive responses to the terrestrial habitat.