* 9526249
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:  Integrated Structural and Fluid    Inclusion Study of Rolling Hinges and Low-Angle Normal      Faults in Metamorphic Core Complexes
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Gary Axen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/1998
* USD 61,256.00

; R o o t E n t r y F w " C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l w " w " 4 @ , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; : G > * B p ' = ) B p ' = ( B p ; ' B p ; & B p 6 X % B p 6 X
$ . B p 1 7 + E # 9526249 Axen Controversy still surrounds the processes that
form metamorphic core complexes and extensional detachment faults. Specifically,
questions remain regarding the angle(s) at which detachment faults are initiated
and slip, the capacity of such faults to generate significant earthquakes, the
characteristics of the transition from crystal-plastic to cataclastic to brittle
deformation along the faults, the extent to which the faults and their footwalls
are deformed by isostatic forces induced by tectonic denudation, and the
mechanics of isostatically driven deformation of large normal faults and their
footwalls. To address these questions, and integrated field and fluid-inclusion
study of three faults and their footwalls will be carried out: the Simplon line,
central Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple detachment, California; and the Raft
River detachment, Utah. Results from these areas will be compared to each other
and to our previous results from the Brenner line, eastern Alps, in order to
avoid site-specific results and to allow comparison between different orogenic
settings. Statistical ly significant populations of orientation and kinematic
data will be collected, along with oriented samples for thin section study.
Microthermometric analysis of fluid inclusions along healed fractures of known
orientation will permit direct constraints to be placed on the depth-temperature
conditions under which specific sets of structures formed, providing a reliable
context in which to interpret the orientation and kinematic data. Whole-rock
chemical data on mylonites and cataclasites from Whipple Mountains
minidetachment horizons will also be collected in order to assess models for the
role of fluids in the initiation of cataclastic/brittle deformation and
detachment faulting. ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9526249
Felicia S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( + Smith Felicia Smith @ | @ @ | @
F # Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e j j j j j j j O 1 1 T 6 O j O j j j j ~ j j j j
< 9526249 Axen Controversy still surrounds the processes that form metamorphic
core complexes and extensional detachment faults. Specifically, questions remain
regarding the angle(s) at which detachment faults are initiated and slip, the
capacity of such faults to generate significant earthquakes, the characteristics
of the transition from crystal-plastic to cataclastic to brittle deformation
along the faults, the extent to which the faults and their footwalls are
deformed by isostatic forces induced by tectonic denudation, and the mechanics
of isostatically driven deformation of large normal faults and their footwalls.
To address these questions, and integrated field and fluid-inclusion study of
three faults and their footwalls will be carried out: the Simplon line, central
Alps, Switzerland; the Whipple detachment, California; and the Raft River
detachment, Utah. Results from these areas will be compared to each other and to
our previous results from the Brenner line, eastern Alps, in order to avoid
site-specific results and to allow comparison between different o