* 9526961
* Mathematical Sciences:  Weekly Dissipative Predator/Prey    Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* William Schaffer, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 06/30/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9526961 Schaffer The investigator and his colleagues study predator-prey models
as perturbations of Hamiltonian systems. Predation is an important factor in
natural and man-made ecosystems. Recently, it has been observed that two species
predator-prey models subject to seasonal forcing exhibit interesting behaviors
in the presence of seasonal variations in the environment. Most interesting is
the fact that for certain parameter regimes there exist infinite numbers of
coexisting attractors corresponding to oscillations of different period and
amplitude. In the face of continuing perturbations from without, such a
circumstance promotes the likelihood of violent and unpredictable variations in
system dynamics, i.e., in the densities of predators and victims over time. Put
another way, the mathematics suggests that small variations in ambient
conditions, for example, year-to-year variations in the climate, can induce
enormous and wholly unexpected changes in species abundances. Interpreted
biologically, the parameter regimes in question correspond to prey populations
the densities of which are predator-limited, i.e., to the circumstance in which
predators keep victim densities well below their carrying capacity. That such
regulation is not unusual is evidenced by the fact that victim populations often
explode when "released" from predation. In agricultural systems, such irruptions
can be the unintended (and economically catastrophic) consequence of pest
eradication programs. From a mathematical viewpoint, strong regulation of
herbivore populations by their predators corresponds to "weak dissipation."
Previous investigation of the two species model suggests that such situations
can usefully be viewed as perturbations of the Hamiltonian limit, in which case
the dissipation is, perforce, zero. Because these models include seasonality,
the equations are "nonintegrable" with the consequence that the topology phase
space is extraordinarily complex. The mat hematical questions thus relate to
which aspects of the Hamiltonian topology are preserved under weak dissipation
and to the rapidity with which these features are eradicated as dissipation
levels increase. The present project seeks to extend the basic mathematical
model of predator-prey interactions in several directions. The generalizations
include increasing the numbers of interacting species and examining the
consequences of weak dissipation in the context of a patchy environment, for
example, cultivated fields distributed among old fields and woodlands. In
addition, the investigator and his colleagues address agroeconomic issues -
namely, the feasibility of substituting generalist arthropod predators for
insecticides as a principal means of controlling pest species. The conventional
ecological wisdom is that given sufficient understanding of predator
requirements, such a substitution is both feasible and desirable. In fact, the
history of modern agriculture is nothing if not the story of increasing victim
carrying capacity with the consequence that effective pest control by predation
would necessarily correspond to weak dissipation. The challenge, therefore, is
to devise management policies that allow for the effective control of
economically significant pests and, at the same time, avoid an increased
potential for devastating outbreaks.