* 9526483
* Improved III-V Optoelectronic Performance and Reliability   Through Carbon Tetrabromide Doping
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Theresa Mayer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/1999
* USD 336,802.00

9526483 Miller The goal of this project is to investigate and develop III-V
semiconductor-based optoelectronic emitters, detectors, and electronic circuits
with improved performance. The approach focuses on an important materials issue
which affects many present devices and integrated optoelectronic circuits:
controlled heavy p-type doping in an epitaxial structure, using carbon. Gaseous,
carbon tetrabromide, CBr4 will be used for carbon doping in solid source
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE). Stable, low-resistance p-type contacts, improved
laser lifetime, and improved heterojunction bipolar transistor (HBT) reliability
will be developed and demonstrated. The common p-type dopant for solid-source
MBE is Be. At doping concentrations exceeding about lxlO^19/cm3, Be can diffuse
rapidly during epitaxial growth and also during device operation. This
phenomenon makes it difficult to grow high-performance microwave HBTs with good
yield and reproducibility using Be, and also leads to a rapid degradation in
device performance. As a result, commercial suppliers of epitaxial material
grown by MBE find it virtually impossible to sell wafers for use in HBTs. There
is also evidence that a similar phenomenon limits the performance of lasers
grown with Be. The use of carbon rather than Be in solid-source MBE growth will
reopen the growth of high reliability, highly p doped, high performance devices
to this technique. The approach of this project is to use carbon tetrabromide,
CBr4, for p type doping in solid-source MBE growth. The project couples the
growth by MBE of AlGaAs, GaAs, AlInAs, and GaInAs materials on GaAs and InP
substrates closely to the design, fabrication, and testing of HBTs, lasers, and
detectors. This is an extension to optical emitters, detectors, and device
reliability of the principal investigators' prior work on CBr4 doping. ***