* 9526583
* Kinetics of Interfacial Roughening Under Nonhydrostatic     Stresses:  New Interfacial Mobility Effects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Michael Aziz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 10/31/1996
* USD 23,455.00

9526583 Aziz This research aims, through the study of unique aspects of solid
phase epitaxy of silicon, to explore the basic mechanism and kinetics of
interfacial roughening commonly encountered during epitaxy of SiGe alloys, and
during heteroepitaxy of compound semiconductor materials. Critical parameters of
particular relevance to kinetic phenomena, the spacing(wavelength), amplitude
and stress dependence of this interfacial instability will be determined.
Additionally, computer simulation and modeling will be utilized as an integral
part of the research to better analyze experimental results and gain further
understanding and insight into the mechanistic details of interfacial
roughening. %%% This project will explore a new and innovative approach achieve
better fundamental understanding of kinetic phenomena of critical importance to
the synthesis and processing of advanced electronic and photonic materials. The
proposed research has potential for high pay-off to a broad range of
experimental and theoretical data accumulated to date, and several key issues
can be appropriately addressed and resolved by the project to provide greater
understanding and insight to atomic level processes of significance to advancing
the field of microelectronics. Additionally, an important feature of the program
is the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***