* 9526889
* Collaborative Research:  Paleomagnetic and Mineral          Magnetic Characterization of Drill Cores from the           Cape Roberts Project
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,11/30/2001
* Kenneth Verosub, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 11/30/2001
* USD 360,486.00

Verosub OPP 9526889 Wilson OPP 9527343 Abstract The goals of the Cape Roberts
Project (CRP) are to elucidate the history of fragmentation of the Pacific
margin of Gondwana and the history of Antarctic glaciation from Cretaceous
through Oligocene time. The CRP will operate with an integrated science plan in
which all of the initial scientific characterization of the cores will be done
at McMurdo Station in the Antarctic during two drilling seasons over two
successive years. The drilling seasons will each be of two months duration and
will operate in much the same manner as two month cruises of the Ocean Drilling
Program. The scientific activities associated with characterization of the cores
will include magnetostratigraphy, biostratigraphy, petrography, mineralogy, and
sedimentology. Age determination is of principal importance in such a project
because a temporal framework is necessary to obtain a history of climatic and
tectonic events. This award supports a program of research which will enable
determination of a high-quality paleomagnetic stratigraphy, with the appropriate
mineral magnetic studies, in support of the CRP. For the on-site magnetic
studies this award will: undertake logging of the whole-core magnetic
susceptibility which will assist in correlation of the several overlapping cores
to be recovered during the CRP; determine a magnetostratigraphic framework for
dating of the cores; undertake mineral magnetic and environmental magnetic
studies to assess the reliability of the paleomagnetic signal; and determine if
environmental magnetic properties yield information concerning changes in the
tectonic, sedimentologic, diagenetic or climatic influences on the sedimentary
record at Cape Roberts. Detailed environmental and mineral magnetic studies will
also enable evaluation of the sediments as recorders of the geomagnetic field.
The Cape Roberts records provide the potential to obtain rare high southern
latitude constraints on geomagne tic field behavior. Paleomagnetic studies
should also provide important data concerning crustal movements and rift
development in the Ross Sea sector.