* 9526659
* Shortening, Gravity-Driven Compensation, and the Thermal    Evolution of the East Greenland Caledonides
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Kip Hodges, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Thomas O. Wright
* 12/31/2000
* USD 297,679.00

9526659 Hodges The process of extensional deformation within orogenic belts is
of considerable interest in the development of collisional mountain ranges.
First well-documented in the Himalaya, these extensional structures appear to
provide a mechanism for limiting the topographic relief and mean elevation when
physical erosion is not sufficient to compensate for the compression-drives
uplift. Commonly associated with these extensional features is an enigmatic
metamorphic relationship in which the metamorphic grade is inverted, that is,
increases upward. From thermal modeling it is clear that these inverted
metamorphic gradients can only be preserved with rapid cooling. However, the
temporal spatial and mechanical relationships between deformation (compression
with extensional unroofing accommodation) and the geothermal budget (Metamorphic
grade and pressure-temperature-time path) of these systems is not well
understood. This project will study tectonic denudation and inverted
metamorphism in the East Greenland Caledonides. This area exposes a much deeper
part of an Orogen, and the inverted metamorphic gradient is present in a
different structural setting from analogous structures in the Himalaya.
Technically, the high-precision geochronologic techniques to be used are capable
of more closely tying deformation metamorphism in this older orogen. The
expected results of this research include a better understanding of the thermal
behavior of actively deforming orogens, particularly in response to episode of
extension in the overall compressional orogens.