* 9526658
* Quantum Chemical Reaction Dynamics on Massively Parallel    Computers:  Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Evelyn Goldfield, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 01/31/2000
* USD 187,110.00

9526658 GOLDFIELD This project, supported by the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry program will focus on the development of quantum chemical dynamical
tools and the application to several chemical reactions. The primary focus of
this development will be in the area of massively parallel computers. Currently,
much progress is being made in the field of chemical dynamics. This progress is
being fueled both by the development of new and clever computational methods and
the incredible advances in computer power. Such progress means that for the
first time, theoretical chemists can actually envision competing with their
experimental colleagues in providing accurate accounts of important chemical
phenomena. The aim of the research outlined in this proposal is to harness the
power of massively parallel computing to enable chemists to apply rigorous
theoretical methods to larger, more complex chemical systems. At the heart of
chemistry lies the motion of atoms and molecules. The description of the motions
of interacting atomic nuclei provides the most basic and fundamental
understanding of chemical processes. An important goal of theoretical chemical
physics is to describe chemical reactions from first principles alone. Because
atoms are very small, their motions are often not adequately explained by
ordinary Newtonian mechanics, instead, quantum mechanics is required. Although
the quantum mechanical equations that apply to all of chemistry have been known
for most of this century, only in the past several years has a complete,
accurate theoretical description of a chemical reaction been given, and only for
the simplest chemical process, the interaction of a hydrogen atom and a hydrogen
molecules. There is a huge difference between knowing the form of an equation
and having the methodological and computational tools which enable one to solve
it. Chemical dynamicists for the most part have not yet exploited the huge
potential of massive ly parallel computing. The research proposed here is to
develop and implement a hierarchical parallel model for time-dependent quantum
dynamics. The researchers expect that this model will allow them to obtain
realistic descriptions of much larger and more complex chemical systems than is
currently possible. They will apply this model to important and challenging
problems including the two most important reactions in combustion chemistry. One
very important property of this model, which has already been implemented, is
its ability to handle easily and efficiently chemical systems having high
overall angular momentum. Many theoretical efforts concentrate on the
computationally more tractable systems with zero total angular momentum; such
states are rarely found in nature however. There are often both quantitative and
qualitative differences between high and low angular momentum states. Therefore,
in order to compare theoretical calculations with experiments it is often
necessary to obtain an accurate description of nonzero angular momentum states.