* 9526664
* High-Resolution Coastal Record of Western Equatorial Pacific and Adjacent Highland Climate During the Last Glacial Cycle
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1999
* Michael Prentice, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 07/31/1999
* USD 44,767.00

Abstract ATM-952664 Prentice, Michael L. University of New Hampshire Title:
High-Resolution Coastal Record of Western Equatorial Pacific and Adjacent
Highland Climate During the Last Glacial Cycle The goal of this study is to
derive a high-resolution coupled record of surface and high-altitude climate
change in the western Pacific warm-pool (WPWP) over the last glacial cycle. The
record will come from Cenderawasih Bay on the northwest coast of New Guinea.
Because of its position, proxy records in Cenderawasih Bay concurrently monitor
the temperature and hydrology of the core WPWP as well as changes in temperature
and precipitation on the directly adjacent Irian Jaya highland. The program
involves a seismic survey and piston cores will be collected. WPWP temperature
and precipitation changes will be distinguished using foraminiferal isotope
records supplemented by SST estimates derived from transfer-function analysis of
planktonic foraminiferal census data. High-altitude paleoclimate changes caused
significant fluctuations in the extent of high-altitude glaciation as well as
the composition and elevation of vegetation zones. Glacier, vegetation, and
climate changes also will be reconstructed. By filling a large spatial and
temporal gap in tropical paleoclimate reconstructions, this project will
contribute to understanding the role of the global tropical climate system in
large-magnitude global changes on sub-millennial timescales.***