* 9526419
* Collaborative Research:  A GPS Investigation of Deformation in the Jalisco Region, Western Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Dennis DeMets, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2000
* USD 135,771.00

DeMets 9526419 The PI's propose a GPS project that is designed to measure
crustal deformation across a network of geodetic monuments spanning that state
of Jalisco in western Mexico. The Jalisco region is a volcanically and
tectonically complex geologic province that overlies the subducting Rivera and
Cocos plates and exhibits evidence for modern deformation primarily confined to
three continental rifts. Their goal is to understand the relative kinematics and
hence the coupling of the oceanic and continental plates in this regions, as
well as to test several hypotheses concerning the link between the motions of
the subducting plates, seafloor features entering the subduction zone, and the
observed onshore deformation. These hypotheses have previously been untestable
due to a lack of reliable observations of the regional strain field. With modern
GPS technology, the required measurements are now feasible. Observations of
Jalisco block velocities with respect to nearby sites on the North American
plate could also permit us to test the intriguing, but speculative hypothesis
that rotation of a semi-rigid Jalisco is responsible for the observed
deformation along its bordering faults. The October 1996 unexpected magnitude
7.6 earthquake in this area provides a unique opportunity to study the coseismic
and postseismic strains in the Jalisco as well.