* 9526091
* Dissertation Research:  Archaeological Investigation of     Pacific Agriculture
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Michael Graves, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1998
* USD 11,996.00

Under the direction of Dr. Michael Graves, Mr. David Addision will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological, ethnohistoric and
ethnographic research on the island of Nuku Hiva, located in the Marquesan
island chain. Previous work on the island indicates an original colonization by
Polynesian people about 2,000 years ago. Descendants of these inhabitants still
occupy the region today. Nuku Hiva is typical of the Marquesan islands in its
size and it habitat variation which ranges from drier uplands to lower-lying
large valleys with permanent water sources which permit irrigation. Mr. Addison
wishes to trace the development of agriculture over time and to relate
variations in this to environmental characteristics and to changes in social
organization. To accomplish this, he will map agricultural terraces and other
features such as irrigation systems which are prominent on the landscape today.
He will also excavate selected portions of them to determine construction
features and sequence and to collect material for radiocarbon dating. He will
consult historic records which describe agricultural practices at the time of
European contact and will conduct extensive interviews with present day
inhabitants. Because islands are constrained and clearly circumscribed areas
they provide an excellent context to examine human-environment relationships.
The Polynesian region of the Pacific also provides an important study region
because it islands vary widely in size and geography and they were inhabited by
a single stock of people at roughly the same time. Therefore it is possible to
conduct controlled comparison studies. Such islands were originally colonized by
small groups and over time population and population pressure increased. In
cases such as Nuku Hiva therefore one can examine the relationships between
population pressure, environmental variation and human response. This research
is important because it will shed new light on human-environmental interactions.
It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists and further the training
of a promising young scientist.