* 9526111
* Dissertation Research:  The Ecological Influences on        Activity Cycle in Two Cathemeral Lemurid Primates, Eulemur  mongoz and Eulemur fulvus fulvus
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Kenneth Glander, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 02/28/1997
* USD 9,574.00

The vast majority of primates, including humans, possesses anatomical and
behavioral adaptations for either a nocturnal (night-active) or diurnal (day-
active) lifestyle. A group of prosimian primates in Madagascar, however,
displays a distinctly different activity cycle where there is a potential for
activity at any time of the day or night. Although such 24-hour activity is
common among other mammalian species, it is extremely unusual in primates.
Therefore, in this proposed dissertation study, fifteen months of data will be
collected to examine the 24-hour activity in two lemur species, the mongoose
lemur (Eulemur mongoz) and the common brown lemur (Eulemur fulvus fulvus). The
research will be conducted in the tropical dry forest of Ankarafantsika Nature
Reserve in northwest Madagascar. Specifically, this study will attempt to
determine whether 24-hour activity in these primates is driven by such features
of their natural environment as food availability, predator pressure, and
climate. In addition, this study will examine whether any differences exist
between the lemurs' daytime and nighttime behavior. The results of this research
will be used to generate a model explaining why a 24-hour activity cycle is
adaptive for these primates, and to also reach a better understanding of the
importance of activity cycle in the evolutionary history of human and non-human
primates.