* 9526802
* Understanding Gene Repression
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Kenneth Tartof, Institute For Cancer Research
* Standard Grant
* DeLill Nasser
* 06/30/1996
* USD 49,000.00

9526802 Tartof Heterochromatin comprises about thirty percent of the Drosophila
chromosome. Position effect variegation (PEV) results when a euchromatic gene
has been placed adjacent to a block of centromeric heterochromatin. Such PEV can
be modified by dominant genes known as Enhancers of variegation and Suppresors
of variegation. Those genes can be divided into two classes, I and II, depending
upon their response to gene dosage. A putative clone of a class II gene will be
positively identified and characterized by transformation and genetic analysis.
If it is shown to be a class II gene, experiments can be designed to attempt to
understand the regulating role of heterochromatin on gene expression. %%% The
position of a gene on a chromosome can determine its ability to be expressed.
Most of the genes in a eukaryotic chromosome are found in loosely packed regions
of DNA, called euchromatin, and if they are moved close to, or into, regions of
densely packed DNA, called heterochromatin, either express at a low level in the
first case or not at all in the second case. When a gene is inserted into a
chromosome the level of expression can vary between cells and result in what is
called position effect variagation. It is postulated that not only is the
position of the gene a determining factor in its level of expression but that
other genes called suppressors and enhancers can also act to modify the level of
expression. A putative suppressor gene has been cloned and if characterization
of that gene supports its identity as such, experiments can be designed to
attempt to understand the regulating role of the heterochromatin as well as the
gene itself on other genes. ***