* 9526774
* Workshop on Secular Variations in the Rates of Production of Cosmogenic Nuclides on Earth; February 2-4, 1996; Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Robert Reedy, Department of Energy Albuquerque Operations Office
* Interagency Agreement
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/1997
* USD 8,000.00

Gosse 9526774 This proposal requests support for an international, multi-
disciplinary, and multi-purpose workshop on the production rates of cosmogenic
nuclides in terrestrial rocks, to take place at Los Alamos National Laboratory,
New Mexico, February 2-4, 1996. The goals of this workshop are: to gather those
of us who are working to determine this production rates of terrestrial
cosmogenic nuclides with those working in fields that are useful to this
undertaking. This includes scientists whose principal interests and expertise
include: geology and geochronology; accelerator and conventional mass
spectrometry; nuclear and analytical chemistry paleomagnetism and geomagnetic
dipole field intensity research; the influence of solar activity on cosmic rays;
and calibration of the 14C timescale. to provide a forum in which to discuss A)
measurements of production rates, B) models relating to cosmic-ray intensity and
nuclear cross sections to production rates, C) the current state of knowledge
concerning temporal and spatial variability of productio rates. to assemble
recommendations that help steer and focus future efforts to calibrate cosmogenic
nuclide surface exposure data methods. to compile an annotated bibliography of
current relevant publications with evaluation. More than forty invited speakers
will present papers. Discussions on specific topics and general discussions will
occur throughout the three days. Lessons learned and recommendations for future
research will be published along with the abstracts and an annotated
bibliography of most relevant publications. The terrestrial cosmogenic nuclide
time scale, like the conventional radiocarbon time scales, needs to be
calibrated to the true (calendric) time scale. While the cosmogenic techniques
are in their infancy and as the number of geological applications of cosmogenic
nuclide exposure dating rapidly increases, this workshop is necessary and
timely. The recent call (Clark and others, in review) to change by 17% the pre
vious 10Be (and other nuclides) production rate estimate (Nishiizumi et al.,
1989) for -13 kyr of exposure is just one example of the urgent need of this
workshop. The proposed workshop will be share-supported between NSF and Los
Alamos National Laboratory and the Institute of Geophysics and Planetary
Physics. Funds from NSF are requested for participant support and publication
costs. No NSF funds will be used for salaries or for support of foreignn
participant travel or participants who are employees of LANL.