* 9526277
* Combined Infrared and EPR Studies of Photochemically        Generated Free Radicals in Low-Temperature Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Charles Wight, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/1999
* USD 52,427.00

In this project jointly funded by the Division of International Programs and the
Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Charles Wight of the University of Utah will collaborate with E. Y. Misochko of
the Institute of Chemical Physics in Chernogolovka, Russia. In this program
Fourier Transform infrared (FTIR) and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopies will be used to study photochemical reactions of F and H atoms
with simple molecules in low-temperature matrices. The expertise of the
investigators is complementary, with Wight responsible for the FTIR experiments
and Misochko for the EPR. Through this collaboration these researchers will be
able to formulate a comprehensive description of hot atom mobility, diffusion of
thermalized atoms, and atom-molecule reactions that occur in the restrictive
environment of low-temperature solids. Thin layers of solid `noble gas` matrices
at very low-temperatures are an ideal vehicle for containing highly reactive or
transient chemical species so that they can be studied using a technique called
matrix isolation spectroscopy. Using this technique the mechanisms by which a
number of chemical transformations occur can be unravelled and examined.
Examples of such reactions are polymerization, explosive decomposition, and
combustion. Through this international collaboration, the complementary
resources of a Russian and an American investigator will be combined to produce
a more complete picture of these types of processes than might be obtained by
either scientist working alone.