* 9526860
* (CAREER) Coupled Hydrological and Geochemical Modeling of   the Formation of the Cigar Lake Uranium Deposit,            Northern Saskatchewan, Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Jeffrey Raffensperger, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Torgersen
* 04/30/2000
* USD 95,000.00

9526860 Raffensperger Processes occurring in sedimentary basins include basin-
scale groundwater flow, heat transport, and reactive mass transport.
Quantitative models of flow and transport in these settings can provide insight
into the coupled processes that control their hydrological and geochemical
evolution. The Cigar Lake uranium deposit provides and excellent opportunity to
study the coupled processes of groundwater flow and mass transport/transfer. It
is representative of unconformity-type uranium deposits found in Canada and
Australia, which are characterized by: location near an unconformity between
weathered metasedimentary basement rocks and overlying thick sandstone
sequences, their age of formation (1300-1600 Ma), an association with faulted
basement structures and graphite-rich basement rocks, and intensive hydrothermal
alteration halos. Cigar Lake has been studied as an analog for high-level
nuclear waste repositories, and has experienced relatively little post-formation
alteration. Data are now available on the mineralogy and petrology, as well as
the hydrological properties, of the rocks in the region. Raffensperger (1993)
developed a unique finite element approach to quantifying two-dimensional
groundwater flow, heat transport, and reactive multicomponent mass transport in
heterogeneous geologic settings, which was used to examine the formation of
these deposits. However, this effort did not fully explain certain features of
the deposits, for which additional work is required. This study will examine the
formation of the Cigar Lake uranium deposit and associated alteration, and will
focus on the following topics: (1) conditions required for mineralization within
basement rocks; (2) consideration of the role of feedback coupling, in which
porosity and permeability modifications due to mineral precipitation and
dissolution are incorporated into the groundwater flow calculations; and (3) the
creation of a general research tool for the quantitative study of coupled hydro
logical and geochemcial processes. The apparent stability of the Cigar Lake
deposit has been attributed to the low-permeability clay alteration halo
surrounding it. How this alteration developed and influenced the ore-forming
process is a significant question which can be addressed through coupled
modeling. Coupling of important hydrological and geochemical processes, within a
flexible numerical framework, will permit accurate integration of geological,
hydrological, and geochemical data. Furthermore, coupling will be significant in
that the interdependence of hydrologic and geochemical processes may be
evaluated. Detailed simulations of an individual deposit will help refine the
general picture presented by previous studies, and help answer remaining
questions. Unconformity-type uranium deposits are being studies as analogs for
nuclear waste repositories. How these deposits formed, and why they have
remained relatively intact over a time period of 1.3 billion years constitute
geologically and environmentally important research questions. The educational
plan consists of the following elements: (1) Development of an interactive,
mullet-media textbook for EVSC 340 Physical Hydrology, a core course required
for all majors; (2) Inclusion of undergraduate students in the proposed research
through independent study and summer research opportunities; and (3) The
creation of a new course, to be titled "Water on Earth". Work on the first
element will begin this fall, with the support of a University ITC fellowship
and release time provided by the PI's Dean. The third element will be developed
through 1995 and 1996, to be taught for the first time during the 1996-1997
academic year. The goal of the new course will be to provide a "service course"
in hydrology to the University, and to build a bridge between our understanding
of hydrological science and the role that understanding plays in a variety of
contemporary and historical issues.