* 9526038
* Fundamentals of Microwave-Induced Reactions Involving       Non-Ionic Species
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Kun-Mu Chen, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1997
* USD 58,521.00

The global advantages of microwave processing over conventional heating include
direct and volumetric heating, high selectivity, fast heating rate, and high
controllability. The objective of this work is to study the fundamental
interactions between microwaves and non-ionic chemical species. The research
will: (1) determine the non-thermal effects during microwave-induced reaction by
a comparative study of selected non-ionic reactions; (2) explore accurate
temperature measurement techniques and determine the molecular temperature
during microwave heating; (3) quantify the electric field and temperature
distributions at the molecular level; and (4) study the effects of microwave
reactor configuration and control on the reaction. To verify or disprove the
non-thermal effects during microwave heating of non-ionic species, studies of
both epoxy-amine polymerization and epoxy-amine model-compound organic reactions
are planned using amines of different dipole moments. Systems of various dipole
moments will be used because microwave effects occur primarily at the dipolar s
ites for non-ionic reactions. The epoxide to be used for polymerization is
diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A (DGEBA). The epoxides to be used for model-
compound reactions are allyl glycidyl ether of bisphenol A (AGEBA) and phenyl
glycidyl ether (PGE). The amines to be used will be meta phenylene diamine
(mPDA), diaminodiphenyl methane (DDM), and diaminodiphenyl sulfone (DDS).
Parallel isothermal reaction experiments will be carried out using microwave and
conventional thermal heating. Microwave thermal mechanical analysis will be
investigated to measure the segmental mobility of the dipolar groups. The
electric field and temperature distributions at the molecular level will be
modelled. The predicted temperatures will be compared to the measured
temperatures.