* 9526060
* First International Symposium on Gallium Nitride and Related Materials to be held November 26 - December 1, 1995 in     Boston, Massachusetts
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* John Ballance, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1996
* USD 5,000.00

9526060 Dupuis An International Symposium on Gallium Nitride and Related
Materials is being held to address current topics in materials growth and
characterization including several contemporary topics of increasing importance,
namely; Kinetics Of Chemical Reactions; Surface Chemistry Of Precursors;
Synthesis Of Novel Precursors For Nitride Growth; Properties Of Wurtzite And
Cubic Nitride Materials; Electronic And Structural Properties Of Interfaces And
Thin Films; Defect Structure Of Interfaces And Materials; Growth Of
Heteroepitaxial Films; And Substrates For Heteroepitaxial Growth. There are also
a number of sessions dealing with physics and device aspects with a strong
emphasis on fundamental processes. Additionally there will be an opportunity to
assess the field, and to establish ties between universities, research
institutions, and industry. It is expected that top scientists in the field will
attend, and that the Symposium will provide an effective forum to discuss and
delineate the critical scientific issues in this emerging research area, and to
consider and define the approaches and techniques needed to address them. %%% An
evaluation of the progress and status of Gallium Nitride and related materials,
and especially critical materials research issues in epitaxy, processing, and
the relationship of materials research to device and circuit fabrication along
with current assessments of the most important contemporary research issues in
this field will be of great value to the understanding and enhanced utilization
of advanced materials in the field of electronics and photonics. These materials
have particular advantages and characteristics for development of blue-green
lasers and LEDs useful in a host of display and communications technologies. ***