* 9526809
* Seismic Analysis and Design of Steel Frames with Partially  Restrained Connections
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,01/31/2000
* Achintya Haldar, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 01/31/2000
* USD 179,537.00

9526809 Haldar A comprehensive study will be conducted on the inelastic seismic
response behavior of steel frames with partially restrained (PR) connections
considering all major sources of energy dissipation. The procedure considers as
realistically as possible the geometric nonlinearity including the P-delta
effect due to drift in the presence of PR connections, material nonlinearity,
loading and reloading behavior at the PR connections, and damping. Uncertainty
in the parameters will be considered using a nonlinear stochastic finite element
algorithm. Reliability analysis will be conducted to generalize the observations
made during the experiments and deterministic analyses, and for codification of
design. Serviceability requirements consistent with the strength requirements
will then be formulated. Several definitions of local, interstory and global
ductility will be investigated, particularly for the multiple degree of freedom
structures, and the most appropriate definition will be identified. Commonly
used steel frames including moment- residing frames, braced frames, dual systems
with concentric and eccentric braces will be investigated. Design factors will
be re-evaluated and introduced for the seismic design of steel frames with PR
connections. The study will complement SAC's Phase II study on seismic analysis
of steel framed structures which is funded by FEMA. The project will involve
industry trade and associations such as the American Institute of Steel
Construction (AISC) and the American Iron and Steel Institute (AISI). ***