* 9526944
* Tectonic Setting, Depth of Emplacement, and Unroofing       History of the Middle Proterozoic Wolf River Batholith and  Associated Plutons, Wisconsin
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Daniel Holm, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 11/30/1999
* USD 126,119.00

9526944 Holm Understanding the origin and tectonic setting of voluminous Middle
Proterozoic (1.5-1.3 Ga) magmatism across the United States and Canada has long
been one of the foremost problems in Precambrian geology. Whereas early views
largely considered emplacement of the magmatic belt in an overall extensional
'anorogenic' regime, recent structural work in a variety of areas in the western
U.S. seems to favor a compressional or transpressional regime. Because such
evidence comes from widely scattered locations including central New Mexico,
southern Nevada, Colorado, Arizona, and western South Dakota, the results have
been interpreted as representing a regional deformation related to plate
interactions in a compressional setting. This interpretation, if correct, has
new and important implications for the Proterozoic tectonothermal evolution of
southern Lauretina and require further testing and re-evaluation of structures
and thermal histories of Middle Proterozoic intrusions across the entire
magmatic belt. In order to test this interpretation, the PI will investigate the
tectonic setting, depth of emplacement, and unroofing history of the Middle the
PI will Proterozoic Wolf River batholith and associated plutons in Wisconsin. He
will carry out a detailed field, microstructural, and Ar/Ar thermochoronlogic
investigation. The field and microstructural work will assess whether the
fabrics are synintrusive or postintrusive features and whether they are
compressional or extensional in origin. Detailed field studies mapping out
fabric orientations and assessing kinematic indicators should help distinguish
between local strains related to pluton emplacement, regional strain during
intrusion, or post-intrusive solid-state strain. The field and microstructural
work will be complemented by an Ar/Ar thermochronlogic investigation of the
plutonic complex and country rock. Whereas Rb-Sr biotite age dating results from
Wisconsin have provided us with a first-order picture of cooling and/or
reheating during much of the Proterozoic, the results are open to interpretation
and important questions remain. A detailed Ar/Ar study on several different
mineral phases (hornblende, muscovite, and biotite) should help to assess the
depth of emplacement of the Middle Proterozoic plutonic complex and to better
determine the timing an d pattern of unroofing or cooling of the Proterozoic
rocks in the region.