* 9527729
* LTREB: The Long-Term Effects of Removing Insects and Ground-Dwelling Mammals on Tropical Tree Diversity: A Community    Level Experimental Test
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1996,08/31/2002
* Stephen Hubbell, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 08/31/2002
* USD 235,718.00

The purpose of this proposal is to improve basic education in mathematics at the
postsecondary level. The underlying philosophy is that students must be actively
involved in meaningful, global learning grounded in real life situations. To
enact this philosophy, the project will develop two, three credit courses in
integrated mathematics/sciences, which will meet general education requirements
in mathematics for the Associate and Bachelor's degrees, and serve in the
preparation of teachers for grades K-12. Content will be based on critical
concepts drawn from College Algebra, College Trigonometry and Statistics.
Cooperative and discovery learning, along with the uses of interactive
multimedia, will be emphasized. Students will form teams across diverse
educational environments, and will conduct long-term studies of critical
community problems. Faculty will serve as mentors and coaches. The courses will
be developed and team-taught by faculty from all of the higher education
institutions in the metropolitan Jacksonville, Florida area, as well as two
secondary schools in the two county area. Classes will be conducted in
electronic classrooms connected via two-way audio and video. Special emphasis
will be placed on participation of women and minorities. Expected outcomes
include over 70 faculty and 1,400 students affected by the project.