* 9527882
* Chemisorption on Metal Surfaces via Density Functional      Theory Embedding of Ab Initio Finite Cluster Calculations
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Emily Carter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 02/29/2000
* USD 348,245.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting a research
effort where a hybrid electronic structure technique will be developed by Prof.
E.A. Carter of UCLA that first utilizes density functional theory to obtain an
accurate electron density distribution for a metal, which then is used (along
with its corresponding orbital representation) to provide a set of Coulomb and
exchange operators that describe the interaction of the infinite metal surface
and bulk crystal with a chemisorption region (composed of a few metal atoms and
an adsorbed molecule). The chemisorption region is then described using a local
multireference configuration interaction method in the presence of the embedding
Coulomb and exchange field derived from density functional theory. The goal is
to develop and test this hybrid DFT/CI method, with the hope that it will
provide the most accurate means yet of studying chemisorption on metal surfaces
from first principles theories. A new theory involving a mixture of quantum
chemistry and solid state physics techniques will be developed. The theory
utilizes quantum physics known for its accuracy in describing metals and quantum
chemistry known for its accuracy in describing metal-molecule chemical bonds.
These taken together are expected to provide the most accurate means yet of
modelling chemical reactions that occur on metal surfaces. Many important
industrial technologies rely on such reactions and it is hoped that the new
theory will help optimize such technologies further.