* 9527453
* Determinants of Morphological Evolution:                    A Symposium at ICSEB V                                      August 19-20, 1996; Budapest, Hungary
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Stuart Newman, New York Medical College
* Standard Grant
* Judith Plesset
* 04/30/1997
* USD 12,000.00

*** 9527453 Newman The fields of developmental and evolutionary biology are both
undergoing ferment. The vast progress in the last few years in characterizing
the genetic mechanisms involved in embryonic development has demonstrated
unexpected degrees of functional redundancy and overdetermination in these
processes. In addition, evolutionary studies have revealed surprising extents of
homoplasy and other forms of parallel morphological evolution in disparate
lineages, as well as evidence that extensive morphological diversity appeared
much earlier in the history of multicellular life than previously thought. These
phenomena have raised new questions concerning the relationship between gene
activity and the generation of biological form, and have suggested to some that
the solution to these puzzles will emerge with the development of a new
parardigm for understanding the evolution of developmental systems. It is the
purpose of this symposium on "Determinants of Morphological Evolution" to bring
together investigators in the areas of developmental and evolutionary biology
whose work evidences an appreciation of the connection between these
disciplines, and physical scientists working in the areas of morphogenesis of
condensed materials, to discuss questions of the genetic, epigenetic, physical
and life history determinants of the evolution of biological form. The
invitation by the organizers of the Fifth International Congress of Systematic
and Evolutionary Biology to present a symposium on these subjects represents an
encouragement to such interdisciplinary activity, and the site of this meeting,
in Hungary, will help foster communication among groups of scientists with
traditionally different approaches to the study of biological form. ***