* 9527439
* 1996 Meeting on Hole Burning and Related Spectroscopies:    Science and Applications to be held September 13-17, 1996 in Brainerd, Minnesota
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Gerald Small, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Nelson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 14,000.00

9527439 Small Partial support is provided to sponsor the '96 Hole-Burning and
Related Spectroscopies" (HBRS) meeting to be held in Brainerd, MN during
September 13-17, 1996. This conference will be the fifth in a series which began
in 1987 but the first request to NSF for funding. It is the major international
gathering for researchers who use hole burning and related frequency and
coherent time domain spectroscopies to understand the relationships between
disorder, electronic/vibrational structure and various dynamical processes in
complex solids and those who use the basic science to develop advanced
application concepts. The conference will address several important issues. They
include a firmer understanding of the physics associated with practical high
temperature hole burning and better approaches to the design and fabrication of
the "ideal" hole burning medium, a microscopic description of the two-level
systems which dictate the properties of glasses at low temperatures, convincing
demonstration that the spectroscopic and dynamical properties of "single"
molecules are consistent with those of an ensemble and further demonstration of
how line-narrowing and single-molecule spectroscopies combined with external
fields can improve our understanding of intermolecular interactions. The
conference topics reflect the interdisciplinary and fundamental-applied nature
of the HBRS meeting. The meeting provides a superb learning experience for
graduate students and postdoctoral fellows. Not only do they interact with
leading scientists from around the world, they will be exposed to science from
several disciplines and are stimulated to think about the applications of basic
research. %%% The technological impact that is resulting from these studies of
structural disorder and electronic structure and dynamics in glasses, polymers
and proteins is large. Advanced applications such as frequency and time domain
optical storage, and chemical sensing are examples of sign ificant developments.
***