* 9527347
* Solid State Chalcogenides From Intermediate Temperatures.   Exploratory Synthesis in Molten Salts
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Mercouri Kanatzidis, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/1999
* USD 331,758.00

Abstract 9527347 Kanatzidis This research is concerned with the use of molten
polychalcogenide salts as reactive media to explore the synthesis of new
chalcogenide materials at low and intermediate temperatures (200-500 C). Various
A2QX salts (A=alkali cation, Q=S, Se, Te) will be used in reactions with late
transition metals and main-group elements. Emphasis will be given in the
stabilization of quaternary phases. Three kinds of quaternary compounds will be
explored in this stage. One kind involves the mixed-metal system A/M/M'/Q
(M=late transition metal, M'=lanthanide, actinide). The second involves the
mixed-chalcogen system A/M/S/Te. The synthetic approach will use binary alloy
compounds as starting materials and mixed fluxes such as mixed A2TexSy. The
third kind involves the use of the thio- and seleno-phosphate fluxes in
materials synthesis. These fluxes are new and are designed to yield novel
thiophosphate and selenophosphate solids containing the PxQy n- polyanions
(where Q=S, Se). The physical properties of the new compounds, such as
spectroscopic, thermal and magnetic will be studied as a function of
temperature. In order to probe for unusual electronic phenomena, the charge
transport properties of the new compounds will be studied in detail via variable
temperature four-probe resistivity and thermoelectric power (Seebeck)
measurements on single crystals. %%% This research is concerned with new
methodologies to discover new solid state materials having various
technologically important properties. Promising materials will be studied
further and their potential for applications will be evaluated. The subject of
this proposal is performing reactions using molten salts as solvents. Molten
salts have been employed for well over 100 years for high- temperature single
crystal growth. Although many salts are high melting species, eutectic
combinations of binary salts and salts of polyatomic species often have melting
points well below the te mperatures of classical solid-state synthesis, making
possible their use in the exploration of new chemistry at intermediate
temperatures. In some cases, such salts act not only as solvents, but also as
reactants, providing species which can be incorporated into the final product.
Such studies are important because polysulfide ligands have been implicated in
the hydrodesulfurization of crude oil, where they are thought to be present at
the surface of metal sulfide catalysts. Polychalcogenide glasses also are
important as materials for non-linear optics, IR wave guides, optical switching,
and optical information storage, but the structure/property relationships have
not been well determined due to the amorphous nature of the compounds.