* 9527099
* Nonadditivity in Molecular Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Maria Szczesniak-Bryant, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 02/29/2000
* USD 262,316.00

This project supported by the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program
will study non-additivity of intermolecular interactions in a variety of
chemical systems using first principles ab-initio quantum mechanical methods.
Weak intermolecular forces and interactions are of key importance in studies of
the properties of matter in condensed phases. In such an environment, the
interaction in a pair of molecules affects the ways each of them interacts with
a third. The assumption of pairwise additivity of intermolecular interactions is
thus a very poor approximation. Most current means of simulating condensed phase
reactions either disregard non-additivity of interactions entirely, or attempt
to include it in a very crude manner, mixed together with a number of errors in
the interaction potentials. One common misconception about non-additivity is
that it originates from a single source. However, in reality it arises from a
number of fundamentally different physical phenomena. This theoretical research
is aimed at elucidating all of the effects responsible for non-additivity and to
break these down into components which are labeled dispersion, induction and
exchange. Such an analysis will lead to an improved understanding of these
effects on a fundamental level. This work will result in the development of a
number of analytical potentials which explicitly include many-body effects and
are thus suitable for simulations of condensed phases. as well as properties of
clusters.