* 9527929
* Collection, Documentation and Dissemination of Strong Motion Data From Recent Large Earthquakes in Japan
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Yoshiharu Moriwaki, URS Group, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 12/31/1999
* USD 84,160.00

9527929 Somerville The objectives of this project are to gather and provide
access to digital strong motion recordings from recent large Japanese
earthquakes; to document the source, path and site parameters required for the
interpretation and use of the data; to compare them with attenuation relations
used in the United States; and provide commentary on their relevance to ground
motions in the United States. The aim is to provide basic data for use by the
earthquake engineering research community. In the two year period between
January 15, 1993 and January 17, 1995, five major earthquakes occurred and were
widely recorded in Japan. The smallest of these earthquakes, the magnitude 6.9
Kobe earthquake of January 17, 1995, was the most damaging because of its
occurrence in a dense urban region. The four other earthquakes, with magnitudes
in the range of 7.5 to 8. 1, occurred in subduction zones, and were all larger
than any earthquake in the United States for which we have strong motion
recordings. These strong motion data are difficult to acquire, and most
investigators in the United States do not know how to acquire them. Further, the
data cannot be directly used in the development of empirical ground motion
models because different magnitude scales are used in Japan as compared to the
USA (JMA magnitude instead of moment magnitude); and epicentral distance is used
in Japan instead of the closest distance to the fault. These conditions result
in the underutilization of these potentially valuable strong motion data. The
project involves the following: 1. Gather digital strong motion time histories
together with the many categories of information that are required for the
interpretation and use of the time histories. These include source parameters
such as seismic moment, focal mechanism and tectonic category; path parameters
describing the closest distance to the recording site; and available
geotechnical data from the recording sites. 2. Using these data, c ompare the
Japanese ground motions with corresponding empirical attenuation relations used
in the United States. 3. Based on this comparison, prepare a commentary on the
records describing their appropriateness for particular seismic source regions
in the United States. The digital time histories, parameter information,
comparisons, and commentary will be archived on the Internet and provided to the
National Geophysical Data Center in Boulder, Colorado. The proposed work will
implement all of the major recommendations of the 1993 International Workshop on
Strong Motion Data concerning the dissemination of strong motion data from
recent earthquakes in Japan. ***