* 9527603
* Antarctic Meteorological Research Center: 1996-2000
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1997,07/31/1998
* John Young, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/1998
* USD 180,000.00

The Antarctic Meteorological Research Center (AMRC), one of three research
centers in the Science and Engineering Technology Center at McMurdo, is a
resource for meteorological research and a test bed for improving operational
synoptic forecasting. The Man-Computer Interactive Data Access System (McIDAS),
a versatile computer-based system for organizing, manipulating, and integrating
antarctic environmental data forms the basis of AMRC. It captures the flow of
meteorological information from polar orbiting satellites, automatic weather
stations, operational station synoptic observations, and research project data.
It also receives environmental data products, such as weather forecasts, from
outside Antarctica, and acts as a repository for existing archived data bases.
Phase I began in the 1992-93 summer season and consisted of the installation and
operation of work stations capable of manipulating and displaying Advanced Very
High Resolution Radiometer (AVHRR) data based on the existing satellite imagery
acquisition system. This was followed by the acquisition and integration of a
system that provided data collection, data display and archiving, scientific
applications, network communications, and remote user access. The McIDAS system,
developed at the University of Wisconsin in the mid-1970's, ingests
meteorological data from various sources: standard synoptic observations,
radiosonde profiles, satellite- based visible and infra-red imagery, atmospheric
profiles inverted from multi-spectral scanning sensors, and non-standard data
such as TOMS ozone data, SAR sea ice information, and the AWS network
observations. The system automatically registers, calibrates, and locates (by
geographical coordinates) the ingested information and allows a user at a work
station to manipulate the data base. The manipulations include sectorization,
false color, enhancements, brightness stretching, overlays, looping,
differencing, and are quite definitely keyed to synoptic meteorological research
and weather forecasting. The antarctic system is based primarily on data streams
provided by polar orbiters (AVHRR/HRPT and DMSP), since the look angles from
geostationary satellites are so extremely low. The full utilization of McIDAS
capabilities in producing meteorological data products useful in both
forecasting and research will include a data transfer and communications
capability to, for example, the Australian Bureau of Meteorology (ABOM), the
University of Wisconsin Space Science and Engineering Center (SSEC), the Fleet
Numerical Oceanography Center (FNOC), Monterey, and the European Center for
Medium Range Weather Forecasts (ECMRWF), Reading, U.K. The current phase
includes the expansion of the archived data base, the design of the system to
accept data from future polar-orbiting satellites, and the continuation of
product generation and user support.