* 9527083
* Cross-Site: The Effects of Indigenous Small Mammals On the  Species Composition and Structure of Chihuahuan Desert      Communities: A LTER Cross-Site Research Project
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* David Lightfoot, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 03/31/1999
* USD 199,665.00

They propose to expand an existing LTER research project to a site in Mexico.
They will examine the roles of indigenous small mammals as keystone species
determining plant species diversity and vegetation structure across the
Chihuahuan Desert grassland and shrubland ecosystem. The Sevilleta LTER site is
located at the northern biome transition of the Chihuahuan Desert/Great Plains
grasslands, while the Jornada LTER site is in the north-central Chihuahuan
Desert. They propose to add a new research site, the Mapimi Biosphere Reserve
(United Nations Man and Biosphere Program), located in the south-central
Chihuahuan Desert. This crmss-site research project will involve university
scientists with scientists from the US Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife
Service (Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge), the US Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service (Jornada Experimental Range), and Mexican
scientists (Institute of Ecology, Mapimi Biosphere Reserve). Previous research
demonstrates that indigenous small mammals are keystone species in Chihuahuan
Desert ecosys tems. Other research demonstrates that many Chihuahuan Desert
ecosystems have become desertified as a result of human disturbance, and the
persistence of desertified landscapes may result from plant resource use and
physical soil processes alone. They will experimentally determine how small
mammals affect Chihuahuan Desert ecosystems, and how small mammal influences are
affected by short-term and long-term climate change both locally, and regionally
across the Chihuahuan Desert. They will also integrate cross-site data
management network to centralize and coordinate data management activities for
the proposed research project. This data management network will include the
addition of a real-time satellite communications link at the remote Mapimi
research site in Mexico, to link that site to the existing LTER Network. The
respective US LTER sites, and Institute of Ecology in Mexico will continue the
Long-Term operation of this study beyond the three years of this requested
award.