* 9527181
* Opportunities in Support of Multidisciplinary Research:     A Center for High Performance Computing and Communication   for Structural Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Gerhard Wagner, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 09/30/2000
* USD 1,500,000.00

9527181 Wagner The establishment of a Center for High Performance Computing in
Structural Biology will tackle computationally intensive problems that have been
difficult or impossible using conventional laboratory computational resources,
but that will be solvable in the HPCC environment. The emphasis is on the
reduction, analysis, and interpretation of experimental data in structural
biology. The primary goal will be the implementation, validation, application
and dissemination of parallel protocols for the computational tasks, focusing on
problems in macromoleculap NMR spectroscopy and X-ray crystallography, including
advanced signal processing, molecular modeling, and ligand design. The Center
will have a high impact on basic science in structural biology, and on the
development and application of new hardware and software technologies to
problems that are manifestly important. The broad aims of the Center are to
extend the reach of structural biology to greater sensitivity and higher
resolution, to larger and more complex structures and phenomena, and to reduce
the time required for structure investigations. %%% The Center's structural
biology focus provides a set of problems that embody a rich diversity of
mathematical and algorithmic expression, creating a fertile testbed for the
development of HPC algorithms and software. The emphasis on experimental aspects
of structural biology, in particular, will bring HPC to bear on new problems
that are not being pursued by groups developing applications of HPC to theory
and simulation in structural biology. The architecture of the planned
computational facility will provide a versatile and cost-effective computational
environment for this effort. ***