* 9527672
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research on Variational Methods inthe Control of Nonlinear Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Heinz Schaettler, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 01/31/2000
* USD 17,204.00

9527672 Schaettler This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research award is on
"Variational Methods in the Control of Nonlinear Systems." The principal
researchers are Dr. Heinz Schaettler of Washington University, and Drs. Andrej
Nowakowski and Stanislaw Walczak of the Institute of Mathematics of Lodz
University. The researchers will combine their expertise in optimal control
theory in the area of field theory, the Dubovitskii-Milyutin method, and
nonregular/abnormal optimization problems to develop a broad and comprehensive
theory of sufficient conditions for optimality and optimal control problems. The
notion of a field of extremals and/or dynamic programming provide the
theoretical basis both from a classical viewpoint using generalizations of
Hilbert's invariant integral as well as from a modern perspective in the context
of solutions to the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman equation. They will investigate
links between geometric properties of extremals and singularities of the value
function. In particular, they will analyze the role optimal abnormal extremals
play in the construction of a regular synthesis, viz., an optimal field of
extremals. They will give special attention to control systems of Dirichlet type
for which currently only limited necessary conditions for optimality are
available. This research in applied mathematics fulfills the program objectives
of bringing together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to combine
complementary efforts and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and
competence on the basis of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit. ***