* 9527151
* MDC: A High-Performance Problem-Solving Environment for     Optimization and Control of Chemical and Biological         Processes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* J. Ben Rosen, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 09/30/1998
* USD 1,649,999.00

The primary goal of this research is the development of high-performance
problem solving environment (PSE) for the optimization and control of chemical
and biological processes, with initial emphasis on bioengineering applications.
The optimization and control of such processes requires the repetitive solution
of time-dependent partial equations (PDEs) in two or three spatial dimensions.
The requirements of this problem, which must be solved interactively, can only
be met by the use of massively parallel computers. Such a comprehensive and
powerful PSE does not currently exist, and its development presents significant
computational and computer science challenges. The initial application is the
design and optimization of a small diameter bioartificial artery. Over 600,000
surgical procedures for blood vessel replacement are conducted in the U.S.
annually, many involving synthetic polymer substitutes for small diameter blood
vessels that fail due to lack of biocompatability, which is not an issue for
bioartificial arteries. A PDE model based on continuum mechanical theory that
describes the distribution of cells, fibers, and stresses in a tissue will be
used to simulate the evolving compaction of a bioartificial artery. Optimization
of the ultimate properties of the bioartificial artery is sought, in particular
the ability to withstand pulsatile arterial pressure. PDE systems of a similar
mathematical structure commonly arise as models for chemical processes with a
need for their control and optimization. The project includes collaboration with
and input from scientists and engineers at several industrial and government
laboratories with applications in processing. To optimize or control a process
described by PDEs, the original time interval is divided into subintervals in a
multiple- shooting type approach. The PDEs on each subinterval are discretized
in space via parallel adaptive finite el ement methods to give a large system of
algebraic equations (DAEs). Parameters or control variables are then optimized,
subject to state and control variable and continuity constraints (equality and
inequality) using large-scale nonlinear programming techniques. Extensive
knowledge and research experience in adaptive methods for PDEs, DAEs, large-
scale optimization, parallel computing, computing environments, and chemical and
biological processes, are required to successfully develop such a PSE. The
reaerch team members cover this broad range of expertise, and have a successful
record of collaboration with each other.