* 9527302
* Information Theoretic Approaches for Equipment Condition    Assessment, Diagnostics and Maintenance
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Kevin Tomsovic, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 07/31/1998
* USD 76,863.00

9527302 Tomsovic This project is aimed at developing an information theoretic
approach for assessing power system equipment condition with the goal of
improving the overall integrity of the power system. This research is felt to be
particularly important in light of concerns with the quality of the nation's
civil infrastructure system. In terms of overall power system reliability and
security, individual equipment condition plays a critical role. Electric
utilities direct significant effort towards detecting accelerated aging and
preventing catastrophic equipment failures. Traditional maintenance and
condition monitoring schedules were based primarily on manufacturer recommended
fixed time intervals. In recent years due to greater economic pressures,
utilities have begun, one, to shift towards longer maintenance intervals and
two, to load equipment significantly beyond manufacturer ratings. Under normal
conditions, there is adequate design margin to allow both reduced maintenance
and some overloading. Recent sensor developments offer the ability to further
stretch equipment limits by monitoring certain key variables. Unfortunately, the
breakdown mechanism of most equipment are only partially understood so that
developed methods for early detection of equipment failures are imprecise and
unreliable. Broad experience with a particular technique is necessary to
overcome this impression and perform effective diagnosis. In addition, most
equipment has relatively long expected lifetimes so that there may not be
significant failure date to perform meaningful statistical models of failures.
Together the above factors, suggest that utilities are following practices with
limited knowledge of the long term impacts on system reliability. They may not
fully understand the limits to which their equipment can be pushed. Further,
they lack the computational framework to include their data and the experience
in a workable model. This work focuses on developing an info rmation theoretic
framework for modeling the imperfect knowledge of equipment breakdown with the
ability to easily incorporate new information as experience is gained. The long
term objective is to allow both statistical, process and heuristic data in a
model which allows for improved suggestions on maintenance intervals, diagnostic
conclusions and reliability evaluation. This project will focus on underlying
general principles of power system equipment in developing this model. ***