* 9527787
* Systematics of Anamorphic Yeasts
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Jack Fell, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/1998
* USD 125,000.00

9527787 Fell Yeasts and yeast-like organisms are a heterogeneous group of fungi
of agricultural, economic, ecological, and medical importance; interest in them
is accelerating as a result of the search for new organic compounds for
industrial and pharmaceutical uses. About 140 genera and 800 species have thus
far been recognized and named, but many more may exist in environments and
habitats poorly explored thus far. One major problem associated with studies of
yeasts, particularly the anamorphic (asexual) forms, is that they are difficult
to identify. The phenotypic characters (morphological, physiological, or
biochemical) used for classification and identification commonly show strain
variability within species, either environmentally induced or genetic. This
problem affects all laboratories throughout the world and has discouraged
researchers and students from undertaking the collection, study, and
classification of naturally occurring yeasts. Tools of molecular biology hold
promise for yielding data and characters of great utility for identification and
classification of yeasts and their relatives. In particular, nucleotide sequence
data from nuclear ribosomal genes are likely to provide powerful evidence for
similarity and close relationship among strains within a species, and between
species within genera. Dr. Jack Fell at University of Miami is working on the
ca. 22 genera of basidiomycetous yeasts and many of their putative teleomorphic
(sexual) relatives, to collect DNA sequence data useful in assessing
phylogenetic relationships among these taxa. Of special interest are forms
recovered from marine environments (open ocean, estuaries). Integration of the
new data with information on traditional taxonomic characters is another goal of
the work. One of the products is expected to be an updating of the PI's
authoritative monograph (with colleague Kurtzman at USDA-Peoria) on the yeasts
of the world.