* 9527804
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear Dynamics of Streamflow:   Classification, Predictability and Forecasting
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Henry Abarbanel, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher G. Maples
* 07/31/1998
* USD 99,000.00

9527804 Abarbanel An understanding of the dynamics (or time evolution) of
streamflow, its predictability, causality and variability at different time and
space scales is a central issue in hydrologic research. The proposed research
seeks to develop quantitative notions of predictability and dynamical similarity
of streamflow at U.S. sites, using long USGS records (60 to 114 years) of daily
streamflow that are presumed to have little human impact. Methods (based on
nonlinear dynamics) for forecasting streamflow directly from the time series
will be a byproduct of the research. In the context of climate change research,
projections of streamflow using exogenous model climate data may be needed for
many years in the future. Given uncertain inputs, it is important to assess how
quickly, and under which conditions such predictions deteriorate into random
traces, irrespective of model formalism. It may also be of interest to know, at
least qualitatively, the sensitivity of streamflow to different causative
factors. What are the implications for modeling streamflow at different space
and time scales? When is it useful to pursue deterministic, distributed or
lumped models, and when must one resort to a purely statistical approach?
Loosely speaking, streamflow results from the interaction of large scale
atmospheric circulation with slowly varying or fixed surface conditions. The
latter may lend organization to streamflow as the spatial scale of interest
(e.g., drainage area) increases, thus limiting the effective number of
"dynamical" factors that have major influence. An idea which we will investigate
is that a larger basin spatially averages over the many dynamical processes in
the climatic forcing--rainfall at specific locations, geographical features in
the basin, evaporation and soil properties which are certainly heterogeneous
across any watershed. This averaging may reduce the dimension of the response
which we sample by streamflow. Similarly, climatic fluctuations that have "stru
cture" at long time scales, (e.g., El Nino Southern Oscillation). may increase
stearmflow predictability. An interesting methodology for insights into such
processes is provided by recent advances in nonlinear dynamics, and in
particular for time series analysis from nonlinear processes. The idea is that
time series for a single state variable (e.g., streamflow) for the dynamical
system can be used to geometrically reconstruct a "state space" that contains
the essential information on predictability and complexity of the underlying
system. Predictability is measured in information theoretic terms through
Lyapunov exponents that measure the rate of divergence of nearby trajectories in
state space. Complexity is measured through generalized dimensions by an
examination of how densely the state space is filled and variations in such a
density over the state space. Strategies for forecasting the state variable in
the reconstructed state space are devised. Our analyses of the Great Salt Lake
volume using these methods have been very fruitful, and have given us the firm
conviction that significant insights into the nature of the streamflow process
and development of theoretical models for streamflow at different scales will be
possible. The approach proposed here is to systematically analyze variety of
long US streamflow data sets, to (1) see if a reconstruction of the underlying
dynamics is possible from the time series, (2) estimate Lyapunov exponents as a
measure of predictability, (3) estimate generalized dimensions to describe the
complexity of the underlying dynamics, (4) to develop effective forecasting
strategies for daily streamflow, and (5) identify how predictability and
complexity and forecasting ability vary the climatic attributes and basin
attributes such as drainage area. Of particular interest are physical thresholds
at which the response of the system undergoes a change to qualitatively
different dynamics. The existence of such thresholds is probed after the
recovery of sy stem invariants from the time series using nonparametric
regression methods with respect to the parameters of interest.