* 9527366
* A Broadband Seismic Experiment for Study of the Tectonics   and Structure of the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia Sea     Regions
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Douglas Wiens, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 03/31/2001
* USD 330,685.00

Wiens and Zhao OPP 9527366 Abstract The present day tectonics and seismological
structure of the Antarctic Peninsula and Scotia plate region are among the most
poorly understood of any location in the world. This region offers a unique and
complex geodynamic setting, as illustrated by the recent cessation of volcanism
along the South Shetland Trench and onset of volcanism and rifting in the
Bransfield Strait, the possible presence of diffuse deformation and/or
microplates in the Drake Passage region, and fast back-arc spreading behind the
South Sandwich Arc. This award supports the US component of an international
effort to study the seismotectonics and seismic structure of the Antarctic
Peninsula and Scotia Sea regions using a large scale deployment of broad band
seismographs beginning during the 1996- 1997 field season. The project will
deploy 9 broadband PASSCAL seismographs for 2 years in the Antarctic Peninsula
region, Southernmost Chile, and South Georgia Island. The following questions
will be addressed: 1) Is there seismological evidence, in the form of either
subduction zone earthquakes or seismic structure, for current subduction beneath
the Antarctic Peninsula? 2) Is there evidence from seismic anisotropy for large
scale mantle flow around South America into the South Atlantic? 3) Are regional
earthquakes and focal mechanisms consistent with current kinematic models for
the Scotia plate, which imply compressional deformation in the Drake Passage
region? 4) What is the deep structure of the South Sandwich subduction zone? 5)
What is the seismological structure of active back-arc spreading centers in the
Bransfield Strait and South Sandwich regions? Answering these questions will
help to constrain important tectonic questions such as the cause of plate motion
changes, what processes initiate back arc spreading, and the relationship
between mantle flow and surface tectonics.