* 9527190
* HPCC:  A Distributed Architecture for Rapidly Reconfigurable Assembly Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1995,04/30/2001
* Ralph Hollis, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2001
* USD 2,255,397.00

9527190 Hollis This research aims to improve assembly in product manufacturing.
Assembly is a difficult and time-consuming process to automate, especially when
small tolerances are necessary. This architecture for agile assembly is a
strategic framework using agent-based robotic elements that are precise,
modular, and extensible. These elements form sets of leased self-contained
software/hardware modules that can be programmed and operated over the Internet,
and can be brought together to form miniature agile factories for assembly. Such
a scheme requires a combination of intelligent networked communication,
distributed computing resources using high-performance processors, and
distributed sensor/actuator subsystems of novel design. Design and construction
of a prototype miniature factory according to the principles of agile assembly
architecture will be carried out to validate the research and provide a unique
and powerful reconfigurable platform for assembly research and evaluation by
industry. Partial assembly of magnetic storage disk drives will serve as a
testbed. This work aims to advance knowledge in three main areas: (1) seamless
wide area and local area networking of distributed agents emphasizing high
quality of service; (2) modular precision robotic assembly elements containing
high-performance embedded processors; and (3) a comprehensive software
environment for modeling, simulation, and programming of the miniature
factories. The results of the research could allow manufacturers to develop a
capability for geographically distributed design and deployment of assembly
systems while providing drastically reduced changeover times, higher quality,
and a new level of manufacturing system portability.