* 9527606
* Global Positioning System Measurements of Crustal Motion in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2001
* Barclay Kamb, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 08/31/2001
* USD 335,844.00

Kamb Raymond 9527606 Abstract This award supports a project to establish a
Global Positioning System geodetic network in the Transantarctic Mountains of
Antarctica to measure vertical and horizontal crustal velocities. The vertical
crustal velocities measured by GPS reflect the viscoelastic response of the
solid Earth to Antarctic deglaciation. Data from this GPS network will be used
to test models of late Pleistocene-early Holocene versus late Holocene
deglaciation of Antarctica. These data will also constrain the length of time
over which the Antarctic ice sheet disintegrated, and the distribution of the
peak glacial load. A mid-Holocene deglaciation model produces a predicted uplift
pattern in the vicinity of the Transantarctic Mountains that can be measured by
high-precision GPS geodetic measurements within a time span of four years.
Horizontal deformation induced by rebound will also be measured. These data will
also help constrain present-day changes in Antarctic ice mass by monitoring the
elastic deformation of the lithosphere resulting from ongoing glacial loading
and unloading. The lithospheric response to ongoing ice mass changes is
predicted to be an order of magnitude less than the viscoelastic response to
late-Pleistocene-Holocene deglaciation. Tectonic uplift rates are also predicted
to be very small compared to the predicted rebound signal for this region.
Baselines across faults in the Transantarctics may capture co-seismic motion if
an earthquake were to occur, or aseismic slip. The first year of the project
will be spent in technology development for, and a proof-of-concept
demonstration of, a prototype autonomous GPS station (AGS) under joint funding
with JPL. This prototype station will be powered by solar panels and will
collect data continuously during the deployment period. Data transmission via
long-range Radio Frequency (RF) transceivers acting as modems will also be
tested. The prototype station will be modified as neede d to implement a
reliable, operational network of four autonomous GPS stations in the following
year of the project, contingetn upon joint funding by NASA. The AGS network will
send daily data reports McMurdo. The network will be a permanent installation
that will continue to monitor motion in the region beyond the term of this
project. Advanced processing techniques will be employed to increase the
accuracy of the crustal velocity measurements, especially for the vertical
component. These include orbit modeling, troposphere correction, ionosphere
correction, and extraction of annual and seasonal solid Earth and ocean tidal
signals.