* 9527824
* Collaborative Research:  Volcanic Record in Antarctic Ice:  Implications for Climatic and Eruptive History and Ice      Sheet Dynamics of the South Polar Region
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Gregory Zielinski, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/1998
* USD 60,522.00

Dunbar/Kyle OPP 9527373 Zielinski OPP 9527824 Abstract The Antarctic ice sheets
are ideal places to preserve a record the volcanic ash (tephra) layers and
chemical aerosol signatures of volcanic eruptions. This record, which is present
both in areas of bare blue ice, as well as in deep ice cores, consists of a
combination of local eruptions, as well as eruptions from more distant volcanic
sources from which glassy shards can be chemically fingerprinted and related to
a source volcano. Field work carried out during the 1994/1995 Antarctic field
season in the Allan Hills area of Antarctica, and subsequent microbeam chemical
analysis and 40Ar/39Ar dating has shown that tephra layers in deep Antarctic ice
preserve a coherent, systematic stratigraphy, and can be successfully mapped,
dated, chemically fingerprinted and tied to source volcanoes. The combination of
chemical fingerprinting of glass shards, and chemical analysis of volcanic
aerosols associated with ash layers will allow establishment of a high-
resolution chronology of local and distant volcanism that can help understand
patterns of significant explosive volcanisms and atmospheric loading and
climactic effects associated with volcanic eruptions. Correlation of individual
tephra layers, or sets of layers, in blue ice areas, which have been identified
in many places the Transantarctic Mountains, will allow the geometry of ice flow
in these areas to be better understood and will provide a useful basis for
interpreting ice core records.