* 9527846
* Effects of "Bottom-Up", "Lateral", and "Top-Down" Forces on the Structure of a Phytophagous Insect Community
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Robert Denno, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 02/29/2000
* USD 229,999.00

9527846 Denno The relative importance of plant characteristics ("bottom-up") and
natural enemies ("top-down factors") in the population and community ecology of
phytophagous (plant-feeding) insects has been disputed for decades. Add to this
the effects of competition ("lateral factors") on herbivorous insect communities
and the issue becomes more complicated. To date, very few studies have
determined whether: (1) "bottom-up", "lateral", and "top-down" forces act in
concert, (2) important interactions exist among these forces, and (3) each
herbivore species is influenced by different factors such that no single force
dictates community organization. The present research employs an experimental
approach in which host plant quality, competition, and predation are manipulated
to understand the factors which influence the plant-feeding insect community in
intertidal marshes of eastern North America. The major organisms are salt marsh
cord grass, its dominant sap-feeding insects, and their major predators, hunting
spiders. Existing evidence suggests that "bottom-up", "lateral", and "top-down"
forces are all potentially important in this system, and that each herbivore
species responds to these forces differently. Thus, this system provides the
exciting opportunity to assess how these forces integrate to determine the
abundance of each herbivore species. The proposed research will make a
significant contribution toward unraveling the interactions most influential in
dictating the distribution and abundance of plant-feeding insects. The sensitive
wetland ecosystem that will be studied is strikingly similar to many
agricultural cropping systems such as rice, corn, and sugar cane. Similarities
include the uniformity of the habitat, as well as the types of herbivorous
insects and their natural enemies. The results of this study will provide
critically-needed information on the importance of host-plant factors
(fertilizer regimes and varietal resistance) and biological control agents and
how they interact to suppress agricultural pest populations.