* 9527673
* Systematics and Paleobotany of the Legume Subfamily         Caesalpinioideae
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Patrick Herendeen, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/29/2000
* USD 99,705.00

9527673 Herendeen The large plant family Leguminosae (Fabaceae) is ecologically
significant (nitrogen fixing species are common) and economically important (it
includes soybeans, clovers, and tropical tree crops). While general aspects of
taxonomic diversity are well known, many questions remain unanswered about
evolutionary changes within the family that have led to the 18,000 or so species
currently recognized. Even the closest relatives of the family remain
controversial, with recent molecular (DNA) findings suggesting the small,
herbaceous family Polygalaceae, with flowers superficially similar to
"papilionoid" blossoms of Leguminosae. The most primitive groups of legumes are
shrubs and trees classified in the subfamily Caesalpinioideae, with most genera
placed in the tribes Amherstieae and Detarieae. Dr. Patrick Herendeen of Field
Museum is working on these groups, emphasizing collection and analysis of fossil
materials and integration of these data with information collected from living
members of the subfamily studied by himself and by collaborators Anne Bruneau
(DNA analyses), Ian Ferguson (pollen morphology), and Shirley Tucker (floral
morphology). Extensive field work in Africa, a region of great species diversity
for the two tribes, will provide new specimens and materials for all these
researchers and others interested in legume systematics and evolution. Fossil
studies will concentrate on flowers, pollen, fruits, and leaves collected from
Eocene and Miocene deposits in Asia, Europe, and North America. Several extinct
genera are known or suspected, with plants distinguished by combinations of
features not found in modern, living species. Character analysis of this fossil
material will help in determining the direction of evolutionary change in
various floral and vegetative features, and in turn this will aid taxonomists in
delimiting subtribal and generic groupings and in hypothesizing phylogenetic
lineages within early legumes.