* 9527873
* 1996 Gordon Conference: Isotopes in Biology and Chemistry   to be held in Ventura, California, February 11-16, 1996
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/1996,04/30/1996
* Judith Klinman, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 04/30/1996
* USD 3,000.00

9527873 Klinman Partial support is requested for the Gordon Research Conference
on Isotopes in Biology and Chemistry to be held in Ventura, California, February
11-16, 1996. This long-standing conference has traditionally brought together
investigators from a multitude of disciplines (e.g., physical and organic
chemistry, atmospheric chemistry, and biological chemistry). As a result of its
interdisciplinary nature, the Conference has served as a breeding ground for the
generation of new concepts and methodologies in the biological sciences.
Examples include the remarkable advances in enzymes kinetics that occurred in
the 1980's: the recognition of the possible role of nuclear tunneling in enzyme
reactions; the stimulation of a systematic study of the role of magnetic field
effects in enzymatic reactions; the use of heavy atom isotope effects to probe
plant physiology and evolution; etc. In recent years, the Conference has been
moving increasingly into the area of biological chemistry. This trend is
reflected in the current program which will range from a discussion of new
aspects of H-transfer catalysis (low barrier hydrogen bonds, tunneling, and the
role of proton pools in catalysis) to the use of isotopic probes to establish
and characterize radical species in biological processes. A special session will
be dedicated to a consideration of recent applications of heavy atom effects to
characterize biological systems. Intermixed within this program will be sessions
on both physical chemistry and reaction mechanisms. One particularly strong
component of this conference is that it provides a format for the interaction of
theoreticians with experimentalists. %%% Isotopes are widely used in biology and
chemistry in order to follow processes and to understand function. This
conference seeks to bring together scientists who use isotopes in an
interdisciplinary manner in order to improve information exchange and allow
exposure to new results. It is particularly important to the developm ent of
biochemical tracer methodology that biologists be exposed to chemical
applications of isotopes. ***