* 9527003
* SBIR Phase II:  High Density Plasma Vapor Desposition of    Metal Oxide Thin Films
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/1999
* Mathias Koch, Applied Science and Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/1999
* USD 269,719.00

*** 9527003 Bourget This SBIR Phase II project will develop the High Density
Physical Vapor Deposition (HDPVD) sputter source for the growth of useful oxide
compounds such as superconducting Y1Ba2Cu307-x- (Yttrium-Barium-Copper-Oxide).
Using an electron cyclotron resonance source to sustain an oxygen plasma, large
current densities can be produced in the HDPVD source which will uniformly
sputter a large diameter YBCO target when independently biased at low voltage.
The large current density delivered to the sputtering target will yield high
deposition rates without concomitant high energy negative ion bombardment of the
deposited film, a problem typically associated with magnetron sputtering. This
project will fully characterize the parameter space for the HDPVD source and
develop a robust reproducible deposition process for the growth of high quality
YBCO films over both the front and back-sides of 4-inch diameter LaA10
(Lanthanum Aluminum Oxide)substrates. The HDPVD source has already demonstrated
high growth rates with uniform film thickness for metals deposited over 5-inch
diameter substrates, and this process can produce high quality YBCO films with
growth rates which are at least an order of magnitude larger than that
obtainable with off-axis magnetron sputtering. Once a HTS process is developed,
this project will aim to fully commercialize the HDPVD source and sell these
sources to several potential customers in the HTS (high temperature
superconductor) community. The HDPVD source could be used for the deposition of
numerous oxide materials for a wide variety of commercial applications. For
instance, one potential high volume application for YBCO films is switchable
filter banks for installation in all U.S. cellular phone repeater stations.
Furthermore, the HDPVD source could be utilized for other oxide materials such
as ferroelectrics for high dielectric or RAM (random access memory)
applications, thin film phosphors for use in emerging flat panel display
technology, and a variety of non-linear optical materials for other emerging
applications. ***