* 9527469
* U.S.-Germany Cooperative Workshops on Trenchless Excavation Technology; Dresden and Dusseldorf; September, 1995
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Tom Iseley, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christine French
* 04/30/1996
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports ten U.S. civil engineers, all of whom are junior professors
at U.S. universities, to travel to Germany in September, 1995, for a program of
conferences and site visits to learn more about a new trenchless excavation
technology developed there over the past fifteen years. They will be accompanied
by a group of practicing engineers supported by the U.S. construction industry,
who have begun using this technology in the U.S. In addition to participating in
an international conference on this subject in Dresden, the group will visit a
microtunneling manufacturing factory near Hamburg and a composite polymer
concrete (`polycrete`) pipe manufacturing facility in Luneburg and discuss the
engineering research there and to explore possible arrangements for large scale
testing of these systems and materials in the U.S. Polycrete is widely used in
Europe now as a sewer material due to its combination of strength and extremely
high resistance to corrosion and abrasion. Finally, the group will spend several
days at the new Institute for Tunneling Technology near Dusseldorf, which has
received heavy investment by German government and industry sources and is
already recognized as a world-class center of excellence. Its mission is to
develop, test, and optimize technologies for underground infrastructure systems.
There they will participate in a workshop with academic and industry researchers
to examine the educational and research needs for this technology in the U.S.
and elsewhere and the opportunities for collaboration in both research and
educational exchanges between U.S. and German institutions in this field.
Trenchless technology provides the ability to install and/or rehabilitate
underground civil infrastructure systems with minimum surface disruption and
destruction by minimizing excavation. Since its development outside the U.S.
around fifteen years ago, its use by the construction industry has grown rapidly
because it offers a safe, economical and environmentally compatible solution to
the complex problem of underground infrastructure renewal. It is very worthwhile
for the U.S. to develop its own research base for this technology to reduce
reliance on technology transfer from foreign companies. The planned research-
oriented travel in Germany will enhance interactions between U.S. academia and
U.S. industry in this area of engineering and lead to more relevant research and
training in this strategically useful technology.