* 9527667
* Collaborative Research:  Deep Ocean Ventilation Through     Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2001
* Laurence Padman, Earth and Space Research
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 05/31/2001
* USD 233,220.00

9527667 Muench The proposed project is a multi-institutional integrated study of
the outflow of newly formed bottom water from the Weddell Sea and its dispersion
into the South Atlantic Ocean. It builds upon earlier successful studies of the
inflow of intermediate water masses into the Eastern Weddell Sea, their
modification within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction with bottom water
formation processes in the western Weddell Sea. The study is called Deep Ocean
Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL) and includes six
components involving hydrographic measurements, natural tracer experiments, and
modeling studies. The study will be centered east of the Drake Passage where
water masses from the Weddell Sea and the Scotia Sea come together in the
Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and will be carried out in cooperation with the
national antarctic programs of Germany and Spain. The study has four related
objectives. The first is to assess the quantity and the physical and chemical
characteristics of Weddell Sea source waters for the confluence. The second is
to describe the dominant processes associated with spreading and sinking of
dense antarctic waters within the Weddell-Scotia Confluence. The third is to
estimate the ventilation rate of the world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate
seasonal fluctuations in the regional ocean transport and hydrographic structure
and to assess the likely influence of seasonal to interannual variability on
rates of ventilation by Weddell Sea waters. Ventilation of the deep ocean -- the
rising of sub-surface water masses to the surface to be recharged with
atmospheric gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a uniquely
antarctic phenomenon that has significant consequences for global change by
affecting the global reservoir of carbon dioxide, and by modulating the amount
and extent of seasonal sea ice in the southern hemisphere. This component of
DOVETAIL will make the hydrogr aphic observations along various transects
through the region, and deploy moored current meter arrays in the confluence
zone in cooperation with complementary German and Spanish moorings. ***