* 9527314
* Collaborative Research:  Photochemical and Optical          Properties of Antarctic Waters in Response to Changing UV-B Fluxes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* David Kieber, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1999
* USD 322,527.00

ABSTRACT K. Mopper & D. Kieber OPP 9527255 & OPP 9527314 PHOTOCHEMICAL AND
OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF ANTARCTIC WATERS IN RESPONSE TO CHANGING UV-B FLUXES The
decrease in stratospheric ozone over the Antarctic results in an increase in the
UV-B flux in the euphotic zone. The increase leads to cellular damage to aquatic
organisms, as documented by photo-inhibition and decreased productivity.
Cellular damage can occur either intracellularly, or externally at the cell
surface from biomolecular reactions with externally-generated reactive
transients. The extent of this extracellular damage will depend on the
photochemistry of the seawater surrounding the cell. Until recently, nothing was
known about the type of photochemical processes, rates, and steady state
concentrations of transients in Antarctic waters. It is proposed that field
experiments be performed which will allow the construction of predictive models
of photochemical production rates in surface waters and with depth. These
studies will involve further quantum yield measurementts, development of a
sensitive underwater actinometer system, and use of a new underwater
multichannel photometer. The model will allow the prediction of the impact of
varying levels of UV-B on the photoproduction and steady state concentration of
several key reactive transient species in the upper water column. In addition to
this effort, experiments will also be performed to study the photodegradation of
dissolved organic matter and to determine whether biologically utilizable
substrates that are formed photochemically can enhance secondary productivity in
Antarctic waters.