* 9527108
* Cross-Site: Spatio-temporal Dynamics of Canopy and Soil     Moisture: Linking Synthetic Aperture Radar Image            Phenomenology with Ecosystem Processes
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Alan Knapp, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1998
* USD 151,335.00

Soil moisture is a key controlling factor for numerous ecological and
biophysical processes. While diverse techniques are available to make point
estimates of soil moisture, spatially extensive surveys can be logistically
difficult and fraught with problems of interpolation. Remote sensing of soil
moisture offers the possibility of exhaustive spatial sampling. The efficacy of
microwave sensors (both active and passive) in measuring soil moisture is well-
studied. However, little research has focused on patterns of radar imagery of
natural landscapes. Yet, there is a distinct need to assess the potential of
Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) for routine environmental monitoring of land
surface processes. Environmental monitoring of vegetated landscapes will
increase during the next decade as data from spaceborne SAR platforms become
more readily available. The project involves the use of SAR data from the
European, Canadian, and Japanese orbital platforms to address the variation in
canopy and soil moisture and its ecological consequences. These data augment
current investigatio ns at two NSF Long Term Ecological Research (LTER) sites,
Konza prairie Research Natural Area in the northeast Kansas and Sevilleta
National Wildlife Refuge in central New Mexico. Both LTER sites are located
within ecological transitional zones (ecotones) in which soil moisture is a
major determinant of plant productivity and species composition. The primary
products are site-specific time series of soil moisture and canopy change maps.
These data will then be used to link remote sensing and groundtruth data with
ecological processes.