* 9527506
* Multimedia Courseware on Computing and Human Values:  A     Pilot-part 2
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1997
* Terrell Bynum, Southern Connecticut State University Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Rachelle D. Hollander
* 02/28/1997
* USD 74,574.00

This award continues the development and testing of interactive multimedia
courseware modules on social, ethical, and professional issues that arise from
computing technology. Multimedia `HyperCard stacks` combine video clips, sound
bites, graphics and text. The three modules under development focus on the
history of computer ethics, issues of professional responsibility, and issues of
access and equity for persons with disabilities. The modules explore important
concepts from the perspectives of disciplines engaged in study of these issues
and include scenarios that add interest and reality to the concepts. Glossaries,
bibliographies, and related articles add to the utility of the modules for
teaching and research purposes. Teachers and students are testing the modules in
classrooms and independent study settings. This grant provides funds to enrich
and continue to test the first module, and to develop and test the second and
third modules. The developers will continue to distribute the modules at cost to
universities and scholars requesting it; to demonstrate them at national
conferences and workshops; and to write articles describing the development of
the modules and their contents. The stacks will serve as protoypes for high
quality, cost effective, state-of-the-art curriculum materials on computing and
human values.