* 9527722
* Polyphenols as a Plant Adaptation to Acidic, Infertile Soils--A Positive Feedback?
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Robert Zasoski, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Dr. Carol Johnston
* 06/30/2001
* USD 354,950.00

9527722 Dahlgren Pygmy Forest species on the northern California coast contain
some of the highest levels of foliar polyphenols ever reported. Data show that
foliar polyphenol contractions in coniferous species increase as soil acidity
increases and fertility decreases. It is believed that plants produce polyhenols
in a response to increased acidity as a positive feedback mechanism. This
feedback may control the dominant form in which litter N is mobilized (dissolved
organic N vs mineral N), facilitating recovery of DON by adapted mycorrhizal
associations, minimizing N availability to competing organisms, and attenuating
N losses from leaching an denitrification. Specific objectives of this research
are to I) determine soil acidity and nutrient limitation effects on foliar
polyphenol production, ii) examine the influence of polyphenol-rich litter on
regulating release of mineral and organic N forms, iii) to determine whether
polyphenol production is a phenotypic response to soil conditions, iv) to
examine mycorrhizal changes and rhizosphere conditions along the
acidity/nutrient gradient, and v) determine DON utilization by vegetation and
their associated mycorrhizae. This research will use landscape units which have
undergone leaching for 100,00 to 500,000 years and which impose increasingly
acidic conditions and nutritional stress on plant communities. Controlled growth
chamber studies using quartz sand will examine acidity and nutritional effects
on foliar polyphenol levels in Pinus muricata (Bishop pine) and Cupressus
pygmaea (Mendocino cypress). In the field, foliar nutrient applications to
single branches of Bishop pine and Mendocino cypress and fertilizer and lime
applications to individual trees will evaluate the response of foliar polphenol
levels to changing nutrient and acidity conditions. The forms of N released
(NH4, NO3, DON) from Bishop pine, Mendocino cypress and ericaceous litter
differing in phenol and tannin levels both in field and laboratory incubation
studies w ill be examined. The forms of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and DON
in soil solutions and leachates from the incubation studies will be fractionated
into hydrophobic/hydrophilic, acid/base/neutral fractions. Release rates of
mineral N and DON will be evaluated in relation litter polyphenol, nutrient,
lignin contents. Mycorrhizal species composition and infection levels will be
determined across vegetation types and soil conditions, and rhizosphere versus
bulk soil will be evaluated acrtoss the edaphic gradient. Utilization of DON by
acid-adapted plant species and their mycorrhizae will be evaluated in solution
cultures using natural and synthetic soures of DON.