* 9527792
* Experimental Manipulation of Gypsy Moth Phenology Relative to Host Budburst
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Alison Hunter, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 279,989.00

9527792 Elkinton A high percentage of outbreaking species of tree-feeding
Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies) are spring-feeding; that is, they feed in
early spring soon after budburst of their hosts. Also, most defoliation occurs
simultaneously over wide areas, suggesting that regional weather plays a role in
outbreaks, possibly through timing of budburst and insect dormancy-breaking. We
will test the hypothesis that variable synchrony of insect emergence with host
tree budburst in spring contributes to outbreaks. The study insect, the gypsy
moth (Lymantria dispar L.) shares many traits with other spring-feeding pests,
and has been successfully used in population-level experiments. It is one of the
most important forest defoliators in North America. In this study, the timing of
gypsy moth egg hatch relative to host budburst will be manipulated in 25m
diameter replicated plots. The objectives of the study are to measure the effect
of synchrony with budburst on: overall population survival, larval dispersal by
ballooning, growth, survival and reproduction, and rates of mortality from
natural enemies. Experimental populations hatching at different times will be
created, and larvae will be collected at weekly intervals to determine changes
in density and rates of parasitism and disease. Dispersal will be measured using
larvae dusted with fluorescent powder (to record ballooning from particular tree
species) and by sampling the canopy outside the release plots at the end of the
dispersal period. Direct foliage age effects on growth and survival will be
monitored on insects protected from predation, in mesh bags. This will permit
evaluation of the relative importance of these factors and quantification of the
impact of variable synchrony with budburst on population survival. The results
will have implications for the dynamics of other spring-feeding forest insects,
as well as making an important contribution to understanding gypsy moth
dynamics. If synchrony with budburst is an im portant component of gypsy moth
dynamics, it will help us predict whether outbreaks will occur in a given year,
and thus what level of control measures may be required. Existing temperature-
dependent models that predict the timing of gypsy moth egg hatch and tree
budburst can be used to estimate synchrony and thus the potential for outbreaks.
A greater knowledge of the complex nature of population regulation of insect
herbivores may contribute to design of integrated pest management. It would help
to indicate the relative importance of disease, predators, and host plant
resistance, for population control. The work on dispersal will increase
understanding of the spread of invading insects.