* 9527681
* Development and Evolution of Caecilians                     (Amphibia: Gymnophiona)
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Marvalee Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Zoe Eppley
* 01/31/2000
* USD 175,000.00

9527681 Wake A general hypothesis in evolutionary biology is that modification
of a developmental pattern may be correlated with a change in reproductive mode.
Analysis of development of the skeleton, and some elements of the muscular and
nervous systems, in a monophyletic lineage, the amphibian Order Gymnophiona,
will test the general hypothesis of correlation of reproductive and
developmental patterns. Development in three focal species representing three
families will be analyzed. One species represents a basal family with an
oviparous, free-living larval life history, the other two are viviparous (live-
bearing with maternal nutrition). One viviparous species is terrestrial, the
other fossorial, and their developmental patterns and, consequently, adult
morphologies differ significantly. Consequently, interactions of phylogenetic
history, life history, habitat, development and function can be approached and
analyzed. Comparative development of the skull will be examined to ascertain the
basis of homology of structural elements, and the degree to which modification
of development is correlated with the factors mentioned above. The
microstructure of tooth development will be examined to understand the
development and evolution of the unique fetal dentition of viviparous forms. The
development of the vertebrae will be studied to test the hypothesis that
resegmentation is a fundamental property of development, and to determine the
process by which it occurs. The development of specific neural and muscular
elements associated with the skeletal ontogeny, such as the jaw musculature and
the hypoglossal nerve, will be studied. A diversity of techniques will be
employed: immunohistochemistry, scanning and transmission electron microscopy,
clearing and staining, and others. A program t o breed caecilians in captivity
will be established in order to: (1) provide means of examining the diversity of
reproductive modes in the lineage; (2) provide embryos at crucial developmental
stages for study; and (3) assure the maintenance of species threatened in their
natural habitats. This is an integrative study that should lead to significant
advancement in the search to understand the relationship between reproduction,
development and evolution