* 9527035
* National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1996,05/31/2002
* Jack Crow, Florida State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* W. Lance Haworth
* 05/31/2002
* USD 87,822,900.00

9527035 Crow The National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) is operated by
a consortium composed of the University of Florida, Florida State University,
and Los Alamos National Laboratory. The Laboratory is administered by Florida
State University as a national user facility, available competitively to users
on the basis of merit. Established in 1990 and dedicated in 1994, the Laboratory
through an extraordinary state-federal partnership with multi-agency
participation has developed unique facilities in support of magnet-related
research at the highest attainable magnetic fields. The Laboratory is structured
around three major thrusts: (1) user facilities developed in response to users'
needs that are opening new frontiers for science opportunities, (2) magnet
science and technology developed in partnership with the private sector to
enhance U.S. competitiveness, and (3) basic science research driven by a
partnership between external and in house users that drives high magnetic field
science and technology opportunities at and beyond the cutting edge.
&amp;&amp;&amp; During the first five years, the NHMFL established the essential
infrastructure and demonstrated its international leadership in magnet-related
technologies and science. The second five years will focus on the capitalization
of the federal and state investment to realize the full scientific potential of
the new facility. The Laboratory will have a science and magnet technology
program that will expand the current capabilities, develop new magnet systems,
and drive new science discoveries at the highest fields and at the extremes of
pressure and temperature. The Laboratory will provide continuous fields (up to
50 tesla) in the magnetic field region formerly thought to be reserved for only
pulsed magnets and pulsed fields (100 tesla for milliseconds) in the range that
has been a dream of researchers for over a decade. The availability of
opportunities in magnetic resonance at 900 MHz and beyond w ill be a critical
aspect of the Laboratory's efforts to build a users' center of excellence in
very high field magnetic resonance spectroscopies. The in-house science program
will be developed in cooperation with the external users and will address the
following research areas: highly correlated electron systems including heavy
fermions, cuprate superconductors, molecular conductors, and quantum systems;
magnetic materials; and magnetic resonance spectroscopies as applied to the
chemical, physical, and biological sciences. The laboratory is poised to become
the preeminent center for multi-disciplinary research using high magnetic
fields. ***