* 9527892
* CAREER: Skull Evolution in Early Mammals and Advanced       Cynodonts
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2001
* Zhe-Xi Luo, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 10/31/2001
* USD 200,000.00

9527892 Luo In a CAREER project with both research and education components, Dr.
Zhexi Luo of the Carnegie Museum of Natural History and the University of
Pittsburgh is studying new fossils of early mammals, mostly from China, and
using Computer Tomography (CT) methods to acquire internal anatomical characters
for comparative phylogenetic analyses. The three-dimensional graphical CT
methods allow non-destructive sampling of fossils that might otherwise be rare
or inaccessible to detailed study. Reptilian forms usually placed in the
"cynodonts" are thought to represent animal groups from which the first true
mammals evolved. New fossil findings in China have provided much new material of
these animals, some with cranial remains that provide features of the nasal,
orbital, sphenoidal, and ear regions. Changes in the structure of the skull
attendant on the evolutionary transition to mammals likely relate to functional
changes in feeding, respiration, olfaction, and hearing. With access to these
new fossils through colleagues in China and elsewhere, the PI is in an excellent
position to acquire new and potentially decisive data bearing on structural and
functional changes in the early evolution of mammals from reptilian cynodonts.
This paleontological research is to be conducted with the help of undergraduate
students enrolled in programs both at Carnegie Museum and at University of
Pittsburgh, where the PI will be working with colleagues in biology and geology
to establish new teaching and research programs in systematic biology and
vertebrate paleontology. Students will have access to the impressive collections
at the Carnegie Museum, along with associated curatorial expertise, while
retaining valuable pedagogical links at the University.