* 9527103
* Aragonite Crystallography and Diagenesis: An Old Problem    Viewed at a New Scale
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Douglas Haywick, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 02/29/2000
* USD 61,222.00

Haywick 9527103 Aragonite diagenesis is responsible for much of the calcite
cementation that lithifies carbonate sediment in contact with meteoric
porewater. Sedimentologists and crystallographers have long studied aragonite,
and a considerable data base now exists concerning the mineral's physical
properties, metastability and diagenesis. Examination of aragonite at
microstructural levels using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy
(HRTEM) is a comparably new technique, in part, because of the minteral's
instability to the electron beam. Much of what has been done to date, has
focused on microstructural features typical of all minerals (e.g., stacking
faults, twinning). Some evidence now suggests that biogenic aragonite may be
characterized by a more pervasive microstructure. Preliminary HRTEM imaging of
chalky bivalves has revealed that 5-15 nm-scale microdomains (variably
orientated lattice fringes), comprise much of the aragonite. The implication is
that bivalves, perhaps all biogenic aragonite, is heterogeneous at the
microstructural scale. Aragonite dissolution and diagenesis frequently initiates
along structural weaknesses within shells and other skeletal frameworks.
Microdomains may represent yet another structural weakness to initiate
diagenetic alteration. Alternatively, microdomains may form due to diagenetic
processes. The proposal seeks funds to address these, and other pertinent
questions regarding the origin of the microdomains, and their ubiquity within
biogenic aragonite. The study primarily targets bivalves from study sites in
Alabama, Florida and New Zealand. These three areas were selected because they
contain abundant bivalves of similar age (Plio-Pleistocene to modern), that
inhabited similar depositional environments (shallow carbonate shelf). Most
importantly, the Florida an New Zealand sites, have well documented, aragonite-
driven diagenetic histories. It will be necessary to resolve the grade of
diagenesis in order to assess the role of diss olution and alteration on the
formation of the microdomains. The New Zealand study site is particularly well
suited to do this. Here, shells of relatively pristine character occur virtually
alongside those that are partially dissolved ("chalky"), completely dissolved
(molds or calcite spar-filled molds), or recrystallized to calcite spar. This
study will use a variety of established and relatively new techniques to achieve
its goals. Thin-section petrography, enhanced by high-resolution video imaging,
and scanning electron microscopy will resolve shell fabrics, degree of
dissolution (chalkiness) and intra-and intercrystalline porosity. X-ray
diffraction will be employed to establish bulk crystallography and sample
purity. Geochemical analysis (electron microprobe, inductively coupled plasma
spectrophotometry, stable isotopes) will be used to establish trace elemental
and isotopic compositions, and diagenetic grade of thin-sectioned and powdered
specimens. These data will be used to select suitable samples for HRTEM imaging.
Ultimately, the results of this project will yield new information about the
crystallography of aragonite. Moreover, it will open up new avenues for future
research projects examining the ultrastructure of carbonate minerals, and
carbonate diagenesis.