* 9527816
* Mesozoic Break-up of Gondwanaland: Geochronology of         Antarctic Tholeiites
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Kenneth Foland, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/1999
* USD 247,000.00

Elliot and Foland OPP 9527816 Abstract This award supports a project to
investigate igneous rocks associated with the break-up of the Gondwanaland
supercontinent. The initial break-up of Gondwanaland during the Mesozoic was
associated with a major magmatic event during which voluminous extrusive lava
flows and intrusive sills and dikes were formed. Study of these igneous products
which are related to large-scale processes of continental disruption is
important in constraining the temporal and spatial nature of break-up. This
magmatism is expressed by the Karoo tholeiites of southern Africa and related
rocks in Dronning Maud Land, Antarctica, and by Ferrar tholeiites of the
Transantarctic Mountains. The geochronology of mafic igneous intrusive and
extrusive events will be examined in Antarctica in two distinct areas: in
Dronning Maud Land and in the Ross Sea sector of the Transantarctic Mountains.
The former is directly associated with the initial rifting which separated
Africa from Antarctica while the latter, the Ferrar, has a less direct
relationship but nevertheless is part of the initial phase of igneous activity.
The objectives of the research are to: (1) establish the time of emplacement and
duration of the Mesozoic magmatism in Dronning Maud Land; (2) refine the
geochronology of the Ferrar Group with the application of U/Pb zircon dating as
well as 40Ar/39Ar dating; (3) establish the timing of alteration of the
Vestfjella lavas and other post-crystallization events recorded by secondary
minerals in Dronning Maud Land; and (4) evaluate possible relationships of
Dronning Maud Land magmatism and alteration to the Lebombo Monocline in southern
Africa and to the Ferrar Group and other magmatism associated with Gondwanaland
break-up. Mineral samples will be used to date the events using the 40Ar/39Ar,
U-Pb, and Rb-Sr methods. The minerals include: primary igneous phases (feldspar,
biotite, zircon) that will be the focus for establishing timing of ma gmatic
events; and, secondary phases (apophyllite, phyllosilicate) to address timing of
alteration events. Based upon recent experience and success in related studies,
the results are expected to have broad implications not only for specific
questions dealing with the region but also for tectonic models and
geochronologic methods. The results will address: Gondwanaland break-up; spatial
and temporal relations of magmatism in Antarctica; tectonic models for the
generation of flood basalt provinces; and, application of geochronologic
methods, especially to altered basic igneous rocks.