* 9527735
* Spermatogenesis in "Pteridophytes":  Ultrastructure         Differentiation and Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Karen Renzaglia, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 140,000.00

9527735 RENZAGLIA The first successful migration of early life forms from water
to land was one of the most significant and perplexing of all biological events.
Nearly 500 million years ago, swamp-dwelling algae made it ashore and thus set
the stage for the magnificent flourish of plants and animals to come. Yet, it is
still uncertain as to what this ancestral alga looked like and how the diverse
plant groups that exist today are related to this presumed ancestor, and to each
other. This project proposes to address these fundamental questions by examining
sperm cell development and structure in a critical group of seedless vascular
plants, the OpteridophytesO. Plants included among the OpteridophytesO include
ferns, club mosses, spike mosses, quillworts, and horsetails. Sperm cells in
modern OpteridophytesO hold clues to the functioning, structure and evolution of
ancient land plants. Swimming sperm are the only motile cells of contemporary
plants and as such they carry traits of their aquatic algal ancestors. Tracing
their differentiation and architecture provides clues to early land plant
lineages and will eventually identify evolutionary threads leading all the way
back to the ancestral algae. Ten OpteridophytesO, species whose sperm cells are
thought to resemble most closely those of the first terrestrial organisms, will
be targeted for electron microscopic examination. More than 500 detailed
micrographs will be taken for each plant. These photographs will be analyzed and
three-dimensional images will be prepared to depict the stages of development.
In addition, computers will track and analyze information on approximately 100
cell traits, from cell shape to protein components. Emphasis will be placed on
examining the role of proteins that are involved in organizing the structural
entities of these highly complicated motile cells. The results will help place
these ten informative species more correctly on the plant worldOs complex
genealogical tree. These analyses will also more clearly resolve which modern
algae are the closest relatives to terrestrial plants and the sequence of
appearance of the primitive plant groups during the early history of plant life
on land. Beyond that, these studies provide more essential information about the
organization, differentiation and evolution of cells in all forms of life.