* 9527060
* Quantitative Constraints on the Emplacement Style and       Eruption Duration of Continental Flood Basalt Lava Flows
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Stephen Self, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/1999
* USD 220,700.00

9527060 Self Recent work on the Columbia River flood basalts and the ongoing
Kilauea eruption has led to a new hypothesis for the emplacement of flood basalt
lava flows. Contrary to the results of previous workers, flood basalt lava flows
could not have been turbulent. Instead, evidence indicates that these flows were
emplaced over a period of years as inflating pahoehoe sheet flows. While the
physical evidence is compelling, initial work still leaves many unanswered
questions about the mechanics of the eruption and emplacement of these huge lava
flows. Review of available data and conducting some new field experiments with
an emphasis on large sheet flows will provide insight into inner workings of
flood basalt lava flows. This investigation of the key physical processes will
allow L. Keszthelyi to extend his current numerical modeling efforts of the CRB
flows initiated under an NSF Earth Sciences Postdoctoral Fellowship. Combining
careful measurement of flood basalt lava flows in the CRB and observation of
active flows in Hawaii into numerical models is the only way to place
quantitative constraints on the emplacement style and eruption duration of
continental flood basalt lava flows. This will lay the necessary foundation for
future quantitative estimates of the atmospheric and climatic impact of flood
basalt eruptions. The proposed research will also lead to significant advances
in understanding the behavior of lava flows in general.