* 9527789
* Entry of Sewage-Derived Organic Matter from McMurdo Station, Antarctica, Into the Benthic Food Web and its Biological   Consequences
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1997
* John Oliver, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/1997
* USD 124,531.00

Abstract The population of the United States Antarctic Program at McMurdo
Station is approximately one thousand people in the austral summer. Untreated
sewage is disposed through a macerator and released into the marine environment
as effluent directly offshore of the station at the twenty meter depth contour.
Although the Principal Investigators have previously mapped the boundaries of
the sewage effluent plume in the water column, the degree to which anthropogenic
sources of organic enrichment is taken up and passed through the antarctic
benthic food web is unknown. Coincidentally, the foundation for understanding of
the structure, composition and functioning of antarctic benthic communities
comes primarily from field research conducted within the boundaries of the
McMurdo sewage outfall plume. The purpose of this research is to determine if
sewage-derived organic material is assimilated by the benthic food web and its
extent of influence and if there is a biological response to anthropogenic
organic enrichment and how this compares to natural organic enrichment by seals.
This research will provide an understanding of the relative contribution to
natural organic enrichment by seals. A secondary purpose will be to understand
the relative contribution of different organic sources to the benthos and the
way that this material moves through the food web. The Principal Investigators
will use stable carbon, sulfur, and nitrogen isotope ratios and fecal-derived
bacteria as indices and compare the influence of sewage and seal-derived organic
matter with natural organic sources from the under-ice, benthos, and water
column. They will test the hypothesis that sewage influence is greater than
previously thought. This understanding is essential for effective station sewage
management and policy decisions and for the design and interpretation of polar
benthic research conducted in the vicinity of human inhabitation or other
sources of organic enrichment.