* 9527131
* Multidisciplinary Challenge (MDC): Parallel and Distributed Computing for Solving Large Structural Biology Problems
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/1995,12/31/2001
* Dan Marinescu, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kamal Shukla
* 12/31/2001
* USD 2,385,000.00

9527131 Marinescu Dr. Marinescu and his collaborators will develop algorithms
and programs for real time data acquisition and analysis of crystallographic and
cryEM data. These are required to process data produced at high rates. 10 Mbits
per second or more, by new photon sources like the Advance Photon Source and by
CCD detectors. Similar data rates are produced by state of the art electron
microscopes equipped with CCD detectors such as the new Philips CM200 installed
at Purdue. Real time analysis of such data streams require parallel and
distributed computing. The research will be done by an interdisciplinary
collaboration among members of Purdue's Center for Structural Studies and
Department of Computer Sciences. The biological objectives are to provide
improved tools for the structure determination of proteins, nucleic acids, and
complexes such as viruses, virus-receptors, and membrane bound cell surface
molecules using X-ray crystallography, cryo-electron microscopy (cyroRM), and 3D
image reconstruction. An essential requirement for this is the fusion of
structural biology and high performance computing. The computer science
objective is to create new algorithms, parallelize old ones, and design
methodologies for the high performance computing required in structural studies
of biological macromolecules. %%% The goal is to provide an integrated solution
for the computational side of structure determination from data acquisition to
data analysis and data visualization and to incorporate into our system programs
developed elsewhere, e.g., the CCP4 suite. This group is in a unique position
due to the extensive experience in structural biology augmented by expertise in
computer science and mathematics. This project builds on ongoing collaborative
research between faculty in the Structural Biology group and Computer Science
department. ***