* 9527470
* The Tenth International Conference on Frankia & Actinorhizal Plants on August 6-11, 1995 at the University of California in Davis, California
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Alison Berry, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Rona Hirschberg
* 07/31/1996
* USD 5,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F NR0 J C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l !!/ J !!/ J 4 @ 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; 9527470 Berry This is an award to support expenses
for young investigators in two categories to attend the Tenth International
Conference on Frankia and Actinorhizal Plants, held at the University of
California, Davis, California, on August 6-11, 1995. Travel expenses were
provided for four outstanding young investigator, invited symposium speakers,
whose work has led to major recent advances in the field of symbiotic nitrogen
fixation. Funds were also used to provide partial support for young
investigators with excellent research programs and whose students made
presentations, or who otherwise had need for financial support. The topic of
this meeting was both timely and important in understanding the extent of
biodiversity which exists. It is well known that bacteria alone function to
continually introduce molecular nitrogen into the biosphere, a process upon
which all eucaryotic life owes its existence. In this plan, plant symbiotic
nitrogen-fixation occurs via two recognized systems, the
rhizobium/bradyrhizobium nodulation mechanism and the frankia /plant
association. Based on present know ledge, the latter plant association occurs
predominantly in association with fast-growing trees (both temperate and
tropical region) and tropical grasses. Unfortunately, this route for nitrogen
fixation has received limited attention, although it is perhaps the most
important entry port for molecular nitrogen into the biosphere in environmental
bioreclamation projects, particularly in tropical regions. As a result of this
and because of the importance of learning more about how this activity operates,
the conference proceedings will be published as a volume of Physiologia
Plantarum. A significant number of highly productive young investigators
attended the conference, which provided an important forum to share information
and to establish research and communication networks for the future. This Award
was jointly supported by the Metabolic Biochemistry and the Microbial Genetics
Programs, Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences. *** ; Oh +' 0 S u m m
a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( / $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Berry,
Alison M Shelley A. Graves Shelley A. Graves @ C J @ @ C J @ Microsoft Word 6.0
2 ; e = e j j j j j j j 1 S U U U % z * ) T } E j j j j j S ~ j j j j S 9527470
Berry This is an award to support expenses for young investigators in two
categories to attend the Tenth International Conference on Frankia and
Actinorhizal Plants, held at the University of California, Davis, California, on
August 6-11, 1995. Travel expenses were provided for four outstanding young
investigator, invited symposium speakers, whose work has led to major recent
advances in the field of symbiotic nitrogen fixation. Funds were also used to
provide partial support for young investigators with excellent research programs
and whose students made