* 9527986
* Mathematically General Predictions and Plant Population     Dynamics:  Experimental Tests with Cardamine Pensylvanica
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2002
* Jane Molofsky, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 03/31/2002
* USD 204,950.00

9527986 Molofsky Ecologists are increasingly called upon to develop predictive
models about how the effects of human-induced changes in the environment will
affect the future performance of populations and communities. Although simple
mathematical models are often used as a basis for such predictions, we know very
little about the relationship between the qualitative predictions of these
models and the behavior of real populations. However, given the limited
resources available to ecologists, it will be impossible to construct
realistically detailed models for all situations. Thus, one of the most critical
tasks facing ecologists today is to determine when (if ever) the predictions of
simple models adequately reflect the effects of changes in environmental
conditions. Research funded by this award addresses that goal by testing whether
simple population models adequately predict changes in abundance for populations
of an annual plant (Cardamine pensylvanica) grown over multiple generations
under controlled environment conditions. By experimentally manipulating
environmental conditions and monitoring long-term population dynamics, we will
be able to test whether the mathematically general predictions of simple models
capture ecologically general features of population dynamics. Experiments will
allow us to propose conditions for which simple models should or should not be
able to capture important aspects of plant population dynamics in a variety of
natural and experimental settings. Findings will have implications for
environmental planners, conservation biologists, and natural resource ecologists
involved in modelling effects of anthropogenic perturbations and natural
disasters on plant populations.