* 9527522
* Career:  Environmental Heterogeneity and the Relative Roles of Top-Down and Bottom-Up Forces in Oak Herbivore           Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Mark Hunter, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 01/31/2000
* USD 120,000.00

9527522 Hunter Most ecologists agree that populations of herbivores are
influenced by both the availability of suitable plant food and by the actions of
their natural enemies. There is no consensus, however, on how the relative power
of these two processes varies in different environments. This project combines
experimental approaches and field sampling to assess changes in the relative
importance in food quality and natural enemies on populations of insect
herbivores that feed on oak trees. The quality of oak leaves will be manipulated
by fertilization of trees in a plantation, and natural enemies will be excluded
from a subset of the trees. Sampling will determine whether insect populations
respond more to changes in food quality than to changes in predation pressure.
The results from the oak plantation will be compared with a natural field site,
the Coweeta Long-Term Ecological Research Site, where oak trees grow along a
gradient in elevation. The results will add to our understanding of the
environmental conditions under which predators or food quality dominate
populations of herbivores. Humans are interested in managing populations of many
kinds of herbivores. Insect pest of fields and forests, and mammals such as deer
and caribou, are among the herbivores that we seek to control because of their
effects on food production and recreation. Judicious management of herbivore
populations requires understanding of the factors that influence their
population ecology. The results of this project will help determine the
circumstances under which biological control or hunting will aid or hinder
management goals.