* 9527601
* U.S. Leadership in Sustainable Technologies
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,04/30/2000
* James Poirot, American Association of Engineering Societies Inc
* Continuing grant
* William S. Butcher
* 04/30/2000
* USD 320,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F ?? l C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t | O b j e c
t P o o l ?? l ?? l 4 @ $ % & ' ( ) * + , - . F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document
MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; @ B " ! ` a q . } q ? ` @ ` @ ENG -9527601 Tollerton
The US member of the World Federation of Engineering Societies (WFEO) is the
American Association of Engineering Societies (AAES). AAES is providing the
chair and secretariat for the WFEO Technology Committee. The Committee s mission
is to lead the engineering profession worldwide in the promotion and application
of sustainable technologies . In pursuit of that mission, the Committee s
objective is to encourage research into and educate about sustainable
technologies by collecting and disseminating information available from multiple
sources including several parts of the US government, other US sources, and from
foreign sources via other members of WFEO. Among the transfer methodologies to
be explored for possible use by AAES and the WFEO Technology Committee to carry
out this objective would be the new Global Network for Environmental Technology
(GNET) and the World Engineering Network (WEnet). GNET is an electronic
communications system developed by the U.S. Government for exchanging
information and locating opportunities in environmental technology. WEnet is a
compu terized information and networking system, integral to GNET, which has
been developed by the World Engineering Partnership for Sustainable Development
for use by the world engineering community. *** Oh +' 0 $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT ENG -9527601 Deborah S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t
i o n ( # J. White Deborah J. White @ o l @ @ o l @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e
% | % l l l l l l l 1 T < @ l l l l l l l l l 4 ENG -9527601 Tollerton The US
member of the World Federation of Engineering Societies (WFEO) is the American
Association of Engineering Societies (AAES). AAES is providing the chair and
secretariat for the WFEO Technology Committee. The Committee s mission is to
lead the engineering profession worldwide in the promotion and application of
sustainable technologies . In pursuit of that mission, the Committee s objective
is to encourage research into and educate about sustainable technologies by
collecting and disseminating information available from multiple sources
including several parts of the US government, other US sources, and from foreign
sources via other members of WFEO. Among the transfer methodologies to be
explored for possible use by AAES and the WFEO Technology Committee to carry out
this objective would be the new Global Network for Environmental Technology
(GNET) and the World Engineering Network (WEnet). GNET is an electronic
communications system developed by the U.S. Government for exchanging
information and locating opportunities in environmental technology. WEnet is a
computerized information and networking system, integral to GNET, which has been
developed by the World Engineering Partnership for Sustainable Development for
use by the world engineering community. ***