* 9527550
* Regional Structure of the Antarctic Peninsula Derived from  ERS-1 SAR Mosaic: A Study of Upper/Lower Plate Interactions During Subduction of the Antarctic/Aluk Ridge Crest
* O/D,OPP
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Terry Wilson, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/1997
* USD 24,956.00

Abstract This award supports a project to use synthetic aperture radar (SAR)
data from the European ERS-1 satellite for a structural analysis of the
Antarctic Peninsula. This project constitutes a demonstration of the use of SAR
data for geological and geophysical investigations in largely ice covered
regions. The Cenozoic tectonic evolution of the Antarctic Peninsula involves a
history of geometrically simple orthogonal plate subduction, with successive
collision of fracture zone-bounded segments of the Antarctic-Aluk ridge crest
from south to north along the convergent margin. It has been proposed that the
subducted fracture zones are reflected in geological and structural segmentation
of the Antarctic Peninsula and, therefore, a direct mechanical interaction
between the upper and lower plates along the subducting margin is suggested.
Structural mapping from a synoptic ERS-1 SAR mosaic of the entire Antarctic
Peninsula should document the regional continuity of any fracture zones into the
continental crust and any systematic changes in structure within the peninsula
that may be linked these fracture zones. The goal is to systematically evaluate
the impact of subducting fracture zones on the upper plate along the convergent
margin. The Antarctic Peninsula provides an unrivaled opportunity for such a
study because the ocean floor record is well documented, Oground truthO exists
from high-quality geologic mapping and field structural data, and the convergent
margin represents the least complex scenario of fracture zone/trench
interaction. The results of this study can provide a model for other convergent
margins worldwide where the tectonics are more complicated. Furthermore, this
approach, using an ERS-1 SAR mosaic, will serve as a prototype for SAR-based
structural mapping in ice-covered terrain that should prove useful when RADARSAT
data becomes available.