* 9527130
* MDC: Integration of Symbolic Computing with Framework of    Classes and Problem-Solving Archetypes
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Steven Koonin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 09/30/1999
* USD 1,828,000.00

The goal of this project is to help scientists and engineers carry out
computational tasks more effectively by doing research on: - The integration of
symbolic and numeric computation to facilitate problem specification,
exploration and result verification. - Hierarchies of reusable computational
abstractions organized in libraries with well-defined navigational structures. -
Exploiting commercial standards and tools for object-request brokers, compound
documents, and collaboration infrastructure. The project takes a novel approach
to problem-solving environments (PSEs). Its focus is on the entire process of
problem-solving from initial conception, symbolic specification, solution,
visualization, comparison with experimental data, and feed back. The project
focuses on problem-solving environments, not merely programming environments.
This focus leads to research on reusable abstractions at all levels of problem-
solving. Important abstractions include the problem-solving method itself,
method-specific abstractions for sequential and parallel program design,
reasoning and debugging, performance analysis and tuning, and frameworks for
class libraries. PSEs are more useful when they are more specific. However,
rather than build one problem- solving environment for one class of user,
application domain, programming language and machine, this project aims at the
basic research that will enable us to develop tools for building specific PSEs.
To use a metaphor, rather than doing research on workbenches we want to do
research on machine tools that can be used to build workbenches. Traditional
PSEs deal with extending a workstation environment whereas this project is
concerned with developing structured environments for problem-solving.
Scientists and engineers collaborate when they solve problems, and they share
much more than code. PSEs based on collaboration also provide object-request
brokering and compound multimedia document interfaces. Since this vision is both
novel and ambitious, a critical aspect of the project is leveraging methods and
tools developed for scientific, commercial and home-computing applications.