* 9527115
* Cross-Site: Saurian Malaria: A Long-Term Study
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Joseph Schall, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 12/31/1999
* USD 208,536.00

BOREAS BSR Ballston BioScience Bioinformatics Bitnet CEAS CENR COI COV CRB
Christensen Clements Clementsian CoI Collins Curtis DCA DD DDD DEB DEB's DGC
Delmarva Detling Detrended Dioecious Drosophila Dulles EROC Edwards Erag9527115
Schall This project will continue long-term ecological studies on the malarial
parasites of lizards. Three sites will be used: (1) the Hopland Field Station in
northern California where field and laboratory studies on lizard malaria have
been underway for 17 years, (2) the Luquillo LTER site in Puerto Rico where
preliminary data were gathered, and (3) the eastern Caribbean island of Saba
where other recent surveys have been conducted. The broad goal of this project
is to continue studies at all three sites for at least the next decade. The
research will examine the distribution, abundance, sex ratio, and interspecific
interactions in three species of malarial parasites in lizard hosts. One species
of malaria infects the western fence lizard in California. The ecology of this
species is perhaps the best known of any non-human malaria. Two other malaria
species coexist in the Caribbean. Parasite abundance, sex ratio, and
interspecific associations all interact over ecological and evolutionary time.
These long-term studies will provide the necessary base-line data for
understanding this host-p arasite system. Three issues will be addressed. First,
the distribution and abundance of the parasites will be followed over time and
compared among sites. Classical and recent models of parasite prevalence will be
explored with these data. Second, recent theory on sex ratios of malarial
gametocytes will be tested by taking advantage of the different levels of
prevalence at the tropical and temperate sites and as parasite prevalence
changes over time. Third, interspecific interaction, especially facilitation,
will be explored for the two coexisting species of malarial parasites at the two
tropical sites. The relative and absolute abundances of the two parasites could
effect interactions between the lizards. Malarial parasites are a diverse,
geographically widespread group. Their importance to the biology, including
population biology, of humans is well documented. Studies on lizard malaria now
suggest that Plasmodium can be of central importance to non-human hosts as well,
including population and even community-level effects. The Anolis lizards of
Caribbean islands are extremely abundant and influence the entire biotic
environment because of their diet of insects. Thus, lizard malaria can stand as
a model system to study host-parasite ecology and its impacts on other aspects
of the biota.