* 9527954
* Mathematical Sciences: Mapping the Dynamics of Neural       Network
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Jack Peck, Ithaca College
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 93,584.00

Peck In this multidisciplinary project, the investigator at Ithaca College and
his colleagues Guckenheimer and others at Cornell University focus upon studies
of the stomatogastric ganglion. This small neural network with approximately 30
neurons is a central pattern generator that coordinates movement of the gastric
mill and pylorus of crustacea. The investigators construct compartmental models
of individual neurons based upon experimental measurements and amalgamate these
into models for subnetworks. These systems provide a testbed for the development
of algorithms to explore the bifurcations of dynamical systems. Particular
attention is given to those aspects of the systems that involve multiple time
scales. The goal of the project is to improve understanding of dynamical
processes in biological systems, with an emphasis upon neural systems. The
investigators work in a multidisciplinary setting, combining experiment and
mathematical modeling, giving due attention to both mathematics and
neuroscience, and ensuring that the two interact at all times in the work. The
larger goals are pursued in the context of specific systems, namely the study of
a small neural circuit that controls rhythmic motions in the foregut of
lobsters. This model system has been chosen for its modest size and
accessibility for experimental manipulation. The project aims to understand how
neural systems switch among motor patterns and how they regulate these patterns.