* 9527710
* RUI:  Competitive Co-Existence of Two Predators in a        Spatially Patterned Landscape
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Ann Rypstra, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 04/30/2000
* USD 200,000.00

9527710 Rypstra This research focuses on the effect of tillage practices in
soybean fields on the survival and coexistence of two species of wolf spider. We
will test the hypothesis that the coexistence of these two spider species
differing in competitive ability, colonization ability, and longevity depends on
the degree of fragmentation and disturbance in their habitat. The two species of
spider prefer patches of plant debris on the soil surface - a feature of soybean
fields maintained under conservation tillage practices. We will monitor the
spiders in tilled and untilled soybean fields and manipulate the spatial pattern
of their environment by localized tilling or addition of mulch. These
manipulations will enable us to understand how habitat destruction and
fragmentation change the interaction between the two species and determine the
situations where the interaction results in localized extinction. Empirical data
will be used to build a computer model to extend our understanding of species
coexistence to longer time frames and more general situations. The spider
community is diverse and constitutes nearly 50% of the predatory fauna in
soybean fields, but it is poorly understood. Understanding the activities and
interactions of spiders in conventional till and no-till soybean fields is a
critical step towards understanding the effect of tillage practices on this
important crop.