* 9527080
* Spectroscopic Studies of Energy Transfer in Low Temperature Matrices
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Julanna Gilbert, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 12/31/1999
* USD 272,017.00

In this project in the Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry Division,
Gilbert will investigate the spectroscopy and photochemistry of various
nitrogen- and phosphorus-containing small inorganic radicals and molecules, such
as energetic halogen amines and phosphenes, in low-temperature matrices. Energy
transfer will be studied in species such as NX2 and PX2, where X = F, Cl. The
intermediates produced in the photolysis of M(N3)3, where M is a Group 3 atom,
will also be examined. Ultraviolet/visible absorption and laser-induced
fluorescence spectra will be obtained from the matrix-isolated species to
characterize their electronic states as well as to aid in understanding the
photodissociation dynamics of the gas-phase compounds and their intermediates.
Gaussian 94 calculations will be carried out on the radicals formed. The family
of nitrogen-containing compounds known as halogen amines as well as that of
azide compounds are interesting because they are notoriously unstable under
standard conditions of temperature and pressure. The reasons for this behavior
are not understood, but certain trends are observed, such as increasing
instability in going from compounds containing fluorine to those containing
chlorine, bromine, and finally iodine. An understanding of these issues in the
halogen amines and comparison with the phosphorus compounds may aid in
elucidating the chemical nature of other nitrogen- and phosphorus-bearing
species. Practical applications include the chemical etching of surfaces in
semiconductor processing, tribological thin-film coatings, and better reagents
for electronic-transition chemical laser systems.