* 9527758
* Molecular Systematics of the Neotropical Cichlidae with     an Emphasis on Middle American Cichlids
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Charles Lydeard, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 02/28/1999
* USD 115,000.00

9527758 LYDEARD Neotropical cichlids are a group of fascinating freshwater
fishes that have long attracted the attention of professional biologists and
hobbyists alike. Neotropical cichlids are found from the Rio Grande in Texas to
southern South America. Cichlids have evolved into a variety of shapes and sizes
that are ecoloeically similar to North America's largemouth bass, bluegill, and
rapid water-loving, bottom-dwelling fish called darters. Cichlids are unique
among fish in that they build nests, care for their young, and defend
territories. These features have also made cichlids popular with aquarium
hobbyists; familiar aquarium varieties include the Jack Dempsey, firemouth,
Aztec, oscar, angelfish, and discus. Unfortunately, despite the widespread
appeal of Neotropical cichlids, we still know very little about the
relationships among these species. The primary objective of this research is to
examine the relationships of Neotropical cichlids using DNA sequencing
technology. By actually sequencing portions of several genes from
representatives of Neotropical cichlid species, we expect to construct a tree
depicting their relationships to one another. Understanding the relationships of
Neotropical cichlids will enable biologists to learn how the various
morphological varieties evolved and provide an important framework for future
ecological and behavioral studies. In addition, our work may provide useful
information for improving cichlid stocks for the aquarium trade.