* 9527497
* Experimental Studies of Surface Transport Aspects of        Electrodeposition and Corrosion
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Ian Suni, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* RAUL MIRANDA
* 12/31/1998
* USD 197,339.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9527497 The goal of this effort is to develop and apply a
methodology to measure surface diffusion on electrodes at the solid-liquid
interface. The approach uses voltammetry, differential capacitance, and surface
second harmonic generation (SHG). Systems studied include lead on gold (111) and
chlorine, lead, or copper on silver (111). Experiments on vicinal gold (111) use
a purely voltammetric measurement to obtain the relative coverage on terraces
and steps; the dependence of this partitioning on the deposition rate from
dilute solutions gives an indirect measure of surface diffusion. Direct
measurements of surface diffusion. Direct measurements of surface diffusion on
silver (111) use surface SHG, a nonlinear optical probe of adsorption capable of
submonolayer selection; these experiments are two types: measurement of the
decay of a surface diffraction grating, and measurement of the decay of a one-
dimensional concentration step. The first technique employs laser-induced
thermal desorption (LITD) to create a diffraction grating and uses SHG to
monitor its rate of decay, which is caused by surface diffusion. The second
techniques involves creation of a step concentration profile, either by LITD or
by masked vacuum evaporation, the decay of which is monitored by SHG. A
Boltzmann-Montano analysis of the decay gives the coverage-dependent diffusivity
that is needed to describe macroscopic electrodeposition processes. The SHG
signal is related empirically to surface coverage by two electrochemical
methods: stripping voltammetry and differential capacitance. Surface diffusion
is one of the fundamental steps in electrodeposition and electrodissolution, and
is rate-limiting in some industrial situations. Nevertheless, the phenomenon is
little studied because it is experimentally inaccessible. This study aims to
rectify this with the eventual goal of incorporating microscopic information on
surface diffusion and nucleation into feature-scale (morphological) simula tion
of sub-half-micron electrodeposition of noble-metal interconnects and electrical
contacts. ***