* 9527536
* Structure of Plant-Arthropod Associations: Impact of Herbivores on Community Composition and Host Performance
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Richard Root, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* Susan Mopper
* 01/31/2001
* USD 150,000.00

9527536 Root The conditions created by a long-term experiment involving the
removal of insects from abandoned agricultural fields provide an exceptional
opportunity to examine key assumptions in models of plant succession. In a
previous experiment, the suppression of plant-feeding insects released the
controls on goldenrod populations. Under these circumstances, goldenrods became
strong competitive dominants that suppressed many plant species that are
prominent in normal plant succession. This study will measure the changes that
follow the withdrawal of insecticide treatments to reveal how herbivores can
account for vegetational change in communities that are dominated by plants with
strong inhibitory influences. The results of this experiment will also
demonstrate whether the removal of insects, a major component in most
terrestrial ecosystems, merely sets back the normal sequence of successional
changes or if it causes the community to develop along an entirely new
trajectory that produces a persistent and previously unknown plant association.
In another set of experiments, the attributes that are responsible for the
dominance of goldenrods will be examined. Previous work has shown that
goldenrods respond to herbivore damage by reducing their fecundity, but not the
quality of their seeds. As is the case with our understanding of the population
biology of most plants, little is known about the fate of the seeds after they
leave the parent. The availability of germination sites, loss of viability in
aging seeds, size of the seed bank, and dispersal of seeds will be addressed in
field experiments in isolated gardens where the density and age of seeds are
controlled. This investigation will further our understanding of management
strategies for fields in long-term fallow. The studies on seed dispersal and the
dynamics of seed banks will provide better insight into the processes involved
in the establishment of weed populations.