* 9527317
* Cross-Site: Collaborative Research: Mycorrhizal Responses to Nitrogen Eutrophication at Five Mesic and Semi-Arid Sites
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Nancy Johnson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1999
* USD 103,469.00

9527317 Johnson Although nitrogen is frequently the most limiting nutrient in
ecosystems, continuous, elevated inputs of nitrogen may cause significant
ecosystem stress. Deposition of anthropogenic nitrogen has been associated with
recent losses of plant as well as fungal diversity throughout Europe. Little is
known about the effects of atmospheric nitrogen deposition on the structure and
function of North American grasslands and shrublands, although as much as 30 kg
nitrogen per hectare per year is deposited in southern California, with lesser
amounts elsewhere in the US. The three principal objectives of this research
will be to (1) assess species composition changes of fungi during nitrogen
eutrophication in mesic to semiarid grasslands using microscopy and
immunoflourescence, (2) assess the kinds of mycorrhizal fungi under nitrogen
eutrophication to indicate the mutualistic or parasitic effects of fungi, and
(3) conduct bioassays to determine whether inferior mutualists predominate after
nitrogen eutrophication. This study will examine the effects of nitrogen
eutrophication on mycorrhizae at four experimental grasslands within the Long-
term Ecological Research network and at a shrub-grasslands in southern
California. These grasslands in Michigan, Minnesota, Kansas, New Mexico, and
California form a precipitation and fertility gradient. The effects of nitrogen
euthrophication will be studied on plants, mycorrhizal fungi and soils in
experiments that have previously been established and in new plots at these
sites. This research is designed to assess the ranges and variances of
mycorrhizal responses to nitrogen at three scales: at individual plant-root
interfaces, within grasslands communities, and across a climatic and soil
gradient. This is a first step toward assessing the potential effects of
nitrogen eutrophication on the structure and functioning of mycorrhizae-plant
interactions in grasslands in the US. This research is important because
grasslands are the basis for rang e resources and beef production in North
America.