* 9527468
* Molecular Electronic Structure Theory:  Methods and         Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Henry Schaefer III, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 02/28/1999
* USD 417,600.00

In this project, which is supported by the Theoretical and Computational
chemistry program, professor Schaefer at the University of Georgia will continue
his investigations of the electronic structure of atoms and molecules and the
reactions which they undergo. The research program is composed of two parts. The
first is the development and testing of new methods, while the second is the
application of these methods to relevant and interesting chemical problems. The
methods to be developed are all aimed at a more accurate description of the
potential energy surface(s) which describe a molecule and the energy changes
once the molecule is distorted and reaction occurs. Of particular focus in this
granting period will be an implementation of coupled cluster methods applicable
to open shell species. Additionally Schaefer will investigate approximations to
another electron-correlation method, namely second-order configuration
interaction. During this grant period a number of chemical applications will
also be pursed. A partial list of these projects includes: a detailed
examination of the phenylcarbene/tropylidene potential energy surface; the
equilibrium geometry of the ammonia dimer; an investigation of a direct iron-
iron bond in the complex Fe2(CO)9. Further investigations will also probe
whether hybrid density functional theory Hartree-Fock methods can resolve the
apparent inconsistencies between molecular mechanics and experiment for the
thermochemistry of C20H20.