* 9527875
* Dissertation Research:  Native Perceptions of Plant Efficacy Among Indigenous Cultures of Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Brent Berlin, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 04/30/1997
* USD 7,828.00

This award to the University of California-Berkeley funds the dissertation
research of a cultural anthropologist in the Peruvian Amazon rain forest. The
problem is to understand how native Americans identify medicinal plants in the
forest. The student will assess native perceptions of specific cues of taste,
smell, or feel (bitterness, sweetness, astringency, aromatic smell, prickly
texture, etc. ) which are thought to indicate therapeutic efficacy. A `taste and
smell` experiment will be conducted whereby Indian informants are asked to
describe items unfamiliar to the native palate, to provide an objective,
comparative basis for defining the indigenous vocabulary of taste and smell. The
student will also study how native perceptions of medicinal efficacy relate to
native theories of disease causation, and how these correspond to Western
pharmacological and medical knowledge. The methods include an ethnomedical
health census, structured and semi-structured interviews, and the collection and
analysis of botanical specimens. The native models of two Amerindian groups will
be compared, to assess the degree of variability across unrelated cultural
groups sharing a similar environment. This research is important because it will
add to our expertise about this important region of the world and will advance
our knowledge of how native peoples select and use medicinal plants. The study
of medicinal plants used by indigenous peoples is especially important because
it may reveal new cures for diseases, while at the same time promoting cultural
and ecological conservation in indigenous areas.