* 9527548
* Support for the Division of Environmental Biology (DEB) Ecological Studies Cluster
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1995
* Thomas Binaut, FRIDAY SYSTEMS SERVICES INC
* BOA/Task Order
* Margaret Palmer
* 12/31/1995
* USD 16,119.00

; R o o t E n t r y F Jw s= C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t j O b j e c
t P o o l F s= F s= " ! # $ % & ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 : ; < = >
? @ A B C F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; e = e j j j
j j j j j 1 O Q Q Q o T 2 8 j j j j j O ~ j j j j O Linsky This award will
underwrite the provision of essential technical and administrative support
services for the Ecological Studies Cluster (Ecology and Ecosystem Studies
programs). the current effort will provide those services pertinent to
competitive research proposals received in response to the cluster s June 15,
1995, target date for proposals. the effort will continue with that grouping of
proposals through their final disposition following the October 1995 panel
meeting for the programs. Oh +' 0 $ H l S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( D
h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Linsky deborah johnson deborah johnson @ p= @ K
p= @ s= @ v A Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; c ! ! K @ Normal a " A@ " D efault
Paragraph Font deborah johnson(\\CLM2\DEBECO\ECOLOGY\CLUSTER\LINSKY.DOC deborah
johnson%\\CLM2\DEBECO\ECOLOGY\CLUSTER\LIN.ABS deborah
johnson%\\CLM2\DEBECO\ECOLOGY\CLUSTER\LIN.ABS @HP DeskJet 500 LPT1: HPDSKJET HP
DeskJet 500 D L f 1 , , ( 4p 7\ & d +NpR (s HP DeskJet 500 D L f 1 , , ( 4p 7\ &
d +NpR (s 1 Times New Roman Symbol & Arial " h $ 8 Linsky deborah johnson
deborah johnson ;