* 9527381
* Mathematical Sciences: Stability and Approximation for      Distributed Parameter Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Richard Fabiano, University of Saint Thomas
* Standard Grant
* John Lagnese
* 08/31/1997
* USD 33,389.00

9527381 Fabiano This RUI award supports a project dealing with stability and
approximation of dynamic partial differential equations and integro-differential
equations. The basic issue involved is that of preservation of stability under
finite dimensional approximation of the system. This is a very important
question since every computational scheme for a system of partial differential
equations or other infinite dimensional system involves a finite dimensional
approximation of one sort or another, and it is well-known that certain
approximation schemes will destroy stability or change the so-called stability
margin. A recently developed method of approximation, called the method of
equivalent inner products, that is known to preserve the stability margin of the
original infinite dimensional system, will be studied. The method is known to be
useful for approximation of bounded operators (systems of ordinary differential
equations, for example). In additions to establishing convergence properties of
the method in the context of the equations under consideration, reliable
computer algorithms based on the method will be developed. The mathematical
equations governing the motion of vibrating flexible elastic structures are used
to model such diverse physical systems as robot arms, large antennae, buildings
(vibrating in an earthquake, for example), airplane wings, and so forth.
Computer algorithms are often used to simulate these equations in order to solve
complex problems in these applications. With the advent of new technologies,
such as advanced actuators and materials, and enhanced performance requirements,
together with the need to better understand and influence the motion of these
systems, there is a necessity for more sophisticated mathematical models and
theoretically sound, reliable numerical algorithms for model simulation and
approximation. This project will focus on a new approximation method which has
shown significant promise for imp acting exactly these types of problems. Basic
convergence properties of the method will be developed, as well as associated
software based on the method. ***