* 9527329
* The Cape Roberts Project: Volcanic Record, Geochemistry and 40Ar/39Ar Chronology
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,07/31/2002
* Philip Kyle, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 07/31/2002
* USD 193,451.00

Kyle OPP 9527329 Abstract The Cape Roberts Project is an international drilling
project to obtain a series of cores from the sedimentary strata beneath the sea
floor off Cape Roberts in the Ross Sea. The project is a joint venture by
scientists from the national Antarctic programs of Germany, Italy, New Zealand,
the United Kingdom., Australia, and the United States. Drilling will
continuously core a composite section of sediments over 1500 m thick which is
expected to represent parts of the time period between 30 and more than 100
million years ago. The principle objectives of this component of the project
will be to examine the record of igneous material in the drill core and provide
high precision 40Ar/39Ar dates from tephra (volcanic ash) layers, disseminated
ash, feldspars and epiclastic volcanic detrital grains to constrain depositional
age and provenance of the sediments in the cores. This project will contribute
to general geologic logging of the core and will characterize any igneous
material using electron microprobe, x-ray fluorescence (XRF) and instrumental
neutron activation analysis (INAA) analyses. The presence of alkalic volcanic
detritus from the Cenozoic McMurdo Volcanics will constrain the initiation of
this phase of volcanism and improve our understanding of the relationship
between volcanism and tectonism. The influx of sediments eroded from Jurassic
Kirkpatrick Basalts and Ferrar Dolerites will be used to time the unroofing and
rates of uplift of the Transantarctic Mountains. Geochemical analyses of core
samples will examine the geochemistry and provenance of the sediments.