* 9527888
* Variable Control of Island Communities:  Productivity,      Nutrients, Consumption and El Nino/Drought Events
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Gary Huxel, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 06/30/1999
* USD 380,800.00

9527888 Polis This work examines what factors determine the distribution,
abundance, and diversity of key groups along the Gulf of California. Many
species of insects, spiders, scorpions, lizards and mammals are extraordinarily
dense on small islands and coastal areas compared to larger islands or the
mainland. Several factors are important: productivity flowing from the marine to
terrestrial ecosystems via shore drift and bird colonies; size of the island
(its shoreline to area ratio); variable terrestrial productivity; and the
presence/absence of predators. The marine and terrestrial food webs will be
connected by examining how marine input penetrates inland and how it affects key
species. How primary productivity by land plants changes with variable
precipitation (drought to heavy rainfall associated with El Nino events) will be
determined, as will differences in soil nutrients caused by seabird
fertilization and how the terrestrial system responds to such changes. This
research investigates several issues with applied importance. First, it analyzes
the potentially great influence that marine input exerts on the dynamics of key
populations, food webs, and ecosystems of island and terrestrial coastal
communities. This is novel and important, since coastal communities cover about
8% of the earth and contain more than 65% of humans and a disproportionate
amount of biodiversity and productivity. Second, this research addresses how El
Nino, a major planetary weather maker, influences the productivity and structure
of land communities. Third, it illustrates a ubiquitous process: the flow of
nutrients, detritus, prey, and consumers across habitat boundaries. Finally,
this system is a general model for the ecology of islands and fragmented
habitats (e.g., nature reserves), each of different size, and each exhibiting
different combinations of species and interconnections to other habitats. It
also provides a general understanding of factors affecting abundance and
biodiversity.