* 9527701
* Temporal Changes in Resource Heterogeneity and Vegetation   Response in Tree-Fall Gaps
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Thomas Spies, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 75,000.00

In the coniferous forests of the Pacific Northwest, canopy gaps created by the
death of large trees within mature forests are hypothesized to determine the
species composition and future development of those forests. In 1990, the
investigators established experimental canopy gaps of different sizes within two
conifer forests of different age. The main objectives have been to determine the
influence of the composition and abundance of vegetation and the availability of
resources (e.g. light and moisture) prior to and immediately after gap formation
on the pattern of development in old growth forests. The investigators will
continue their long-term measurements of plant diversity and abundance, and of
light and soil moisture levels, in the experimental gaps. Recent plans for
management of federal lands in the Pacific Northwest emphasize managing young
forests to encourage a greater diversity of species and structure that is
characteristic of old-growth forests. Allowing stands to age naturally may
accomplish this goal, but selective tree harvest has also been proposed as a way
to achieve structural complexity more rapidly while allowing some commodity
extraction. This study will aid in understanding how canopy gaps influence
development of old-growth forests, how long it might take for old-growth
structure to develop naturally, and whether selective harvest of different sizes
of openings can mimic this process. This study will also provide new information
on the most appropriate gap size for the establishment and growth of different
tree and understory plant species, and the effect of existing vegetation on tree
survival and growth.