* 9527876
* Mechanism and Timing of West Antarctic Ice Sheet Retreat    at the End of the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,04/30/2002
* John Anderson, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2002
* USD 772,664.00

Anderson OPP 9527876 Abstract This award supports continuation of a long term
investigation of the continental shelf sediments that is aimed at examining the
configuration of the West Antarctic Ice Sheet during the last glacial maximum,
the events and mechanisms involved in its retreat, and the timing of retreat.
The project involves: 1) characterizing variations in the ice sheet grounding
zone in a latitudinal transect extending from Ross Sea to Bransfield Basin, 2)
reconstructing conditions at the ice/bed interface prior to and after ice sheet
retreat, and 3) radiometrically dating ice sheet retreat along this transect.
Detailed sea floor imagery (multibeam and deep-tow side-scan sonar), high
resolution seismic reflection profiles, and sediment cores will be used to map
and characterize prior grounding zones. Of particular concern are features that
indicate the amount and organization (channelization) of basal meltwater and the
extent of bed deformation that occurred in different ice streams. The timing of
ice sheet retreat provides information about the link between Northern and
Southern hemisphere ice expansion, and the role of eustasy in ice sheet
decoupling. This research should lead to better predictive models to determine
which ice streams are most unstable and likely, therefore, to serve as Oweak
linksO in the long term behavior of West Antarctic Ice Sheet.