* 9527413
* Workshop Proposal: Antarctic Digital Magnetic Anomaly Map   (Sept. 18-19, 1995)
* O/D,OPP
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Ralph von Frese, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 08/31/1996
* USD 7,500.00

Abstract This award is to allow participation by US researchers in a workshop
aimed at establishing a framework for producing a magnetic anomaly map and
magnetic digital data base for the Antarctic. The workshop will be held with the
collaboration of the British Antarctic Survey at Griton College, Cambridge (UK)
over 18-19 September 1995. The workshop will establish: 1) the geologic
requirements for the Antarctic map and data base; 2) conditions of data
contributions; 3) formats for the data base and map; 4) where compilation
efforts will take place; and 5) conditions of data release. A report covering
these points, as well as a strategy for implementing compilation efforts, will
result from this workshop. The US, through the Office of Polar Programs at the
National Science Foundation, maintains a strong research program in Antarctic
earth sciences. Representation in this meeting is in the best interests of both
the US research community and the US Antarctic Program's Polar Earth Sciences
Program. Furthermore, the Antarctic Treaty requires each member nation to share
and disseminate information resulting from Antarctic research activities.
Participation of US researchers in this meeting is important to the data
dissemination goals of the Antarctic Treaty.