* 9527907
* The Role of Amino Acid Uptake by Mycorrhizal Ericaceous     Shrubs in the Nitrogen Economy of Nutrient-Deficient Peat   Bogs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Antoni Damman, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 05/31/2000
* USD 256,653.00

Johnson 9527907 Peatlands, dominated by ericaceous shrubs and Sphagnum moss,
cover 400 million ha in the circumboreal region. These ecosystems are
characterized by slow decomposition and nutrient cycling, and accumulation of
peat (primarily Sphagnum moss litter). Ombrotrophic (rain-fed) peat bogs
represent one of the most nutrient-deficient of all ecosystems because peat
accumulates above the surrounding landscapes and, therefore, these systems
receive nutrient inputs form only atmospheric sources. Consequently,
ombrotrophic peat bogs are thought to be strongly limited by nitrogen (N). Our
field and laboratory net N mineralization rates from ombrotrophic peat bogs are
much lower than minertrophic peatlands and even lower than arctic tundra.
Furthermore, it appears that only about 1/4 of the annual N requirement of
ericaceous shrubs and Sphagnum moss can be met by inorganic sources from
atmospheric inputs (mostly deposition, N fixation is negligible) and N
mineralization. Although inorganic N is in short supply in peat bogs, organic N
is present in large quantities as partially decomposed peat and, in lesser
amounts, as dissolved organic nitrogen (DON). In organic soils, some DON occurs
as 'free' amino acids, previously considered as unavailable for plant uptake.
Recent laboratory investigations and the few field studies that have be
conducted indicate that ericaceous mycorrhizal plants (and even several arctic
non-mycorrhizal sedges) can take up amino acids. The goal of this project is to
determine if uptake of amino acids (and perhaps more complex organic N forms) by
mycorrhizal ericaceous bog shrubs can account for the apparent N deficit in the
plants' annual uptake requirements. If the uptake of organic N is a primary form
of N nutrition for ericaceuous plants in organic-rich peat bogs, it would
fundamentally alter ideas about N limitation and N cyclinging, these systems and
perhaps in other Ericace-dominated ecosystems, e.g. heathlands and nutrient-poor
oak forests. This proje ct is focused on the possible short-circuiting of the
decomposition-mineralization cycle by uptake of amino acid N and nitrogenous
sugars by ericaceous plants via ericoid mycorrhizas in an organic-rich bog
ecosystem. The objectives of this project are to 1) determine if ericaceous bog
plants take up amino acids and amino sugars under field conditions, either
directly or via mycorrhizas, 2) characterize the levels of 'free' amino acids
and amino sugars in the soil, and determine the release of dissolved organic N,
especially from relatively liable roots and leaves, and 3) determine if
ericacous bog plants require mycorrhizas for their amino acids uptake. The
project plan includes: a field test of uptake of isotopically-labelled glycine
(amino acid) and glucose amine (nitrogenous sugar) by mycorrhizal ericaceous
plants, field and laboratory incubations of litter to measure release of DON,
field and laboratory studies of mycorrhizal dependency, and N turn-over studies
using 15N-labelled decomposing roots and leaves.