* 9527950
* Collaborative Research: Molecular Systematics of Drosophila Repleta Group Species
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Robert DeSalle, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 11/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9527950 DeSalle The range of host plants used by groups of insects can be broad
or very narrow, including host plant specificity or restriction to a single
host. Since most insects, which constitute the vast majority of all animal
species, use plants during some part of their life cycles for food or as a place
to reproduce, it is important to understand the causes for insects to be host
specialists or generalists. Patterns of host use may be important in explaining
the diversification of insect groups. Particular aspects of host plants may
either limit or increase the number of hosts an insect species can use. Over
long time intervals, this may give rise to related groups of insect species that
share host affinities. The research project supported by this award will use
patterns of DNA sequence data similarities to study the degree of genetic
relatedness among a group of over 40 species in the Drosophila mulleri species
complex (Insecta: Diptera: Drosophilidae). The pattern of species relationships
determined will be compared to the host use of these species in nature. Two
clusters of species in this complex, each with three species, will be studied in
greater detail for evidence of population level variation in DNA sequence data.
The fruit flies in this study group breed on cacti and their larvae feed on
cactus host plants. There has been an apparent host shift with some species
feeding on the cactus genus Opuntia, whose members are easily recognized by
paddle shaped parts, to other cacti whose growth form is columnar or barrel
shaped. Knowledge of relationships among the Drosophila species will allow
determination of the number of times that this shift between cactus types has
occurred. %%% This award will provide information on the biodiversity and host
plant associations in a group of specialized cactus feeding flies. This research
represents an important model system for understanding host shifts and the
origin of insect pests that may be of value in developing non-chemica l means of
controlling pests. ***