* 9527884
* Phylogeny, Systematics and Evolution of Cactaceae,          Subfamilies Opuntioideae and Cactoideae
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Robert Wallace, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 03/31/1999
* USD 55,000.00

9527884 Wallace The cactus family, Cactaceae, comprises some 1500 species in
North and South America (with one introduction to West Africa) and includes
morphologically diverse life forms ranging from columnar, tree-like to barrel to
viny and epiphytic. In adapting to dry and often desert conditions, these "stem
succulents" have likely in parallel converged on similar vegetative shapes and
forms, which renders evolutionary analysis designed to distinguish the lineages
within the family difficult and confusing. In order to obtain robust and
independent comparative data for taxonomic and phylogenetic analyses, Dr. Robert
Wallace of Iowa State University is studying DNA variation in genes of the
chloroplast and nucleus, from samples of cacti from the two large subfamilies
Opuntioideae and Cactoideae. DNA nucleotide sequences are being gathered from
several genes, and these will be aligned for comparison and assessed for
mutational differences between species. Phylogenetic trees are then constructed
based upon these measures of mutation difference. With the phylogenies (or taxon
genealogies) as guide to lineage relationships among genera and species, one can
study the pattern of adaptive radiation into desert habitats throughout the
Americas, and the morphological changes that accompany or enable evolution into
various regions and habitats. The phylogenetic analysis also will inform a more
stable classification of cacti, and direct the choice of key characters for
purposes of species identification.