* 9527558
* SBIR Phase II:  Quality Manufacturing of Oxide Dispersion   Strengthened Silver Sheathed High-Temperature Superconductor Wire Using Internal Oxidation
* TIP,TI
* 01/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Gilbert Riley, AMERICAN SUPERCONDUCTOR CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 06/30/2000
* USD 400,000.00

DMI-9527558 Riley This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
result in the development of quality manufacturing procedures for the cost-
effective production of high-performance Oxide Dispersion Strengthened Silver
(ODS-Ag) sheathed High-Temperature Superconductor (HTS) wire. We have
demonstrated in our successful Phase I Research that novel ODS-Ag materials
fabricated using internal oxidation of a dilute Ag-alloy precursor are viable
advanced sheathing materials for HTS wire that will enhance the mechanical and
electrical properties of the resulting composite. Using Total Quality Management
(TQM) principles, we will build on our Phase I achievements and develop quality
manufacturing procedures associated with the qualification and processing of
dilute Ag-alloys. In our approach, we will address the underlying technical and
economic factors associated with raw material procurement, processing, and
quality assurance. Success in our Phase II program will result in dilute Ag-
alloy qualification procedures optimized for the quality manufacture of high-
performance ODS-Ag sheathed HTS wire, ultimately leading to a product with an
incrementally improved price to performance ratio. The successful development of
cost-effective ODS-Ag sheathed HTS wire will significantly accelerate and
broadly enable a multiplicity of HTS bulk applications. The increased strength
and robustness of the improved wire will benefit such mechanically demanding
applications as Power Transmission Cables, Motors, and Generators. Similarly,
the improved alternating current performance of the improved wire will benefit
such electrically demanding applications as Transformers, Inductors, and Fault
Current Limiters.