* 9527626
* New Operating Paradigm for Electric Power Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Felix Wu, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* George Maracas
* 03/31/2000
* USD 160,841.00

9527626 Wu Recent moves to open up electric power transmission networks to
foster generation competition and customer choice have touched off a debate over
how the transmission system should be restructured in order to meet the goal.
the opposing sides of this debate are now commonly known as the bilateral model
and the poolco model. Both models resort to conventional centralized operation
in dealing with the shared resources of an integrated transmission network. The
conventional operation paradigm was developed in a different era for electric
utilities operated as regulated monopolies. A new operation paradigm is needed
for a restructured industry that encourages efficient competition and at the
same time maintains necessary coordination to guarantee a high standard of
reliability. Coordination does not mean centralization. There are indeed two
aspects of coordination, namely, information structure and decision-making
authority. We propose to examine the requirements for coordination in the new
operating paradigm for reliable (secure) and economic operation of power systems
along these two dimensions. It is believed that the decision mechanism regarding
economics and reliability (security) of system operation should be separated.
Economic decision should be carried out by private multilateral trades among
generators and consumers. The functions of reliability should be coordinated
through the power system operator with proper information structure to guide
generators and consumers to make profitable trades that meet the secure
transmission loading limits. The communications, computing and control
infrastructure necessary to support the proposed model will be investigated. ***