* 9527400
* Discrete-Time Population Models:  The Combined Effects of   Dispersal and Stage Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Hal Caswell, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/2000
* USD 280,000.00

9527400 Caswell Dispersal is a fundamental process in population ecology.
Mathematical models of population growth that include dispersal have helped
scientists to address such important ecological, economic, and public health
issues as habitat fragmentation, invasions of exotic species, and the spread of
epidemics. The life history of individuals also has important demographic
consequences. Vital rates (i.e., birth, growth, development, and mortality
rates) change throughout an individual's life. Mathematical models that
incorporate age- or size-dependent vital rates are among the most important
tools for studying the evolution of life histories and for protecting endangered
species. This project will develop and analyze models that incorporate both
dispersal and population structure in a simple modeling framework based upon
integrodifference equations (IDE's). IDE's have a number of advantages: (1)
rather than using a standard diffusion approximation, IDE's can model a variety
of dispersal mechanisms; (2) as discrete-time equations, IDE's link naturally to
matrix population models and (3) IDE's connect easily with data because their
central component, the dispersal distribution, lends itself to empirical
measurement. The investigators' analyses of these models will focus on the
interaction of stage-specific dispersal and stage-specific vital rates. They
will combine mathematical analysis and numerical simulation. The results will be
useful in population ecology, evolutionary biology, conservation biology, and
biological control.