* 9527963
* Dissertation Research:  The Tiwanaku Occupation of the      Island of the Sun, Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Alan Kolata, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1998
* USD 7,430.00

Under the direction of Dr. Alan Kolata, Mr. Matthew Seddon will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological excavations at the
`temple to the sun` which is located on an island in highland Bolivian lake.
Spanish explorers who observed and described the Inca empire noted that this was
a highly sacred site. Previous archaeological work has determined the location
and has also discovered that the area was inhabited during at least two previous
cultural periods. Mr. Seddon will excavate to determine the extent and nature of
these earlier occupations. Both architectural and artifactural data will be
recovered for comparison with other sites from the same time periods in the
Bolivian highlands. On this basis it will be possible to learn whether during
these earlier periods the area served a religious function or whether is was
occupied for primarily domestic use. Archaeologists wish to understand the
processes which led the emergence of complex societies and have extensively
studied the Inca as an example of a New World pre Columbian civilization.
However in the Andean region the Incas were only the latest in a series of such
complex entities and Bolivia is known for the Tiwanaku society which preceded
it. The extent to which the Inca created their civilization `de novo` is not
known and Mr. Seddon's research will address this issue. Although the temple of
the sun served a religious purpose, Mr. Seddon's work focuses not on religion
but on social and political control. In many prehistoric societies these
functions are embedded in a ritual framework and it is these underlying social
processes which are the object of Mr. Seddon's research. This work is important
for several reasons. It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It
will shed new light on the growth of complex societies and assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.