* 9527493
* Curriculum for Integrating Manufacturing Enterprise         Decisions (CIMED) (Collaborative CRCD Project with          University of Oklahoma)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Manjunath Kamath, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/1999
* USD 199,410.00

Abstract EEC-9527493, Oklahoma State University/Dr. David B. Pratt
(collaborative project with University of Oklahoma/Dr. S. Raman (EEC-9531194)
This award provides funding to Oklahoma State University (OSU) for support of a
Combined Research-Curriculum Development Program entitled, "Curriculum for
Integrating Manufacturing Enterprise Decisions (CIMED)". This is a joint
collaborative project with the University of Oklahoma. Support for the
University of Oklahoma portion of this project is provided under award
EEC-9531194). The CRCD program emphasizes the need to incorporate exciting
research advances in important technology areas into the upper level
undergraduate and graduate engineering curricula and stimulates faculty
researchers to place renewed, equal value on quality education and curriculum
development. This three year program will develop a research/teaching
environment to focus on integrated manufacturing and enterprise modeling.
Undergraduate curriculum enhancement will be based on a joint University of
Oklahoma/Oklahoma State University project on integrated production management
and the development of graduate courses will build upon research results of an
enterprise modeling research effort. OU will have lead responsibility for the
development of the integrated undergraduate enhancements which will allow
students to study the role of individual activities and the effect of individual
decisions with respect to a global system's performance. OSU will have lead
responsibility for the graduate enhancements which will be directed toward
contributing to the development of a unified framework for conceptualizing,
designing, modeling, and operating advanced manufacturing systems. ??