* 9527669
* LTREB: Continuing Assessment of Ecological Recovery         Following Experimental Acidification of Little Rock Lake,   Wisconsin
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Timothy Kratz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/1999
* USD 89,999.00

9527669 Frost Little Rock Lake was the site of a whole-ecosystem acidification
experiment between 1983 and 1990. A wide range of acid responses were documented
by comparing the lake's treatment and reference basins. Since 1990 when acid
additions stopped, chemical and biological characteristics of the lake's
recovery have been evaluated. Chemical features of the lake have largely
returned to pre-acidified conditions. By spring 1995, the lake's pH was close to
6.1, the value prior to the manipulation. In contrast, some biological
conditions of the lake have proven much less resilient. In particular, the
taxonomic composition of the treatment basin's zooplankton community has
remained substantially different from the community occurring in the reference
basin. Even total zooplankton biomass, which remained nearly equal in the two
basins in all but the lowest pH stage of the acidification, has fluctuated
widely during recovery. This award will provide funds to continue monitoring the
treatment and reference basins of Little Rock Lake. This will allow assessment
of whether the zooplankton recovery is simply slower that the lake's chemistry
or if the community has been driven to an alternate state which will persist for
an extended period of time. The funds will also allow additional small-scale
experiments to evaluate some of the mechanisms affecting zooplankton dynamics.
Large-scale experiments such as this serve as an interface between applied and
theoretical ecology. Continued funding of this project will provide important
insights into the specific effects of acidification and into some of the
fundamental processes that control ecosystem structure and function.