* 9527263
* Laboratory Simulation and Modelling of Debris Flow          and Hyperconcentrated Flow
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* William Rose, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 12/31/1998
* USD 94,300.00

9527263 Rose Debris flows are hazardous when they occur. In the past such events
have destroyed and damaged property and killed tens of thousands of people. This
study will seek to improve the understanding of debris flows and
hyperconcentrated flows through experiments, theoretical and modeling efforts,
and study of deposits from experiments. This proposal is a part of a larger
study plan consisting of three major parts: 1) small scale laboratory
experiments in flumes 1 to 8 m long and 5 to 30 cm wide at McGill University; 2)
large scale experiments in a flume 2 m wide and 95 m long at the U.S. Geological
Survey flume in Oregon; 3) a field study of noncohesive debris-flow deposits.
This proposal seeks funding for parts 1 and 2 of the plan. Part 1, small scale
laboratory experiments, is supported, in part, by a Canada International
Fellowship to the principal investigator from the National Science and
Engineering Research Council of Canada. Experiments in small flumes have the
advantage that setting up and finishing a large matrix of experiments in a short
time is feasible and that steady uniform flow is easily attained, but they are
drastically scaled down from the natural processes that they are meant to
stimulate. In small flumes, data can more easily be collected, but some of the
conclusions drawn from it may be suspect because of the difficulty in scaling
large flows, especially those that contain large proportions of gravel sized
debris. It is therefore critical to perform experiments in a large apparatus to
determine the effects of scaling and to reproduce natural flow conditions and
deposits more accurately.