* 9527004
* A New Approach for Evaluating Controls on Depositional      Sequence Architecture
* GEO,EAR
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2001
* Robert Goldstein, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 03/31/2001
* USD 137,995.00

Franseen 9527004 For the past decade, concepts of sequence stratigraphy have
been applied to studies of carbonate facies. However, in large part, our
understanding of the variable that control the location and geometry carbonate
depositional sequences are inadequate because of the few studies that are able
to isolate these variables. The objectives of this study are to evaluate the
effect of variables such as eustatic sea level fluctuation, regional sea level
fluctuation, tectonism, substrate paleoslope, leeward versus windward location,
siliciclastic input and autogenic controls, by using a unique combination of
quantified relative sea level histories, high resolution chronostratigraphic
correlations, and selection of localities which allow isolation of different
variables. We have selected the Upper Miocene because of exceptional exposures
of Upper Miocene carbonate sequences from Mediterranean region. The comparison
of shapes and magnitudes of relative sea level fluctuations shown on
quantitative relative sea level curves from different areas, combined with field
data and high resolution age control from radiometric dating, biostratigraphy
and magnetostratigraphy, can provide the detailed data necessary to determine
the effects of local, regional and global controls on depositional sequence
development. To arrive at the overall goal the proposed project is divided into
four phases. Phase I is complete. It was designed to develop a quantitative
record of the relative sea level history, chronostratigraphy, and to develop a
detailed understanding of the sequence stratigraphy for one locality. It has
developed a new method for quantification of relative sea level history (pinning
points) based on identification of facies deposited at or just below sea level
and on tracing evidence of subaerial exposure on marine rocks down paleoslope.
It has also produced a high resolution chronostratigraphy calibrated with
radiometric dates. The successful completion of Phase I of this project h as
already illustrated significant deviations from commonly accepted sequence
stratigraphic models by showing the importance of substrate paleoslope and
illustrating that the architecture predicted by the systems tract approach is
not applicable. Funding is requested for Phase II and Phase III in this
proposal. Phase II will develop the same information as in Phase I in separate
localities on the same tectonic block. This information includes geologic
mapping, petrography, construction of pinning point curve, magnetostratigraphy,
biostratigraphy, and radiometric dating. Time correlation of depositional
sequences between the areas will allow the analysis of local variables such as
substrate paleoslope, leeward versus windward location, siliciclastic input and
autogenic controls while the variable of relative sea level should be held
relatively constant because of the location on the same tectonic block. Phase
III involves working with other researchers who are studying areas on separate
tectonic blocks of the Mediterranean to develop similar quantitative relative
sea level histories, chronostratigraphy and sequence stratigraphy in those
locations. This comparison will allow analyses of the tectonic effects on
relative sea level history and sequence stratigraphy in unites that have
experienced the same overall Mediterranean sea level history. Phase IV is the
final phase of the study. It will develop similar quantitative relative sea
level histories, chronostatigraphy and sequence stratigraphy for sites outside
of the Mediterranean to separate local Mediterranean sea level effects from
eustatic effects. The purpose of this research is to develop an understanding of
the variables that control the location and architecture of carbonate
depositional sequences. Thus, the product will be a quantitative understanding
of how depositional sequence geometry, location, and facies distribution is
controlled by: (1) local variables of paleoslope, autogenic controls,
siliciclastic input, and seaw ard versus windward location; (2) regional
variables of tectonic controls on accommodation space and Mediterranean sea
level, and (3) global sea level. Once the sedimentologic effect of these
variables are understood , a better general understanding of the geologic record
may be gained, and predictive models may be refined to the point of aiding oil
and gas production.