* 9527576
* Sensor-Integrated Control for Rapid Thermal Chemical Vapor  Deposition (RTCVD)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* P. Krishnaprasad, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* John C. Hurt
* 09/30/1999
* USD 550,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F W g C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l 3 g 3 g - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; 9527576 Krishnaprasad This award is the University of Maryland
with a sub-contract to North Carolina State University at Raleigh. The overall
goal of this effort is to demonstrate a methodology for sensor-integrated
control of rapid thermal chemical vapor deposition (RTCVD) of polycrystalline
silicon (poly Si) from silane with focus on controlling deposition thickness and
across-wafer uniformity. The project exploits advances in real-time sensors,
including pyrometry for temperature, thermal imaging for temperature uniformity,
and sampling mass spectrometry for thickness metrology and process ambient
monitoring. Reduced-order process models constructed from high fidelity heat and
fluid flow simulations, together with physically-based dynamic equipment,
process, and sensor simulations, are the basis for control models. Resulting
run-to-run control methodologies for controlling deposition thickness and
across-wafer uniformity are being developed and validated experimentally, and
real-time control approaches are being explored. These run-to-run control
approaches will be extendible to real-time c ontrol. An architecture to support
a basic supervisory control component is being demonstrated, using physically-
based dynamic simulation to determine sensor signatures of specific equipment
failure modes, together with advanced algorithms as interference tools for
detecting sensor signal correlations and identifying indicated equipment/process
malfunction. The investigators at the University of Maryland provide the effort
on simulation and control, while the investigators at North Carolina State
University provide the effort on sensors and on rapid thermal chemical vapor
deposition of polycrystalline silicon. The experimental proof of concept of the
control system will be performed in the cluster tool deposition apparatus at
North Carolina State University. *** 0 0 Oh +' 0 $ H l D h ,
\\CLM15\SMURPHY$\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n
( , 9527576 SHERONDA MURPHY SHERONDA MURPHY @ X g @ @ X g @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2
; e = e d d l l l l l l l 1 % D T G 9 l l l l l l l l l s 9527576 Krishnaprasad
This award is the University of Maryland with a sub-contract to North Carolina
State University at Raleigh. The overall goal of this effort is to demonstrate a
methodology for sensor-integrated control of rapid thermal chemical vapor
deposition (RTCVD) of polycrystalline silicon (poly Si) from silane with focus
on controlling deposition thickness and across-wafer uniformity. The project
exploits advances in real-time sensors, including pyrometry for temperature,
thermal imaging for temperature uniformity, and sampling mass spectrometry for
thickness metrology and process ambient monitoring. Reduced-order process models
constructed from high fidelity heat and fluid flow simulations, together with
physically-based dynamic equipment, process, and sensor simulations, are the
basis for control models. Resulting run-to-run control methodologies for
controlling deposition thickness and across-wafer uniformity are being developed
and validated experimentally, and real-time control approaches are being
explored. These run-to-run control approaches wi