* 9527006
* The Soil Production Function:  The Key Linkage Between      Erosion Rates, Climate and Soil Thickness on Landscapes     Developed on Bedrock
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/1996,12/31/1999
* William Dietrich, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/1999
* USD 277,000.00

Dietrich 9527006 For over 100 years it has been assumed that the rate of
disintegration of bedrock into erodable soil depends on the thickness of the
overlying soil mantle. This assumption underlies the belief that there are
weathering-limited and transport-limited landscapes. The emerging trends toward
modeling real landscapes rather than hypothetical ones and toward tackling
complex problems coupling climate, geology, biology and human actions, however,
requires that this assumption be investigated. Soil production plans an
essential role in controlling the spatial variation in soil depth and in
determining under what conditions landscapes become bedrock dominated. No field
data currently exists, however, that permits quantitative definition of the
shape of the soil production function. Propose to focus on the thin soils (<1m)
developed on convex ridges where erosion is due to diffusive transport processes
and production is strongly influenced by mechanical disruption caused by
biologic activity. Her we find the boundary between the soil and partially
weathered bedrock to be abrupt, making the soil thickness easily defined. Two
new, independent methods will be used to determine the soil production function.
One method obtains an estimate of the production function from simple field
relationships. This method arises from a theoretical analysis which shows that
where soil production is in balance with removal by diffusive (slope dependent)
processes, the product of the diffusion coefficient and curvature equals the
soil production rate. Hence, if soil production rate depends on soil thickness,
then soil thickness should vary with topographic curvature, and if the diffusion
coefficient is known, the soil production law can be fully quantified. The other
method estimates conversion rate of bedrock to soil from the analysis of
cosmogenic nuclide build up in the bedrock found at the base of the soil column.
The approach is analogous to erosion rate estimates previously done on expose d
bedrock using cosmogenic nuclides, but this is a novel application to a case
where the target rock is beneath the surface. Although estimates of bedrock to
soil conversion rates by this method also assume steady state soil thickness,
this assumption can be evaluated for long term variation by comparing the ratio
of 26Al to 10Be concentrations. This cosmegenic nuclide method is entirely
independent of the first, and can provide both estimates of long-term lowering
rates as well as diffusivities. Preliminary findings for each method show that
they yield comparable results consistent with an expected exponential decline in
production rate with soil depth. A three-year project is proposed to test the
assumption of depth dependency in soil production by applying these two new
methods. Six sites, two underlain by greywacke and four by granite rocks have
been selected for study based on previous work on geomorphic processes, on
climatic differences, and by the very large differences in long-term erosion
rates. The two greywacke sites have already been the subject of substantial
geomorphic studies and the diffusivities, climatic history and role of
macrofauna in transport and soil production are well-known. Here we will focus
on the question of does the methodology give sensible results and define a clear
production function. The four sites underlain by granitic rocks vary in long
term erosion rates by as much as a factor of 1000, have annual precipitation
that varies by a factor of 2 and three sites show clear evidence of active
macrofauna burrowing while one, in Australia, has no macrofauna in the soil.
Comparison of the production function for all six sites should shed light on the
underlying controls on the production function and enable us to form an
explanation for how landscapes with widely varying erosion rates could have the
soil thickness. Successful determination of soil production functions will be of
great value to modeling landscape evolution as well as to providing insight and
guidelines about the long-term consequence of accelerated soil erosion due to
land use in hilly lands underlain by bedrock.