* 9527915
* Rehousing Bishop Museum's Marine Shell Collections in       Acid-Free Conditions
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Robert Cowie, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/2000
* USD 265,829.00

Ants are among the most abundant and ecologically dominant animal groups in the
majority of terrestrial ecosystems, in terms both of numbers of species and of
individuals. In addition, ants are relatively taxonomically well known among
invertebrate groups. This sytematic and ecological importance confers upon ants
a high status among biodiversity indicator taxa. In leaf litter, there may be as
many as 150 species of ants per hectare; this number is sufficient to allow for
calculation of standard biodiversity measures. The ALL (Ants of the Leaf Litter)
workshop, funded by this award from the Biotic Surveys & Inventories and
International Programs of the NSF in cooperation with the International Union
for the Study of Social Insects (IUSSI), the Species Suvival Commission of the
World Conservation Union (SSC-IUCN) and other sources, will build a
collaboration among 19 experts from all parts of the world (9 from the US) that
will 1) optimize and standardize quantitative collecting techniques, 2)
prioritize the tasks involved in cataloging and describing leaf litter ants, 3)
formalize a comprehensive research agenda for the future, 4) set up a global
network of leaf-litter samples in order to build a comparative database on the
Internet, and 5) produce a handbook to assess the biological diversity of ants,
especially leaf-litter ants. The workshop will be held in Brazil, and will be
followed by a separately funded training course for local students, in which the
protocols developed by the group of experts during the workshop will be
immediately communicated. The protocols, handbook, and database that emerge from
the workshop will be made available via the Internet.