* 9527966
* Kinetics of Main-Group Electron-Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* David Stanbury, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 02/28/1999
* USD 314,000.00

Dr. David M. Stanbury, Department of Chemistry, Auburn University, is supported
by the Inorganic, Bioinorganic, and Organometallic Program of the Chemistry
Division for research into main-group electron-transfer reactions. The kinetics
and mechanisms of selected chemical reactions will be probed in a series of
redox reactions of simple main-group molecules in aqueous solution. these
reactions will be designed so that the rate limiting step is outer sphere
electron-transfer. The systems include halogen, oxyhalide, nitric oxide, and
ozone oxidation-reduction, and have been selected to contribute broadly to the
understanding of the electron-transfer process. As several of these reactions
appear to violate the prediction that there is a simple correlation between the
reaction rates and the energy required to distort the molecules to a compromise
geometry between the oxidized and reduced structures, Marcus Theory will be
tested. Electron-transfer is one of the most basic reactions and is of
importance in many areas of chemistry. This investigation will center on systems
that are involved in chemical processes occurring in the environment and in
biological systems. The details of how electrons are transferred to or from a
molecule will be determined. This is of significance because several of these
systems do not appear to follow predicted behavior or are ones that are
unstudied. In order to understand the role of these compounds in the environment
or biological systems, their fundamental behavior must be understood.