* 9527811
* Collaborative Research:  Cretaceous Mammals From Mongolia   and Higher-Level Mammalian Phylogeny
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1996,02/26/1999
* Guillermo Rougier, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/26/1999
* USD 175,106.00

9527811 Novacek Since the famous fossil-collecting expeditions to the Gobi
Desert of Mongolia in the 1920s, scientists at the American Museum of Natural
History and their colleagues have continued an outstanding tradition of research
on Cretaceous-age dinosaurs, birds, and mammals. Fossil collections resumed
recently with Mongolian and Chinese collaborators, and these new expeditions are
yielding abundant specimens of both known and entirely new groups (taxa) of
dinosaurs and early dinosaur-like mammals. Material includes exquisitely
preserved skulls and skeletons of multituberculates and taxa considered to
belong to basal groups of placental mammals. Study of this material will provide
new evidence bearing on taxonomic diversity and phylogenetic (evolutionary)
relationships of early mammal-like reptiles and of the early lineages of true
mammals. New characters from dentition, skull, and postcranial skeletons will be
amassed using traditional paleontological techniques as well as new CT
(computer-aided tomography) scanning of specimens, which avoids destructive
sampling. AMNH scientists in association with colleagues at University of
Louisville and abroad are working to integrate the new knowledge of taxa and of
characters from these early fossil mammals with knowledge from known fossil and
extant groups, and in turn to compare their results with data from molecular
(DNA) studies of living taxa. In particular, well-documented fossil species will
provide calibration points for theoretical studies of molecular evolutionary
rates. And the eventual integration of morphological and molecular evidence
should provide robust estimates of evolutionary history for the early lineages
of mammals and their close relatives.