* 9527067
* The Record of Antarctic Environment Preserved in Deep Sea   Sediments: Critical Times of Climate Change
* GEO,OPP
* 02/01/1996,04/30/2000
* David Rea, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Scott Borg
* 04/30/2000
* USD 225,349.00

Rea OPP 9527067 Abstract This award supports a project to define the
paleoclimatic variability during times of important climate change on
Antarctica, in the latest Cretaceous and Paleocene, late Eocene and early
Oligocene, and the early Pliocene. Preliminary data suggest that the
Maastrichtian and possibly Paleocene environment of Antarctica was dry enough to
permit generation of sufficient dust to form an important component of the
sediments surrounding the continent. This research will determine if and when
this semi-arid climate did exist on Antarctica and when it was superseded by
more moist conditions. The transition to fluvial and hemipelagic dominated
erosional processes may shed light on the initial formation of glaciers in the
Antarctic hinterland. At the time of the Eocene/Oligocene boundary, changing
sediment accumulation rates and the relative proportions of hemipelagic and ice-
rafted material will provide information on when the Antarctic ice sheet became
well-established, effectively shutting off the supply of fluvial sediment to the
Southern Ocean. And finally, any significant change in the ice sheet
configuration during the early Pliocene should be readily observable in the
concomitant changes in the nature and rates of terrigenous sedimentation. To
accomplish these goals, this project will examine the terrigenous component of
deep sea sediments of the Southern Ocean. These materials contain a dual record
of the environment of Antarctica and of the sedimentary transport processes.
Techniques of mineral grain extraction, grain-size analysis, magnetic fabric
determination, geochemical characterization, and flux calculation, all of which
have proven diagnostic in the interpretation of paleoclimatic and
paleoceanographic conditions, will be applied within this project to unravel the
history of environmental change on the Antarctic continent.