* 9527163
* MDC: Simulations of Integrated Communications Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Fred Roberts, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Dwight D. Fisher
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,557,810.00

ABSTRACT NCR-9527163 Hajnal, Andras Rutgers University MDC: Simulations of
Integrated Communications Systems The rapidly developing synthesis of
communications and computing technologies, the ongoing construction of immense
digital data networks, and the global deregulation of telecommunications
industries will have a tremendous impact on the national economy and
infrastructure. This proposal brings together leading experts in network
modeling, network design and analysis, and high performance discrete-event
simulation to focus on the development and validation of high-performance
modeling and simulation tools for broadband networks and wireless communication
services. The project will apply these tools to cutting edge problems in network
design and operations that cannot be answered otherwise. The goals of this
project are to: (1) develop network description methodology, similar in spirit
to VHDL (very high speed integrated circuit hardware design language), suitable
for the description of current and future telecommulication networks (2) provide
validated high-performance simulation software prototypes based on this
methodology, and (3) demonstrate the use of the tools for network construction
and operation problems that cannot be answered otherwise. An important aspect of
this project involves education and training of graduate students and post-
doctoral fellows by involvement in pressing industrial problems, and via sharing
the high-performance modeling and simulation tools within the public domain. The
multidisciplinary project team attacks the problem by covering all of its
critical elements. The team includes applications scientists who will help shape
the network description and simulation tools by their experience and knowledge
of current research directions in networking, and who will use the tools to
explore those directions: it includes network modeling experts who contribute
mathematically valid network behavioral models that help to accelerate the
simulations ; it includes experienced developers of high performance simulation
tools. Most critically, all members will participate vigorously in the design of
the network specification methodology, for that methodology must address the
needs and concerns of each. We envision a role analogous to the academic and
industrial research partnership which successfully fostered the rapid expansion
of the computer-aided-design industry in microelectronics. Indeed, we employ
some of the proven strategies critical to that expansion - standardized
description methodologies and highly efficient simulation tools.