* 9527752
* Collaborative Research:  Deep Ocean Ventilation through     Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Douglas Martinson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/2001
* USD 234,506.00

The proposed project is a multi-institutional integrated study of the outflow
of newly formed bottom water from the Weddell Sea and its dispersion into the
South Atlantic Ocean. It builds upon earlier successful studies of the inflow of
intermediate water masses into the Eastern Weddell Sea, their modification
within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction with bottom water formation
processes in the western Weddell Sea. The study is called Deep Ocean Ventilation
Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL) and includes six components
involving hydrographic measurements, natural tracer experiments, and modeling
studies. The study will be centered east of the Drake Passage where water masses
from the Weddell Sea and the Scotia Sea come together in the Weddell-Scotia
Confluence, and will be carried out in cooperation with the national antarctic
programs of Germany and Spain. The study has four related objectives. The first
is to assess the quantity and the physical and chemical characteristics of
Weddell Sea source waters for the confluence. The second is to describe the
dominant processes associated with spreading and sinking of dense antarctic
waters within the Weddell-Scotia Confluence. The third is to estimate the
ventilation rate of the world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate seasonal
fluctuations in the regional ocean transport and hydrographic structure and to
assess the likely influence of seasonal to interannual variability on rates of
ventilation by Weddell Sea waters. Ventilation of the deep ocean -- the rising
of sub-surface water masses to the surface to be recharged with atmospheric
gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a uniquely antarctic
phenomenon that has significant consequences for global change by affecting the
global reservoir of carbon dioxide, and by modulating the amount and extent of
seasonal sea ice in the southern hemisphere. This component of DOVETAIL concerns
the high resolution regional modeling of the study area, and the deployment of
ice drifters to observe directly the ice motion, the surface air temperature,
and the atmospheric pressure.