* 9527315
* Collaborative Research:  Atmospheric Wave and Vortex        Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 02/29/2000
* USD 189,510.00

9527315 Polvani This project represents an ongoing collaboration between Drs.
Lorenzo Polvani of Columbia University (under this award) and Dr. Alan Plumb of
MIT (ATM-9528471) concerning the dynamics of nonlinear atmospheric waves and
vortices, with particular emphasis on applications to the stratosphere. In this
work, a number of tools have been employed. Initially, the techniques of contour
dynamics was used to study, at very high resolution, the characteristics of
Rossby wave breaking under a variety of circumstances. The principal
investigators then used a global, pseudospectral, shallow water model to look at
the two-dimensional dynamics of nonlinear waves in the presence of
nonconservative processes as well as a "contour advection" technique (a
Lagrangian, high resolution, contour-following approach to depict transport in
known flows. To extend these results, the PIs will examine the three-dimensional
aspects of the interaction between Rossby waves and the stratospheric polar
vortex using a multi-layer, pseudospectral, primitive equation model. They also
will investigate various aspects of the tropospheric circulation related to
Rossby wave dynamics - including atmospheric blocking and interactions between
the Hadley circulation and midlatitude planetary waves. ***