* 9527250
* Cross-Site: Collaborative Research: Effects of              Different-Sized Herbivores on Grassland Plant Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Mark Ritchie, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 09/30/1998
* USD 96,984.00

This study addresses the effects of different-sized mammalian herbivores on
plant diversity at six different North American grassland sites. These sites
represent two sets of sites that differ in their inherent site productivity. One
hypothesis is that differences in productivity will lead to very different
effects of herbivores on plant diversity. At low productivity sites, most plant
species are of sufficiently high quality to be consumed by all herbivores, but
are defended such that larger herbivores eat inferior plants, while smaller
herbivores feed on seeds of dominant plants. At high productivity sites,
competitively dominant species may be consumed only by larger herbivores that
can accommodate their low N content. These trade-offs suggest that larger
herbivores will have greater effects on plant biomass at high productivity
sites, while smaller herbivores will have greater effects on biomass at low
productivity sites. In addition, larger herbivores may increase diversity at
high productivity sites and reduce it at low productivity sites, while smaller,
more selectively foraging herbivores may have the opposite effects. The goal for
this proposal is to begin monitoring for the first 3 years of a long-term (next
10 - 20 years) program as it is likely that changes in plant species composition
and diversity will require that long to respond fully to treatments. The
collaborative network of LTER and other sites committed to support this project
should greatly facilitate such monitoring. The results should provide a general
understanding of the role of herbivores in controlling grassland plant
diversity, and should aid efforts to restore, preserve, and manage grassland
ecosystems.