* 9527441
* Combined Research-Curriculum Development in Process Design, Optimization, and Control
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Warren Seider, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/1999
* USD 355,000.00

Abstract EEC-9527441-University of Pennsylvania, Lehigh University, Princeton
University, Dr. Warren D. Seider, Dr. William L. Luyben, and Dr. Christodoulous
A. Floudas This award provides funding to the University of Pennsylvania for the
support of a Combined Research-Curriculum Development (CRCD) Program entitled,
"Combined Research-Curriculum Development in Process Design, Optimization, and
Control." The CRCD program emphasizes the need to incorporate exciting research
advances in important technology areas into the upper level undergraduate and
graduate engineering curricula and stimulates faculty researchers to place
renewed, equal value on quality education and curriculum development. This
project will be a collaborative effort between Dr. Warren Seider, University of
Pennsylvania, Dr. Christodoulos A. Floudos, Princeton University, and Dr.
William L. Luyben, Lehigh University to translate the results of their ongoing
research in the design and control of chemical processes into a modern two-
course sequence in process design. A two-course sequence will be created, along
with the associated courseware (text and multi-media modules), that provides the
first comprehensive treatment of process design, optimization, and control for
the chemical engineering profession. This course will be taught cooperatively at
the three institutions and industrial consultants will provide design problems
and advise the student groups as their designs evolve. ??