* 9527709
* Genetic Variation and Adaptation in Heterogeneous           Environments (Semibalanus balanoides)
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Mark Bertness, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 02/28/2001
* USD 220,000.00

9527709 Rand This research will combine the tools of molecular population
genetics and experimental field ecology to examine the pattern of natural
selection at specific genes in the intertidal acorn barnacle (Semibalanus
balanoides). At the "Mpi" and "Gpi" genes in the acorn barnacle, two forms of
the protein encoded by each gene are found in natural populations. The two forms
of each of these proteins show repeatable differences in their proportions
between high- vs. low-tidal heights on sunny exposed rocks. At shaded sites
nearby, there is no clear difference between tidal heights in the proportions of
the two types of proteins. Similar patterns in other organisms suggest that
natural selection for thermal tolerance leads to the differential survival of
the two genetic variants in different environments. Three experiments will be
conducted. 1) The investigators will examine the change in frequency of the
different proteins and neutral DNA markers in different temporal samples (from
larvae in the water column in the spring, through to adult stages in the fall).
2) A reciprocal transplant experiment will be conducted to manipulate the
placement of individuals between high vs. low tidal heights, and sunny vs.
shaded sites. The transplanted individuals will be scored for molecular genetic
markers to test whether natural selection is acting on the protein variation. 3)
Mpi and Gpi genes from the acorn barnacle will be cloned to determine the DNA
sequence variation at these genes. These experiments will allow identification
of the ecological factors leading to the association between genes and
environment, as well as identify the DNA sites at which selection is acting. No
previous studies have explicitly manipulated DNA and protein markers in the
intertidal to examine natural selection at specific genes. This work will
provide a synthesis of ecological and genetic analyses that examine adaptation
to heterogeneous environments. Because the relevant selective agent appears t o
be thermal stress, this research may help elucidate the effects of climate
change on genetic variation.