* 9527781
* LTREB: Effects of Insect Defoliation on Nitrogen Loss from  Forest Ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2002
* Clive Jones, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 01/31/2002
* USD 250,000.00

9527781 Lovett This project addresses the role of insect outbreaks and nitrogen
deposition in controlling the cycling and loss of nitrogen from forest
ecosystems. Crucial long-term data sets on gypsy moth abundance, forest
defoliation, and nutrient cycling in upland oak forests of southeastern New York
State will be maintained. These forests are subject to periodic gypsy moth
outbreaks as well as elevated atmospheric deposition of nitrogen from nitrogen
oxide pollution. In addition, an experiment is proposed which will clarify the
role of nitrogen availability and defoliation in regulating nitrogen loss, and
will hasten the effects of nitrogen accumulation that would occur over a much
longer time period from atmospheric deposition. The hypothesis being tested
states that because of their nitrogen limited vegetation and high immobilization
potential in the soil, oak forests will initially show only small nitrogen
losses after defoliation. However, as nitrogen accumulates in the forests from
atmospheric deposition or fertilization, the amount of nitrogen lost after
defoliation events will increase. The results of this study will elucidate the
role of ecosystem nitrogen accumulation in controlling nitrogen losses after
defoliation, and will help evaluate the interactive effects of insect
defoliation and elevated nitrogen deposition, two simultaneous stresses
affecting northeastern forests.