* 9527405
* Do Top-Down and Bottom-Up Controls Interact to Exclude      N-Fixing Cyanobacteria From the Plankton of Estuaries?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Robert Howarth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing Grant
* Penelope L. Firth
* 08/31/2000
* USD 400,000.00

Author: rwh2@cornell.edu (Robert W. Howarth) at NOTE Date: 3/26/96 12:08 PM
Priority: Normal TO: cdahm at nsf2 CC: rmm3@cornell.edu at NOTE CC:
73753.2331@compuserve.com at NOTE Subject: Abstract for DEB 9527405
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
Hi Cliff -- Here is my stab at the abstract you requested. Mike Pace and I are
still working on the budget. Bob DEB-95-27405: "Do top-down and bottom-up
controls interact to exclude nitrogen-fixing cyanobacteria from the plankton of
estuaries?" Eutrophication and phytoplankton production are frequently limited
by nitrogen in estuaries and by phosphorus in lakes. One reason for this
striking differences is a difference in nitrogen fixation. In lakes when
nitrogen availability is low, nitrogen-fixing organisms bloom and help alleviate
the nitrogen deficit by fixing molecular nitrogen into biologically available
forms. In most estuaries, no such response occurs. This proposal tests the
hypothesis that low availabilities of trace metals (Fe and Mo) in estuaries
relative to lakes leads to slow growth rates of nitrogen-fixing organisms,
leaving these organisms vulnerable to consumption by animals, and thereby
preventing nitrogen fixation. In preliminary experiments with tanks full of
seawater, the investigators successfully grew nitrogen fixing organisms by
keeping animal populations low. This was the first time nitrogen-fixing
organisms of the sort common to lakes were found in estuarine water anywhere in
North America. The new research will build on these tank studies to more
completely test the hypothesized difference between lakes and estuaries.