* 9527031
* Mineral Dissolution and Growth:  A Laboratory Study of      Kinetic Responses to Variable Conditions
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Carrick Eggleston, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 12/31/1999
* USD 167,894.00

Eggleston 9527031 Mineral dissolution and growth are basic forms of chemical
communication between rocks and the hydro-, and bio-spheres (i.e., environments
at the Earth's surface). This proposal describes a study that uses rate-
relaxation kinetics and non steady-state experiments as a powerful new probe of
surface chemical processes operating during dissolution and growth of oxide
minerals. Conditions at the Earth's surface are variable. Chemical processes in
this environment are subject to frequent transient and periodic perturbations
and fluctuations of conditions; steady-state is rarely achieved. Our
understanding of mineral dissolution and growth kinetics, in contrast is largely
limited to steady-state. We know very little about rate-relaxation times (i.e.,
the time needed for transition from one steady-state to another), despite strong
evidence that they exist. This imposes a fundamental limit on our ability to
model reaction rates in nature. This study will test and constrain a theory of
non-steady-state (NSS) dissolution and growth kinetics that addresses this
limitation. The theoretical framework developed here to systematize NSS data
combines surface complexation models (SCMs), absorption kinetics, and Burton-
Cabrera-Frank (BCF) theory. This approach has direct bearing on several other
long-standing problems: 1) relationship(s) between overall thermodynamic driving
force and rate; 2) structure-reactivity correlation's for mineral surfaces; and
3) the role of rate-affecting adsorbed species. Importantly, it also creates a
way to use new data on kinematics (step and kink motion and interaction) from
in-situ scanning probe microscopy to constrain theory. NSS kinetics thus
provides a unique opportunity to establish connections between microscopic
surface processes and macroscopic kinetic behavior at both laboratory and field
scales. Specific hypotheses tested, using simple (single component) Al, Fe, and
Si oxide minerals (plus a few structural analogs), and later usi ng albite, are:
Rate-relaxation times exist; i.e., in response to an abrupt change (e.g., in
pH), dissolution or growth rates are expected to approach a new steady-state
slowly relative to the abruptness of the change. This will be tested wet-
chemically using specially designed flow-through reactors. The system response
to square-wave and sine-wave variations of , e.g., pH, will be recorded. This
"frequency-response" technique from chemical engineering provides valuable data
on intermediate steps in reaction mechanisms. Rate-relaxation times are expected
to correlate with H2O-replacement rates for corresponding aqueous ions (as do
dissolution and adsorption rates). Rate-relaxation results from changes in the
concentration and/or structure of adsorbed "nutrient" species (e.g., of Al on
Al203). Equilibrium and kinetic data on such adsorption will be gained using :
a) isotopic dilution, b) a novel use of FTIR spectroscopy, c) a new, high-
resolution electrostatic atomic force microscopy (AFM) technique, and d)
comparison of AFM-derived step kinematics data to the predictions of BCF-SCM
theory discussed above. Iso-structural (corundum and goethite-structure oxides
are used so that linear-free energy relationships can be employed to systematize
kinetic data.