* 9527770
* Dissertation Research:  Social-Political Analysis of Gender and Religion in Ireland
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Susan Abbott-Jamieson, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/1997
* USD 8,350.00

This project involves the dissertation research of a cultural anthropologist
from the University of Kentucky. The research problem is to understand how
devotion to the cult of the Virgin Mary in Ireland is mediated by the gender of
the individual, how these beliefs and practices affect the individual's health
behavior, and how devotion and the religious beliefs affect opinions about
Ireland's relations with the larger social and political environment,
specifically the European Community. The methods used in this exploratory
project include participant observation in a representative urban location,
intensive interviews of healing narratives and ritual processes, several formal
surveys of selected religious congregation members, and analysis of archival
material on the religious organizations, ceremonies, and social activities. This
project is important because it will provide information on how religious
beliefs and activities impact on normally secular beliefs and practices, in this
case about health and international politics. While the connections between
these social variables are normally not in the public eye, the behavior of
people in the world -- e.g., in the former Yugoslavia-- shows that the local
group identities often rise to be of paramount importance. Case studies such as
this will provide information to build a general social theory relating
religion, gender, health and political behavior.