* 9527318
* LTREB: EROC: Climate and Predation Effects on Reproductive  Patch Choice and Species Coexistence
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Thomas Martin, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Thomas M. Frost
* 01/31/1998
* USD 135,000.00

9527318 Martin Habitat selection and species coexistence are generally thought
to reflect choice of environmental conditions that minimize ecological costs and
maximize fitness. Biotic interactions are often particularly emphasized in
theories. Yet, ecological influences may be constrained by physiological
tolerances as a function of evolutionary history of a species and different
evolutionary histories or physiological tolerances may provide an alternative
explanation of differences in resource use among coexisting species. Such
alternative actions of biotic versus abiotic influences are particularly
highlighted along microclimate gradients because species commonly segregate
along microclimate gradients. This research will document a microclimate
gradient and show that seven bird species are segregated along this gradient.
Such segregation raises an interesting question: Does segregation reflect
physiological constraints or responses to ecological costs? Recent studies
indicate that the ecological cost of nest predation may favor choice of nest
sites that minimize risk of predation and favor coexistence of species that
differ in nest site selection. Changes in microclimate from weather changes
among years should cause dynamic shifts in habitat selection if physiological
costs of microclimate are important. Yet, nest site shifts could increase
ecological costs if shifts exceed ecological optima. Data collected over the
previous six years show that nest sites do shift in response to weather changes.
Continued long-term study of this system and nest site shifts is important
because such shifts provide an unprecedented opportunity to examine the
potential role of biotic versus abiotic influences on habitat selection and
species coexistence based on dynamic changes in potential environmental
influences.