* 9527677
* Theoretical Studies of State to State Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* George Schatz, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 01/31/2000
* USD 372,348.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting Schatz's
research program which is concerned with using computational methods to
determine the rates of chemical reactions that are important in combustion and
atmospheric chemistry. For certain kinds of reactions, the current generation of
computers has opened up new opportunities for the use of theory to determine
rate information at a level that is better than or competitive with experiment.
A goal of the research program is therefore to develop theoretical methods
(quantum and classical dynamics methods) that take advantage of the new computer
power to characterize important reactions. Another component of this work is the
representation of potential energy surfaces that determine the forces between
the atoms while reaction takes place. Such surfaces have proven difficult to
describe when simultaneous bond-breaking and bond-forming occurs, or when there
are multiple reaction pathways. However the Schatz group has developed several
techniques for representing these surfaces and the resulting surfaces have been
widely used. The theoretical dynamics methods and reactive potential energy
surfaces will together be used to study several specific chemical reactions of
interest to the combustion and atmospheric kinetics community for the purpose of
interpreting and predicting experiments. Planned studies are aimed at
understanding the role of reagent vibrational excitation on chemical reactivity,
including the importance of mode-specific chemistry; at characterizing reactions
in which there is a change in electronic state while the reaction occurs (with
emphasis on the influence of spin-orbit excitation on chemical reactivity); and
in understanding reactions in which there is no reaction path that connects
reagents and products. Other topics include the use of theory to understand the
spectroscopy of transition states of chemical reactions, and the
characterization of collisional relaxation rates that leads to the stabilization
of reaction intermediates.