* 9527836
* SBIR PHASE II: Production of Endohedral Metallofullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/1997,02/29/2000
* John Wright, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 02/29/2000
* USD 300,000.00

*** Wright 9527836 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop a continuous method for the production of endohedral metallofullerenes
(fullerenes containing encapsulated metal atom(s)) and an economical method of
separating them from the empty fullerenes. The metallofullerenes form a unique
new class of molecules whose graphite like fullerene shell simultaneously
protects the trapped, reactive metal atom from the outside environment while
also provide a fullerene functional group that can be readily used for
derivation or attachment of the metallofullerene to carrier molecules and
substrates. Additionally, because of electronic interactions that occur between
the trapped metal atom and the fullerene shell, the metallofullerenes are
expected to possess a broad range of unusual electronic and magnetic properties.
The metallofullerenes have potential applications in such diverse areas as
superconductivity, nonlinear optics, and pharmaceuticals for medical imaging.
Unfortunately, progress on the research and development of metallofullerene
properties and applications has been slow due to the very high production costs.
Metallofullerenes are currently produced by a batch process using carbon arc
vaporization of doped graphite. The production costs using this method are so
high that metallofullerenes are currently not commercially available. During
Phase I of this project, a new, dramatically different synthesis method that is
continuous, simple to operated, and scaleable to large industrially relevant
capacities was developed. Phase II will improve the efficiency of this new
process and investigate methods for scaling-up both production and purification
of the metallofullerenes. The production and separation processes developed in
this Phase II project are capable of meeting the research demands for
metallofullerenes. In the long term, this new production method is projected to
lower the cost of metallofullerenes to less than $10/gram and allow their use in
medical i maging, nonlinear optics, novel superconductors, and a host of other
applications. ***