* 9527333
* Theoretical Studies of Kinetics, Dynamics and Mechanisms of Polyatomic Bimolecular Gas Phase Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Thanh Truong, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 03/31/2000
* USD 200,625.00

The Theoretical and Computational Chemistry program is supporting professor
Truong at the University of Utah. The research to be conducted over the next
three years involves the development and applications of new direct ab-initio
dynamics methods for investigating potential energy surfaces, kinetics, and
dynamics of gas-phase bimolecular reactions. The dynamical method is based on
Variational Transition State Theory augmented with several multidimensional
semiclassical tunneling corrections. Reaction path information will be evaluated
directly from a sufficiently accurate ab-initio or non-local density functional
method, thus obviating the need for the construction of analytical potential
functions which currently do not exist for most of the reactions under
consideration. A methodology for calculating vibrational-state selected rates
will also be developed. These new methods will be used to study the detailed
dynamics of a number of radical reactions. Most of the reactions under
consideration involve hydrogen abstraction by species such as hydroxyl radical
reacting with H2, or methane. Particular attention will be devoted in these
investigations to the effect of reagent vibrational energy on the computed
bimolecular reaction rates. These investigations will also attempt to correlate
the topology of the potential An understanding of the dynamics and mechanisms of
these reactions has implications at both the fundamental as well as
technological levels. In terms of technology, these hydrogen abstraction
reactions are of significance in combustion, environmental and atmospheric
chemistry. In terms of a fundamental chemical understanding, these reactions
contain similar reaction kinematics with simple light-light-heavy (L-L-H) and
heavy-light-heavy (H-L-H) atom-diatom reactions whose dynamics have been well
studied. Experiments on these reactions are underway in different laboratories.
Hence, potential energy surface information resulting from this work will be
valuable in aiding the interpretations of new experimental observations.