* 9527178
* MDC: The Virtual World Data Server
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Walter Karplus, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/2000
* USD 1,370,000.00

The Virtual World Data Server is a multi-user, distributed, real-time data
server intended for very large virtual environment simulations. The heart of
this system is the Real-Time Storage Server (RTSS). The RTSS is designed to
efficiently store and retrieve large amounts ( > 1 terabyte) of spatially
distributed heterogeneous data. The RTSS communicates over high speed
asynchronous transfer mode (ATM) connections with multiple interactive real-time
simulations. It establishes a two-way link with each active simulation in order
to determine where the current viewing position is and where the viewer is
headed. The RTSS makes a determination of what 3-dimensional information is
needed, retrieves that information from disk in an optimized fashion and
delivers it to the simulation in a just-in-time manner. The RTSS is complemented
by an advanced three-dimensional visual simulation system. Together these two
systems are capable of supporting a variety of demanding applications including
(but not limited to) urban planning, medical, emergency response, physics,
architecture and urban design. This system promises to dramatically improve the
way that cities are planned and scientific and medical experiments are
visualized. It allows community members and interested citizens to understand
and evaluate the impact of policy and planning decisions and it provides
capabilities for scientists to visualize datasets over 100 times larger than
that which is possible today.