* 9527481
* Collaborative Research: Initial Sedimentological            Characterization of the Late Cretaceous-Early Cenozoic      Drill Cores from Cape Roberts, Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Ross Powell, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2001
* USD 150,128.00

Krissek OPP 9527008 Powell OPP 9527481 Abstract An international initiative to
collect 1500 m of drill core from offshore of Cape Roberts, McMurdo Sound
Antarctica, is intended to provide a better understanding of Antarctic history
through the late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic. Events during this period, which
extends from before the final breakup of Gondwana through the onset of Antarctic
glaciation, are ill-defined by existing data. The Cape Roberts Project (CRP)
aims to provide new data about the development of the West Antarctic rift
system, the subsidence history of the Ross Sea, and ice sheet fluctuations on
Antarctica through this critical time interval. These regional events must be
documented better because they have ramifications of regional and global
significance, including: 1) impacts on both regional and global climatic
development, with its terrestrial and marine effects, and 2) impacts on the
preservation of such climatic records through the regional and global influences
of Gondwana tectonics. CRP is partly an extension of previous drilling efforts
on the Antarctic continental margin, and is partly a new initiative to more
completely document the developmental history of the Ross Sea sector of the
Antarctic and southern Pacific region through the late Cretaceous - early
Cenozoic. It will draw on the successes of previous drilling efforts to document
regional and environmental development with good spatial and temporal
resolution, and it will also draw upon newly compiled geophysical data bases.
CRP is a collaborative endeavor and is currently being supported by six
participating countries. This award supports the U.S. contribution to the
stratigraphic logging and initial sedimentological characterization of the drill
core. Pursuit of more specific research goals will be accomplished via proposals
from individual scientists in the future. Tasks involved in the proposed work
will include initial description and characterizatio n of the stratigraphic
successions; these results will be used as the fundamental data base for other
analyses. The stratigraphic sections will also be used as reference sections for
modeling observed marine and geophysical events. Initial sedimentological
characterization of the successions will allow the definition of facies, the
construction of facies sequences, and the interpretation of depositional
environments through time. The end result of the proposed work will be an Ocean
Drilling Program-style initial report for each drilling season. These reports
will include the stratigraphic log, initial facies and depositional system
interpretations, sedimentary petrologic and petrogenetic analyses, and initial
clay mineralogical analysis. Information provided by other specialists will also
be included in the reports, including biostratigraphy, magnetostratigraphy,
geophysical logs and geochemical interpretations. The initial interpretations of
regional history will be presented in these reports, and the regional and global
ramifications of this history will be highlighted.