* 9528629
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Utility Tradeoffs and Statistical Analysis for Pollution Prevention
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* James Carnahan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 12/31/1999
* USD 310,000.00

9528629 Thurston This grant provides funding to develop a robust theoretical
foundation for design decisionmaking for pollution prevention. The research will
develop a rigorous new method for integrating quantitative decision analysis
over the entire range of product design, manufacture, use and disposal.
Specifically, a methodology for combining statistical manufacturing process
control with lifecycle analysis and concurrent multiobjective design
optimization will be developed. Pollution and its removal cost will be treated
as product defects. This project will significantly expand on previous work to
develop design tools that can be used by any industry. Procedures for classes of
manufacturing processes and their resultant waste streams will be specified. If
successful, United States manufacturers will be better able to integrate the
unique, site-specific considerations of the international marketplace into their
design analysis to identify optimal pollution prevention strategies. The goal is
not to attempt to identify the "environmentally correct" alternative. Instead,
it is to develop a mathematically rigorous method for modeling tradeoffs under
uncertainty between pollution, cost and quality. The best combination of
strategies will be identified, including specification of the product design,
materials, manufacturing process design and manufacturing process control
settings. Instead of generating pollution, waiting for the regulators to
respond, then paying the price, manufacturers will be able to anticipate these
events and integrate them into the design decision-making process. The twin
benefits are that their products will then possess a strategic advantage in the
marketplace, and also generate less pollution.