* 9528021
* The Ultrastructure Synthesis and Nonlinear Spectroscopy of  Photonic Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Larry Dalton, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/1999
* USD 288,000.00

9528021 Dalton Newly developed techniques of femtosecond and picosecond
nonlinear optical spectrosocopy (including phase-mismatch spectroscopy) are used
to define the contributions made to the optical nonlinearity of pi-electron
materials by electronic and nuclear dynamical processes activated by
photoexcitation. This information is used to optimize the performance (and
define the operational limitations) of devices fabricated from these newly
synthesized pi-electron chromophores. Buried channel nonlinear optical
waveguides are fabricated in these polymers by a variety of of techniques
including photochemical processing and reactive ion etching. A novel multi-color
photolithography technique is proposed to solve problems of coupling narrow
dimension electro-optic modulator waveguides to larger dimension fiber optic
cables. %%% By systematically optimizing chromophore hyperpolarizability,
chromophore number density in the polymer lattice, chromophore ordering, and the
glass transition temperature of the final polymer lattice, it is anticipated by
polymeric materials exhibiting electro-optic coefficients in excess of 50 pm/V
and characterized by long term thermal stabilities at temperatures in excess of
125 degrees celsius can be prepared and processed into appropriate integrated
polymer/semiconductor photonic/electronic devices. Such materials would
represent a significant advance over currently available materials for low
frequency modulation applications. ***