* 9528436
* Workshop on Adaptation and Learning in Natural and          Artificial Systems.  To be Held in Washington, D.C.         November 13-15, l995.
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Robert Full, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/1997
* USD 85,046.00

9528436 Sastry This is a proposal to hold a workshop in Washington, DC for two
and a half days from Monday, November 13th to Wednesday, November 15th, 1995 on
"Architectures for Control and Learning in Natural and Artificial Systems: from
Molecules to Ecosystems". The main goal of this workshop, with approximately 50
participants is to organize how the Biosystems Analysis and Control (BAC)
Initiative might be expanded from its current form in a way so as to address the
challenges and uses of new technological and conceptual tools for biological
systems over a range of scales: from molecules to eco-systems. The format of the
workshop is to have some invited presentations, with smaller break out groups to
generate ideas and reports on the first two days. On day three, we will discuss
the reports to arrive at a consensus of how biology and engineering can cross-
fertilize each other in the area of "Architectures for Control and Learning". We
hope to be able to collate the material into a report by March 1996. Sastry and
Full will act as co-chairpersons of this workshop. They will also act as the
organizing committee in concert with the program appropriate program directors
of programs in the Biology and Engineering Directorates of NSF. ***