* 9528155
* The Influence of Delayed Pollination on Stigma Number and   Size, and Progeny Male-Female Ratio and Fitness in Wind     Pollinated Plants
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* D. Carl Freeman, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Taber D. Allison
* 08/31/1997
* USD 25,000.00

9528155 Freeman This proposal examines the ability of wind-pollinated plants to
respond to pollen deprivation in an evolutionary adaptive manner, and to
determine if maternal parents, subject to delayed pollination, influence their
progeny's sex ratio and male reproductive potential. There is a increasing
evidence that wind-pollinated plants can determine if they have been pollinated
and respond to delays in pollination in a manner that increases the likelihood
of their being pollinated by increasing either the number or length of their
stigmas (i.e., increasing the total pollen capture surface area). The delay in
pollination is also reported to influence progeny sex ratio, and enhance the
production of stamens by the male progeny in cultivated spinach. We propose to
examine the impact of delayed pollination and inadequate pollination on
characteristics of both the maternal parent (the number of pistillate flowers,
and stigma length) and their progeny (sex ratio, and fitness) using Atriplex
powellii (an annual) and A. garrettii (a short lived perennial). Both species
are wind pollinated, and grow in the cold deserts of North America. From a
theoretical perspective the studies will add to our understanding of factors
that influence sex ratios, and the ability of plants to respond to dynamic
aspects of their environment. From a practical perspective the experiments will
provide useful information about the reproductive biology of wind-pollinated
plants under conditions of reduced population density.