* 9528327
* Collaborative Research:  Accessing Comparative Brain        Collections
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Adrianne Noe, American Registry of Pathology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 08/31/1998
* USD 128,930.00

This collaborative project integrates and makes more accessible for research
two major collections of comparative vertebrate brain material. These
collections, at the University of Wisconsin and at Michigan State University,
contain over 275 sectioned and stained brains representing more than 150
species, from 50 taxonomic families from 17 different orders of mammals,
selected for their research and evolutionary significance. These brain
libraries, containing more than half a million sections mounted on microscope
slides, are unique and priceless, involving a preparation investment of millions
of dollars over decades. They are the largest collection of their kind in the
world prepared by standardized techniques, and contain samples from many rare
and now endangered species that could never be duplicated. This project will
enhance the accessibility of these samples for neuroscience research and
education. New optical and electronic techniques are used to produce a catalog
of the collections to publicize and promote the availability of this material
for study. Production of this catalog, and subsequent transfer of the two
collections together to the Washington DC area to join other major collections
of human brain specimens, will be first steps toward integrating a major
neuroscience resource in a single site, with adequate research facilities.
Further plans include electronic dissemination of the catalog internationally,
to allow some study of the general appearance and overall organization of a
variety of brains, and decisions about whether to visit the collections
themselves for more detailed direct study. The preservation, stabilization and
centralization of these valuable specimen will have a major long-term impact
beyond simply comparative neuroscience, and will provide a unique contribution
by NSF to the Decade of the Brain.