* 9528964
* SGER: The Taxonomic Distribution of Middle-Repetitive DNA   Families: Homoplasy Free Phylogenetic Data?
* BIO,DEB
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Charles Marshall, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Charles O'Kelly
* 08/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9528964 MARSHALL In the past ten to fifteen years molecular sequence data have
provided powerful tools for investigating the phylogenetic relationships or
associations of lineages in many diverse groups of organisms. Such data have
often helped to resolve relationships where classical morphological data were
insufficient or suggested alternative and conflicting results. Yet, just as
morphological data includes convergent/parallel derived features, the same
molecular sequence can arise independently. Such convergent or parallel
features, known as homoplasies, can be very problematic if they are unrecognized
and thus unwittingly used to associate taxa. This project seeks to develop a
methodology for eliminating homoplasies from molecular data by drawing only from
"middle-repetitive sequences", thereby selectively utilizing rare genomic
events. Recognizable assemblages of these ("families") will be unique to a
lineage and therefore "homoplasy-free" data will be available for phylogenetic
reconstruction. This methodology will be developed and tested with DNA sequence
data from nine species of sea urchins. If the investigator's suppositions are
bore out with this test case, the results of this research may have very broad
applicability and utility for numerous molecular systematists. This award is
made under NSF's Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER) Program, which is
designed to fund innovative, high-risk research with the potential, if
successful, for major discovery or contribution to future research directions.
If successful with this particular project for developing a refined methodology
for obtaining informative molecular sequence data, Dr. Marshall will have made a
contribution of potential utility to systematists working with a broad diversity
of organisms with radiations in the Cenozoic. A more efficient and reliable
means of deriving reliable molecular phylogenies can offer great savings in both
time and research funds.