* 9528680
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Methodology for   Selection of Environmentally Sustainable Processes for      Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Gregory McRae, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1998
* USD 360,000.00

9528680 Cooney A critical challenge facing the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries is management of the complexity that arises from diverse and often
conflicting objectives in product and process development. Simultaneously
dealing with environmental, cost, safety, and flexibility objectives in design
makes solution of the optimization problem difficult. The goal of this research
is to develop a rigorous methodology for evaluating and choosing between
alternative manufacturing processes that allow for introduction of environmental
decisions early in the design strategy. The approach involves selection of
performance metrics that reflect the differing objectives and developing a
design tool that can simultaneously handle multiple and conflicting objectives.
The performance metrics along with a hierarchical method for decomposition of
processes will be used to formalize a decision process for process selection.
Multiple case studies will be examined from processes used to manufacture chiral
pharmaceuticals; these case studies will be used as a basis for developing
teaching modules to introduce environmentally conscious manufacturing into
undergraduate and graduate design classes. Case studies involving chiral drug
manufacturing will be used in this research because promising new production
methods are being introduced in this segment of the pharmaceutical industry.
These new production methods could yield purer products, require smaller capital
investments, and have less environmental impact. The results of this work will
provide a framework for implementation of software to aid the design engineer.
While focused on pharmaceuticals, the framework will be applicable to chemical
processing more generally as well.