* 9528710
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Economical        Cryogenic Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Shane Hong, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay Lee
* 12/31/1998
* USD 350,000.00

9528710 Hong To eliminate both the health problems and the environmental
contamination of using conventional cutting fluid in the machining industry, a
recent joint University-Industry research has led to an economical and practical
cryogenic machining technology. This new process, which is dry, clean, and neat,
cools the cutting tool with super cold nitrogen. By adopting a new cooling
concept, "manipulating the cutting temperature in the micro sense," the
consumption of liquid nitrogen is minimized to a level at which the nitrogen
costs less than conventional cutting fluid. Temperature is a factor in changing
materials properties. The material properties at micro locations in the chip
formation process, such as the primary shear zone, the formed chip, the friction
zone, the bulk workpiece, the tool face, and the tool body, will be adjusted by
varying the temperature to be the most favorable for the cutting process. This
project includes a material study of target workpiece and tool materials to
determine the ideal temperature distribution to yield the optimum material
behavior for specific operations. The nozzle spray pattern, covering area, and
liquid nitrogen flow rate are design parameters to adjust the temperature
distribution. By controlling the cooling pattern, the temperature distribution
can be manipulated to the most desirable range. Thermodynamic and heat transfer
finite element analyses will be conducted to predict the temperature
distribution of the specific cutting process. The amount of liquid nitrogen
needed to achieve the cooling to that temperature will be theoretically and
experimentally determined. The flowrate then can be controlled to the minimum
amount to still be able to do the job; an intelligent control system will be
developed for it. The expected result of this approach is the most efficient
machining and most economical nitrogen dispensing. Cutting fluid plays a key
role in the machining process. Historically, cutting fluids have been optimize d
primarily for the cutting efficiency but at the sacrifice of environmental
concerns. This has led to the need for innovative research such as cryogenic
machining. If it can be proven that the cutting efficiency can be improved while
maintaining the current cutting fluid cost per part, the impact on the machining
industry could be broad-based resulting in a market pull for this
environmentally conscious manufacturing technology.