* 9528805
* Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate       Layers (DOVETAIL)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Peter Schlosser, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/2001
* USD 292,742.00

9528805 Schlosser The propoqed project is a multi-institutional integrated study
of the outflow of newly formed bottom water from the Weddell Sea and its
dispersion into the South Atlantic Ocean. It builds upon earlier successful
studies of the inflow of intermediate water masses into the Eastern Weddell Sea,
their modification within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction with bottom
water formation processes in the western Weddell Sea. The study is called Deep
Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL) and includes
six components involving hydrographic measurements, natural tracer experiments,
and modeling studies. The study will be centered east of the Drake Passage where
water masses from the Weddell Sea and the Scotia Sea come together in the
Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and will be carried out in cooperation with the
national antarctic programs of Germany and Spain. The study has four related
objectives. The first is to assess the quantity and the physical and chemical
characteristics of Weddell Sea source waters for the confluence. The second is
to describe the dominant processes associated with spreading and sinking of
dense antarctic waters within the Weddell-Scotia Confluence. The third is to
estimate the ventilation rate of the world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate
seasonal fluctuations in the regional ocean transport and hydrographic structure
and to assess the likely influence of seasonal to interannual variability on
rates of ventilation by Weddell Sea waters. Ventilation of the deep ocean -- the
rising of sub-surface water masses to the surface to be recharged with
atmospheric gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a uniquely
antarctic phenomenon that has significant consequences for global change by
affecting the global reservoir of carbon dioxide, and by modulating the amount
and extent of seasonal sea ice in the southern hemisphere. This component of
DOVETAIL will make measurem ents on both transient and steady-state tracers to
examine the sources, pathways, and average residence times of the various water
masses in the confluence region. Tritium (an isotope of hydrogen), helium-3,
helium-4, carbon-14, oxygen-18, and various chlorofluorocarbons will be used to
differentiate the sources of confluence water (e.g. precipitation, glacial melt
water, deep water of Atlantic origin), to determine their average residence
times at the surface, and to use the tracer distributions as input to model
simulations of the bottom water formation process ***