* 9528025
* ABR:  Systematics and Zoogeography of Aquatic Hemiptera of  New Guinea
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1996,02/28/2001
* Scott Miller, Bernice P Bishop Museum
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 02/28/2001
* USD 51,696.00

9528025 MILLER The island of New Guinea has a complex geologic history. It
apparently has been formed over time by the northern edge of the Australian
continental mass enlarging as it collided with elements of southward migrating
island arcs. This repeating process of slow tectonic crashing of land masses has
formed upthrusts of mountain ranges on New Guinea. Present day plants and
animals endemic to these ranges and adjacent island arcs include amazing
biodiversity, much of it undescribed, and provide information for biogeographic
analyses that divulge the geologic history of the timing and pattern of these
land mass movements. This award provides continuing support for a project
involving the aquatic Hemiptera (true bugs) (Insecta: Hemiptera) of New Guinea
and adjacent island arcs as a key group for investigating the biogeographic
consequences of such island arc migration and accretion. Support from a prior
NSF award has resulted in excellent productivity with 27 genera (11 new and in
five families) having been analyzed completely and 2 others in part. This award
will support further analysis of 13 additional genera in eight families.
Distributional data for these taxa will be utilized in biogeographic analyses to
enhance knowledge of the zoogeography of this fascinating region. This project
will contribute to our knowledge of the biodiversity of New Guinea.
Specifically, new insect taxa will be described and their relationships studied
for understanding of the historical biogeography of New Guinea and related
island arcs. Aquatic insect studies are especially important because these
organisms are important indicator taxa for monitoring water quality.