* 9528806
* Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate       Layers (DOVETAIL)
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/1997,03/31/2001
* William Smethie, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 03/31/2001
* USD 266,923.00

9528806 Smethie The proposed project is part of a multi-institutional integrated
study of the outflow of newly formed bottom water from the Weddell Sea and its
dispersion into the South Atlantic Ocean. It builds upon earlier successful
studies of the inflow of intermediate water masses into the Eastern Weddell Sea,
their modification within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction with bottom
water formation processes in the western Weddell Sea. The study is called Deep
Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL) and includes
six components involving hydrographic measurements, natural tracer experiments,
and modeling studies. The study will be centered east of the Drake Passage where
water masses from the Weddell Sea and the Scotia Sea come together in the
Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and will be carried out in cooperation with the
national antarctic programs of Germany and Spain. This particular component
concerns the measurement of the chlorofluorocarbon concentration as a tracer of
residence time and movement of Weddell Gyre water. The study has four related
objectives. The first is to assess the quantity and the physical and chemical
characteristics of Weddell Sea source waters for the confluence. The second is
to describe the dominant processes associated with spreading and sinking of
dense antarctic waters within the Weddell-Scotia Confluence. The third is to
estimate the ventilation rate of the world ocean, and the fourth is to estimate
seasonal fluctuations in the regional ocean transport and hydrographic structure
and to assess the likely influence of seasonal to interannual variability on
rates of ventilation by Weddell Sea waters. Ventilation of the deep ocean -- the
rising of sub-surface water masses to the surface to be recharged with
atmospheric gases and to give up heat to the atmosphere -- is a uniquely
antarctic phenomenon that has significant consequences for global change by
affecting the global reser voir of carbon dioxide, and by modulating the amount
and extent of seasonal sea ice in the southern hemisphere. This component will
make measurements of three species of chlorofluorocarbons (also known as freons
or CFC's): F-11, F-12, and F-113. Since the atmospheric concentration of these
anthropogenic gases has been tracked quite precisely for almost fifty years,
their oceanic values, and the ratios of their values can be used to provide
accurate estimates of the time since a given water sample was last exposed to
the atmosphere, and to infer the time scales of water mass modification and
mixing processes in the Weddell Sea. ***