* 9528853
* Discretely Propagating Fronts
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* J. Michael Fritsch, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 03/31/1999
* USD 303,485.00

9528853 Fritsch While the fundamental physics of fronts has been know for many
years, new observational tools and theoretical frameworks are driving a
reevaluation of some of the classical concepts. It has been observed over the
years that frontal boundaries sometimes appear to propagate in a discrete rather
than continuous manner. While observed with some frequency, this behavior has
not been well documented nor studied in any depth. The principal investigator
proposes to begin an exploratory study of discretely-propagating fronts. The
objectives are: 1) establish the characteristics of discretely-propagating
fronts and their environment, 2) determine why and how fronts propagate in a
step-like (discrete) manner, 3) relate the processes of discrete propagation to
current theories concerning frontogenesis, and 4) construct a conceptual model
of discrete propagation. The research methodology is composed of four parts: 1)
compilation of a ten year climatology of discrete propagation events using
standard surface and upper air data, 2) compilation of the properties of
individual events and construction of a composite environment, 3) numerical
simulation of a representative event(s), and 4) calculation of the evolution of
each of the terms (processes) that contribute to frontogenesis over the entire
model domain and for the complete life cycle of the event(s). Under this initial
research effort primary emphasis will be on objectives 1 and 2. While some
progress is expected on the remaining objectives, they will be attacked more
fully under a subsequent research effort that will be proposed only if warranted
after completion of this exploratory effort. It is expected that the knowledge
gained from these investigations will enhance our understanding of how
frontogenesis is related to potential vorticity anomalies and, most importantly,
why, and under what conditions, discrete propagation occurs. It is anticipate
that the results will provide practica l benefits, such as improvements in
short-term (3-18 h) weather forecasts. The results should also provide a basis
for further theoretical studies of the frontogenesis problem. ***