* 9528168
* Interaction of Intense Ultrasound with Genetically          Engineered Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Erich Everbach, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 08/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9528168 Vollmer The general objective of this project is to investigate the
interaction of intense ultrasound energy with Escherichia coli bacteria that
have been genetically engineered to emit visible light (bioluminescence) when
subjected to physical or chemical stress. Acoustic cavitation, the rapid growth
and violent collapse of micro-sized bubbles in response to an impinging
ultrasonic wave, is know to be responsible for damage to biological cells in
vivo and in vitro. The high temperatures and pressures produced during radial
bubble collapse can produce direct and chemically-mediated effects on nearby
cells, or asymmetric bubble collapse can produce high-velocity microjets that
puncture cellular membranes or bacterial walls. By systematically varying the
acoustic parameters and by using particular promoter::lux fusions in genetically
altered strains of E. Coli, this complex interaction will be better understood,
allowing for an assessment to be made of the feasibility of applications such as
ultrasonic water purification and intracorporeal sterilization of medical
implants. The investigation during this twelve month award would follow a five
step experimental protocol to test the hypothesis that ultrasound causes damage
to bacterial membranes through the shear forces and free-radical production that
accompany violent inertial cavitation of resonant microbubbles. The researches
will use an heretofore unavailable acoustical detection system for cavitation
together with a sensitive biological assay to quantify bacterial stress response
(luminescence). The investigation is expected to provide an understanding of the
bacterial stress-response due to the collapse of microbubbles undergoing
transient cavitation that would help optimize the killing of bacteria and lead
to improved sterilization procedures. ***