* 9528412
* Determination of Acidity Functions of Liquid Acids by C-13  NMR and Development of a Theoretically Justified Calibration of Solid Acidity
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Dan Farcasiu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 08/31/1999
* USD 293,950.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9528412 This is an extension of the earlier development of a
nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopic method for determining Hammett
acidity functions for real catalysts. The main thrust is the application of the
method to solid "acids", a class of materials to which the Hammett acidity
concept does not apply. A parameter named "relative protonating ability" is
defined and used for acid "strength" comparisons; it is determined by
protonation of indicators at stoichiometric ratios to the acid sites or
molecules. Both traditional solid acids as well as materials formed by surface
treatment of solids are studied, including heteropolymetallates, sulfated metal
oxides, and zeolites. To expand the measureable acidity range, fluorinated
alkenones and aromatic hydrocarbons are studied as possible indicators. The
dependence of protonation on temperature is studied from -80( C to 200( C. The
acid strengths are correlated with catalytic activity for well-studied reactions
such as isomerizations of olefins or paraffins. Solid acids are being used with
increasing frequency in industrial processes because of their perceived
environmental advantages. However, adequate objective measures of their acid
strength are not available. In addition, there is controversy about how acidity
in solids should be defined. These issues are addressed in this project. This
project is supported jointly by the Divisions of Chemical and Transport Systems
and of Chemistry. ***