* 9528627
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Aqueous Surfactant Solutions as Replacements for Volatile Organic Solvents in Chemical Manufacture
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,10/31/1998
* James Rathman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 10/31/1998
* USD 240,000.00

Abstract James F. Rathman Ohio State University CTS-9528627 Reduced utilization
of hazardous organic solvents in industry is necessary to minimize the
environmental impact of chemical manufacturing processes. In the past, pollution
control was largely achieved by separation techniques designed to remove
hazardous materials from waste streams prior to their release into the
environment. Recently the emphasis has switched to source reduction as the
optimum pollution control strategy, wherein non-hazardous materials are used in
place of hazardous components. The goal of the proposed research is to evaluate
aqueous surfactant solutions as replacements for organic solvents in synthesis
processes of interest to the photographic, pharmaceutical, polymer, and
petrochemical industries. The catalytic effect of surfactant micelles on a wide
variety of reactions is well-known. Despite the wealth of fundamental knowledge,
primarily because kinetic data alone are not sufficient for successfully
replacing organic solvents with aqueous surfactant solutions in existing
processes. For example, premixing of components via emulsification and
separation of products after reaction are two additional areas that must be
addressed. In order for micellar catalysis to be economically viable, acceptably
high production rates must be achieved, selectivity of the desired product must
be attained, and methods of separating products and surfactants must be
identified. High production rates require maximizing solubilization of
lipophilic reactants in aqueous media, as well as preparation and handling of
two-phase water-continuous emulsions. Surfactant mixtures, which often exhibit
synergistic solubilization capacities relative to single surfactant systems,
will be investigated. Reaction rates and product yields will be investigated for
alkylation reactions of phenols, aromatic amines, and amino phenols. Methods of
separating the desired product from the post-reaction solution, and methods of
recovering the su rfactant for recycle, will be developed and evaluated.
Finally, a bench-scale semi-batch process will be designed and constructed to
demonstrate the feasibility of the proposed technology. This project will be
performed in collaboration with the Chemicals Developed Division of the Eastman
Kodak Company. The nature of he collaboration will include working closely with
industrial scientists and engineers to define reaction systems of interest and
possible avenues of implementing new methods that minimize the impact of
production processes on the environment. The principal investigator and student
researchers will visit Eastman Kodak facilities to become familiar with current
industrial methods and to consult with industrial experts on various phases of
the project. None of the research performed in this project will be proprietary.
By studying micelar catalysis in surfactant mixtures from a broader perspective
than has been done previously, the proposed research will enable industries to
implement this technology with minimum effort and expense. Results of this
project will provide the understanding necessary to bridge the gap between
current fundamental knowledge of reaction kinetics and the actual application of
this promising technology in industrial processes.