* 9528635
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Environmentally   Conscious Plasma Arc Processes for Enhanced Metal Production
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Julian Szekely, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/1998
* USD 400,000.00

9528635 Szekely During smelting of ferrous and non-ferrous metals, ionic melts
such as slags, fluxes or mattes react with gases and metals. These reactions are
electrochemical in nature involving charge transfer between ionic an electronic
species and are often diffusion limited in the slag phase. Since slags, fluxes
and mattes are primarily ionic melts, the diffusion process is controlled by the
slower moving electronic species. The objective of this research is to enhance
the slag-metal reaction by using a plasma to provide an electronic pathway in
the slag and assess the magnitude of its impact on processing ferrous melts in
terms of lowering iron oxide (FeO) content and volume of the slag, and
increasing yield, refractory life and recovery of alloying elements. Preliminary
results indicate a potential reduction of ten fold in the percent of FeO needed
for decarburization of iron-carbon melt. Annual world production and consumption
of metals is close to 750 million tons, of which iron is ninety-five percent.
Extraction, smelting, refining and reclaiming processes associated with metals
produce large quantities of both hazardous and non-hazardous wastes and thus
have a significant impact on the environment. This project could revolutionize
steelmaking by dramatically reducing both the volume and the iron content of the
slag that must be disposed of. It could also open other opportunities in the
removal of copper and zinc from ferrous scraps and in the matte smelting of
copper, which would also have a major economic and environmental impact.