* 9528241
* UV Photobiology of Planktonic Development Stages of         Antarctic Benthic Invertebrates
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Deneb Karentz, University of San Francisco
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 03/31/2000
* USD 220,269.00

9528241 Karentz Recently documented global decreases in stratospheric ozone have
brought attention to the potential ecological consequences of increased
ultraviolet-B (UVB) radiation in marine communities. Even without ozone
depletion, UVB radiation penetrating into surface waters of the ocean represents
a biological hazard to many marine organisms. The most extensive destruction of
ozone has been occurring over the Antarctic continent and Southern Ocean, where
over 50% depletion is recorded each spring. A major obstacle in assessing UV
effects is that very little is known about the UV photobiology of individual
species. In the Antarctic, some of the more ecologically dominant benthic
invertebrate species occupy intertidal and shallow subtidal depths where
biological effects of UVB have already been documented. Many of these species
have planktonic development and their spawning season coincides with the period
when ozone depletion is occurring; thus their microscopic embryos and larvae are
exposed to increasingly higher levels of UVB. At present there is no information
on the potential short- or long-term effects of increased UVB levels on
populations of Antarctic benthic invertebrates. The research proposed here will
focus on the UV photobiology of three important Antarctic invertebrate species
that inhabit intertidal and subtidal areas in the region of Palmer Station,
Anvers Island, Antarctic Peninsula. These species are the limpet Nacella
concinna, the sea urchin Sterechinus neumayeri and the sea star Odontaster
validus. The adults of these species are dominant members of Antarctic
intertidal and shallow subtidal benthic communities, and their embryos and
larvae develop for months in surface waters from late austral winter through
summer. This study will evaluate the impact of ambient UVB on early stages
(gametes, embryos and larvae) of the life histories of these species by 1)
examining potential UV exposure levels, 2) assessing differential sensiti
vities, 3) identifying molecular, chromosomal and morphological UVB induced
damage, and 4) evaluating potential protection and recovery from UVB exposure.
Since these species have taxonomic equivalents at both temperate and tropical
latitudes, this work will provide important biological parameters for increasing
our knowledge about UV effects on both local and global scales.