* 9528882
* Japan Earthquake Reconnaissance in Structural Engineering   (Sup for 2 Workshops)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Jack Moehle, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,285.00

9528882 Moehle This project provides support to initiate, develop and implement
a cooperative US-Japan workshop to study the Kobe earthquake of January 1995.
The Great Hanshin, i.e. Kobe earthquake struck the area surrounding the city of
Kobe Japan on 17 January 1995. The epicenter of this moment magnitude 6.9 event
was about 20 km southwest of downtown Kobe. Roughly 40-km strike-slip rupture
extended directly under the city. The event left more than 5000 people dead,
with tens of thousands of structures destroyed by ground shaking and subsequent
fire. Parallels have been drawn to possible scenarios for urban earthquakes in
the United States. The Great Hanshin earthquake therefore offers an opportunity
for the United States to learn and become better prepared for future
earthquakes. A systematic exchange with Japanese researchers, engineers, and
planners is desirable so that counterparts in the United States can best learn
the lessons of this earthquake as they apply to the United States. This project
is to open that dialogue by conducting a seminar in Japan and a follow-up
workshop in the United States. These activities will include presentations of
findings related to this earthquake, identification of research needs, and in-
depth discussions on how to take advantage of the data made available to the
research community in the United States. The reports will include a recommended
research agenda for such subjects as structural design, repair/retrofit, seismic
reconstruction, preparedness and emergency responses, etc. These recommendations
will form the basis for future funding priorities for cooperative research with
Japan by the National Science Foundation and other funding agencies in the
United States. ***