* 9528466
* SGER:  The Effects of Mechanical Foreces on Neural Growth   Rates
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* James Galbraith, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jim Edwards
* 08/31/1996
* USD 45,435.00

The environment provides a wide range of cues that growing and regenerating
nerve cells need to successfully reach their targets. A variety of approaches
have been pursued to identify these cues and to understand neuronal growth and
pathfinding. All of these methods have carefully controlled a particular
component of the neuron's environment such as biochemical factors, interactions
with other cells, or local electric fields. However, the amount of physical
force that is exerted on neurons is one component of the cell environment which
has not been investigated as a potential growth regulator. It is the objective
of this research to investigate the ability of the mechanical environment to
affect neural growth rates and directions. Cells within the body are subjected
to mechanical forces on a continuous basis, and these inputs induce responses
during early embryonic development and later remodeling of fully developed
tissues. Sensitivity to the mechanical environment is a characteristic of many
types of cells. Muscle, bone, cartilage, endothelial and fibroblast cells all
exhibit modified growth or morphology when subjected to physical forces. Nerve
cells are not typically thought of mechano-responsive; however a limited number
of studies have demonstrated reversible responses to mechanical stimulation and
these investigations form the basis for the hypothesis that mechanical
stimulation may direct and increase growth. This research will explore the
ability of mechanical stimulation to affect the growth and orientation of
cultured sensory ganglion neurons. The growth rates and characteristics of these
cultures have been well characterized under control conditions, and outgrowth
rates will be measured from time-lapse video microscopy recordings of both
mechanically stimulated and non-stimulated cells. Since the response of cells to
mechanical forces is often dependent on the method of application, the
mechanical forces in these studies will be applied to the cells by placing them
in one of three lo ading apparatus that will be capable of applying either
compression, elongation, or shear to the neurons. Any preferential response in
outgrowth rates or directions will be correlated with the magnitude and type of
loading used for each experiment. The ultimate aim of the experiments proposed
here is to determine whether mechanical forces can act to direct or modulate
neurite outgrowth. The results will have considerable impact on our
understanding of the processes controlling neurite outgrowth.