* 9528277
* Dissertation Research:  Male Tactics and Female Mate Choice in Captive Savanna Baboons
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Barbara Smuts, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 03/31/1998
* USD 10,928.00

In recent years, an increasing amount of research has been devoted to examining
the importance of mate choice by females in primate sexual relationships.
However, our understanding of female mate choice is limited due to the
difficulty of teasing apart effects of female choice from effects of male
behavior which may influence female mate choice. For example, evidence from
numerous nonhuman primate species suggests that females are constrained in
expressing their mating preferences due to male strategies that involve
aggressive exclusion of rivals and sexual coercion of females. Because female
mate choice will often be constrained by male tactics, it is difficult to
ascertain whether a particular act represents the female's preference, or a
compromise between her interests and those of males. This research will involve
an experimental study on captive savanna baboons in order to investigate female
mating preferences in the absence of male opportunities to coerce females or
exclude rival males. This will be accomplished by comparing male-female
interactions in a naturalistic outdoor group setting and an experimental
condition in which females are given an opportunity to associate and mate with a
choice of males in the absence of male tactics. If females' choices of mates are
constrained significantly by male behavior, they should associate and mate with
different males and/or a greater number of males under experimental conditions
than naturalistic group conditions. The proposed research is one of the first
attempts to examine nonhuman primate female mate choice experimentally and the
first study in a nonhuman primate to investigate the extent to which male mating
tactics constrain female mate choice. This experimental paradigm also provides a
unique opportunity for validating female preference signals. By comparing
females' behavior in the outdoor group setting with their behavior during
experimental mate-choice trials, the researchers will determine whether any
behaviors exhibited by estrous females in the naturalistic group setting are
reliable indicators of female mating preferences for particular males (i.e.
female preference signals).