* 9528866
* Conference on Fluid Flows/Fundamental Automotive Issues
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1995
* John Foss, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Roger E.A. Arndt
* 11/30/1995
* USD 20,000.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9528866 John Foss Michigan State University A Workshop: Fluid
Flows/Fundamental Automotive Issues will be held at Michigan State University on
August 20-22, 1995. The topical focus areas are: 1) external aerodynamics, 2)
under-hood cooling, 3) climate control flows, and 4) induction/exhaust system
flows. The specific objectives are delineating the: 1) basic research efforts
which should be pursued to contribute to the pre- competitive knowledge base in
each of the four topical areas, and 2) operating procedures which will permit
useful interactions between academic r researchers and industrial colleagues. A
general objective of the workshop: to bring together members of the industrial
and the academic communities to explore common interests, will be met by its
organizational structure. Specifically, the designated co-chairs for the four
breakout sessions will be selected from these two communities, and the general
attendees will be invited from the two communities. There are, built into the
program, formal and informal opportunities to effect the contacts that can be
expected to lead to appropriate cooperative efforts. Joint support has been
arranged from the Chrysler Corporation, Ford Motor Company, and General Motors
Corporation. In addition, The Automotive Research Initiative of Michigan State
University will contribute to the support of the workshop.