* 9528870
* Workflow and Process Automation in Information Systems:     State-of-the-Art and Future Directions
* CSE,IIS
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Amit Sheth, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Maria Zemankova
* 08/31/1997
* USD 24,795.00

The goal of this interdisciplinary workshop is to discuss state-of-the-art and
future research directions in workflow and process automation involving
information systems. There is significant recent commercial activity on
developing workflow tools as well as significant interest in this topic in
several fields of computer science. However, the current commercial systems are
not poised to exploit even much higher market potential for workflow technology
that can support information processing applications within and across
enterprises. Guided by an interdisciplinary program committee, the workshop
provides a forum for identifying synergy among experts working on the topics of
workflow and process automation in information and database systems, distributed
computing, and software engineering (including computer supported cooperative
work, software process modeling, component-based software development, and
business process reengineering). The workshop is expected to cover state-of-the-
art in current research and technology, real-world application requirements,
existing and emerging standards, and ba sed on these project the future research
and development directions. Workshop results will be made broadly available
through an NSF report, ACM-SIG/IEEECS-TC publications, and by electronic means.
The report will identify the complementary technical issues that are being
studied or should be further researched, to enhance information systems that can
incorporate intra- and inter-organizational workflows to support information
processes in a variety of enterprises in an effective and efficient manner.