* 9528684
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Manufacturing of  Net-Shapes Using Spray Forming, Integration of Process      Design, Energy and Environmental Issues
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* Roger Rangel, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 03/31/1999
* USD 330,000.00

9528684 Lavernia Products fabricated directly to net shape save energy by
minimizing or eliminating the disposal problems associated with scrap. A new net
shape manufacturing process that uses reactive spray deposition to produce a
fine grain structure, ductile, high strength material that can be superplastic
formed into useful products will be investigated. The grain refinement may
produce superior products with enhanced properties. The research combines
computational and experimental investigations of aluminum alloys, low carbon
steel, and magnesium alloys. Experimental work will use reactive spray
deposition using liquid-gas and liquid-solid reactions as the first step in
refining grain sizes below the superplastic limit. Models will be developed for
reactive atomization and deposition, and droplet-particle interactions.
Experiments and analytical measurements will define the relationship between
grain size and spray deposition conditions, with additional experiments to
characterize the superplastic behavior of these materials. If successful, the
project will reduce energy and waste material in fabricating products, with
large potential energy savings in the fabrication of aluminum products. ***