* 9528506
* RUI:  Undergraduate Research at a Four College Consortium   Utilizing an Automatic Photometric Telescope for Research
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Robert Dukes, College of Charleston
* Continuing grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 01/31/2001
* USD 310,440.00

9528506 Dukes This award will provide support for seven astronomers at four
primarily undergraduate institutions. The observations, to obtain data for the
research projects, will be obtained by the continued use of an automated 0.75-m
telescope. This telescope is operated by computer control and does not require
an observer at the telescope. This type of telescope, known as an Automatic
Photometric Telescope or "APT" yields data that is as good or better than that
obtained by most manual observers. Telescopes of this type are revolutionizing
the observations of certain types of astronomical objects which require an
extensive series of measurements. These objects have traditionally been
neglected since most astronomers have not had the time or the dedicated
facilities required to observe them properly. Undergraduate students will be
able to participate directly in the valuable research. The schools involved in
the Four College Consortium are The College of Charleston, The Citadel, the
University of Nevada-Las Vegas, and Villanova University. Some of the data
needed for the projects are solely dependent on the APT data, and in other
projects the APT data provides crucial ground-based data in support observations
from orbiting observatories such as the International Ultraviolet Explorer
(IUE), Hubble Space Telescope (HST), and ROSAT and ASCA satellites, which
collect data in the X-ray region of the spectrum, as well as observations made
with instruments such as the Very Large Array (VLA) radio telescope. The major
long term monitoring projects involve studying stars on and near the main
stellar evolutionary sequence. Stars lying on the main sequence are those which
are fusing hydrogen into helium in their central regions. These stars (the Sun
is an example) are considered "normal" stars. The research projects to be
carried out involve studying "peculiar" properties of these "normal" stars.
These "peculiar" properties are observed in the Sun but are enhanced in stars
which are o n the main sequence and are cooler than the Sun or hotter than the
Sun. Specific projects to be carried out range from observations of hot, massive
"B" stars to those of cool, low mass "M" stars. In order of decreasing stellar
mass, these projects include: * Stellar Seismology and Investigations of Mass
Ejection Events of "B" Stars * Hot, Chemically Peculiar Stars with Strong
Magnetic Fields * The Sun in Time Project: A Coordinated Optical APT, UV, and
X-ray Study OF Stars similar to the Sun but of different ages. * APT
Observations of Very Young, Active Red Dwarfs * Search for Starspot Variability
among Strong X-ray emitting Cool Stars Projects not involving main sequence
stars include: * Internal Structures of Stars and Tests of General Relativity
from Apsidal Motion: Studies of Eccentric Eclipsing Binaries * Studies of Stars
having exhausted hydrogen in their central regions (Cepheid Strip Variable and
Red Giant Stars)