* 9528977
* Studies of Water and Aqueous Solvation by Recombination of  Cluster Ions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Jim Coe, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* joyce guest
* 05/31/1998
* USD 169,518.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Coe will study aqueous cluster ions using a novel merged cation-anion
fast beam apparatus. Water and aqueous solvation will be examined through the
reaction of mass-selected beams of oppositely charged cluster ions.
Recombination rate constants are measured as a function of cluster size and
center-of-mass collision energy to reveal the effect of clustering solvent
molecules. Several new experiments are proposed in order to examine larger
cluster size and determine the effect of solvent number. Reactions of charged
species in solution lie at the heart of many chemical reactions, but very little
hard information has been available about the detailed role of the solvent in
influencing the course of a chemical reaction. Prof. Coe will address this
question by studying molecular-scale species known as clusters, which consist of
solvent molecules attached to a central species which has an electrical charge.
Using a unique experimental apparatus he can determine, for example, how many
solvent molecules there must be around the central species in order to keep
positively charged materials from reacting immediately with negatively charged
species. This will help to answer the more general question of how many
molecules are needed to define what chemists mean by a solution of one substance
in another.