* 9528363
* GOALI:Adaptive Active Noise Control: Stability Analysis,    Algorithm Development, and Efficient Implementation
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* C. Richard Johnson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2000
* USD 164,831.00

9528363 Johnson We propose a research program in the active control of acoustic
noise (and related problems) using adaptive identification and control
methodologies. The motivating applications are the control of acoustic noise in
a one dimensional or duct noise scenario (e.g. heating, ventilation and air
conditioning or HVAC applications) as well as the control of noise in a three
dimensional or enclosure scenario (e.g. automobile or helicopter interiors).
Open problems to be addressed in this research program concern (a) the
systematic stability analysis of adaptive techniques used in the presence of
intrinsic feedback loops which are caused in these applications by acoustic
feedback and not by the usual closed loop control configurations assumed in
adaptive control theory and (b) the development and efficient implementation of
adaptive filters especially in the MIMO enclosure problem. The research program
will clarify the pertinent aspects of adaptive control theory and practice and
thus allow the systematic application of adaptive techniques. The research
program will be conducted in collaboration with and will utilize experimental
facilities of the United Technologies Research Center in East Hartford, CT. It
is expected that the multidisciplinary team thus assembled by this collaboration
will allow for wide-ranging and practical research results to be achieved and
broadly disseminated thus making contributions to both education and commercial
interests. ***