* 9528510
* Collaborative Research:  Mercury Biogeochemistry in a       Semi-Arid Aquatic Ecosystem:  Processes Controlling         Methylation and Demethylation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1995,07/31/2000
* John Warwick, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 07/31/2000
* USD 114,000.00

9528510 Warwick The biogeochemistry of mercury is important because of the
toxicity of methylmercury, its accumulation in biota, and its biomagnification
in food chains. A knowledge of the concentration, transport, and dynamics of
methylmercury is needed to predict its potential impact on human and aquatic
life. The proposed program combines biogeochemical, microbiological, and
molecular investigations of the formation and degradation of methylmercury with
certain abiotic factors, and a robust modeling effort, to depict factors
controlling methylmercury dynamics in the Carson River/Lahontan Reservoir System
in Nevada. The Carson System received 7000 tons of elemental mercury during the
19th century for gold amalgamation, and now provides a strong gradient in
mercury concentrations. Specific goals are to: 1) locate sources and sinks of
methylmercury; 2) examine bacterial processes including genetic controls and the
role of terminal decomposition; 3) investigate the relationship between the
sulfur and mercury cycles, and 4) develop simulation models. The project will
consist of two major overlapping activities. First, surveys of : 1) rates of
mercury transformation; 2) expression of bacterial genes incurring mercury
resistance; 3) rates of model will be developed and validated, and used to fine
tune future sampling programs. Second, the program will address hypotheses
encompassing: 1) interactions among mercury concentration and speciation; 2) the
role of bacteria as producers and consumers of methylmercury; 3) changes in
genetics and methylmercury concentrations; 4) the role of suspended particles,
and; 5) fluxes of methylmercury from sediments. The simulation model will be
refined using biogeochemical data and used for predictive purposes. The project
will provide data essential for determining controls on the accumulation of
methylmercury in fish and other higher forms of life in semi-arid ecosystems,
and will be useful for comparison to wet and northern environments. In general ,
the research will distinguish aspects of aquatic systems that most influence the
production, degradation, and transport of methylmercury, one of the Earth's most
insidious pollutants.