* 9528826
* Synthesis and Properties of Narrow-band Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* John Goodenough, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 12/31/1999
* USD 461,956.00

9528826 Goodenough Previous studies of the evolution of electronic properties
have revealed that nature accommodates the first-order character of the cross-
overs in a variety of ways: from localized to itinerant electronic behavior,
from primarily ionic to primarily covalent metal-oxygen bonding in mixed- metal
oxides, from Curie-Weiss to Pauli paramagnetism in both single-valent and mixed-
valent systems. Classical phase segregation, charge-density waves, or
ferroelectric displacements represent static accommodations that are well-
studied. This research addresses the more subtle problem of dynamic
accommodations. Initially, a major emphasis will be placed on oxides with
perovskite-related structures. An ABO3 perovskite contains a BO3 array of
corner-shared BO6 octahedra. A mismatch between the A-O and B-O equilibrium bond
lengths may be relieved by a cooperative rotation of the BO6 octahedra that bend
the B-O-B bond angle from 180 . Perovskites with transition-metal B cations may
contain, depending on the strength of the B-O-B interactions, either B-cation
redox couples or narrow, antibonding bands with energies close to or overlapping
the Fermi energy. The strength of a B-O-B interaction and therefore the
bandwidth and the band occupancy of the BO3 array may be varied by isovalent
and/or aliovalent substitution on the A sites. Moreover, the ca 180 B-O-B bond
may accommodate the coexistence of different B-O bond strengths within the same
crystallographic structure by the displacement of a bridging atom toward one B
atom and away from the other on the opposite side. These displacements are
generally cooperative and may be either static or dynamic. The phenomenon of
high- temperature superconductivity appears to be one example of a dynamic
accommodation. Another is the apparent coexistence of Mott-Hubbard and Fermi-
liquid states in the perovskite system Srl-xCaxV03 where spectral weight is
transferred from the latter to the former. Several techniques are de veloped for
synthesizing these marginally stable oxides, and measuring the temperature
dependence of resistance, magnetic susceptibility, and Seebeck coefficient under
pressure. These probes can give important, if indirect, information on dynamic
processes. %%% This research is motivated by three fundamental questions: 1)
What is the underlying physical process responsible for the phenomenon of high-
TC superconductivity? 2) How can one use the understanding of this phenomenon as
a guide in the design of improved high-TC materials? 3) What are the different
ways by which nature accommodates the transition from localized to itinerant
electronic behavior in solids? Initial emphasis will be placed on the study of
oxides with perovskite-related structures.