* 9528147
* Electrospray Mass Spectrometry Equipment for Chemical and   Biochemical Research
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Oren Anderson, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Reed
* 01/31/1997
* USD 70,700.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
will help the Department of Chemistry at Colorado State University purchase an
electrospray probe and associated liquid chromatography sample introduction
accessories for a Fisons/VG Quattro-SQ mass spectrometer, which will be used in
research. The research activity to be supported includes:(1) mechanisms of DNA
crosslinking by the anti-tumor antibiotics, (2) mechanistic studies of nucleic
acid damage, (3) the association between polyelectrolytes and lyotropic liquid
crystals, (4) characterization of iridoid and other glycosides isolated from
medicinal plants, (5) the synthesis and physical studies of so-called
supramolecular assemblies, (6) identification of the fragile polychalcogenide
anions in solution, and (7) the characterization and estimation of purity of
fluorinated carborane anions. Mass Spectrometry (MS) is a technique used to
probe intimate structural details and to obtain the molecular compositions of a
vast array of organic, bioorganic and organometallic molecules. The addition of
the technique of electrospray extends the range of MS to protein and nucleic
acid molecular weights far beyond those accessible by any other technique. The
use of electrospray ionization in combination with high resolution provides the
latest techniques available in mass spectrometry. It affords the chemist one of
the most powerful tools available for the characterization of compounds. The
acquisition of this capability in mass spectrometry is essential for the
prosecution of frontier research in many fields of chemistry.