* 9528287
* Midlatitude Cirrus Cloud Properties Derived from the        FARS Extended Time Dataset
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Kenneth Sassen, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Roddy Rogers
* 11/30/2000
* USD 450,000.00

Sassen/Abstract The object of this research is to utilize the unique,
climatologically representative Facility for Atmospheric Remote Sensing (FARS)
cirrus cloud dataset, collected over the past 10-y in support of Project FIRE,
combined with a focused program of additional state-of-the-art remote sensor
cloud case studies, to prepare a series of publications on the synoptic,
physical, microphysical, and radiative properties of high clouds at our
midlatitude location. As of this time, over 2,100-h of FARS ruby (0.693) lidar
data have been collected, while more recently- acquired research capabilities
including scanning dual-wavelength (PDL, 1.06 and 0.532) polarization lidar, 95
GHz polarimetric Doppler radar, cologned midinfrared radiometer, all-sky
imagery, and a suite of hemispherical and solar tracking radiometers. The
advanced new multiple remote sensor datasets will also aid in student and staff
training, and in the evaluation of the prospects of 95GHz radar for cloud
research. Among the topics in our analysis program are; statistical studies of
the monthly-averaged heights, temperatures, and visible/infrared radiative
properties of cirrus; their synoptic causes, structures from the cloud-to-
mesoscales, inferred contents from lidar linear depolarizations ratios, and an
illustrated cirrus cloud atlas; and, finally, the local (Great Basin)
peculiarlarities of contrails, anvils, cirrus optical phenomenon, deep
cirrus/altostratus, and supercooled liquid water in high and middle level
clouds.