* 9528150
* Studies of Global Optimization in Process Systems           Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Christodoulos Floudas, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/29/2000
* USD 240,467.00

Floudas - Abstract - 9528150 Significant effort has been expended toward
theoretical and algorithmic studies of optimization algorithms and their
computational testing in applications that arise in process synthesis, design
and control. Recent interest in global optimization and its application to
chemical engineering problems is due to the fact that: (1) a large number of
process synthesis, design, and control problems are global optimization
problems; (2) existing local nonlinear optimization approaches may either fail
to obtain a feasible solution or are trapped to a local optimum solution which
may differ in value from the global solution; and (3) the global optimum
solution may have a very different physical interpretation when it is compared
to local solutions (e.g. in phase equilibrium a local solution may provide
incorrect prediction of types of phases at equilibrium, as well as the
components' composition in each phase). The primary objective of this research
is to develop theoretical, algorithmic and computational techniques for global
optimization problems that arise in a variety of chemical engineering design and
synthesis problems, as well as molecular conformation problems that arise in
computational chemistry and biology. These advances will complement efforts in
the rigorous mathematical modeling of chemical process systems and aid the
search in the design of molecules, peptides, and proteins. The PI plans to
investigate (i) the extension of his recently developed global optimization
approach, aBB, to general constrained nonlinear optimization problems and mixed-
integer nonlinear problems which are employed in process synthesis; (ii) the
development of a new global optimization based approach for the determination of
all solutions of certain classes of nonlinearly constrained systems of equations
which has important applications in process systems that exhibit multiple steady
states (e.g., reactors, distillation columns); (iii) the parameter estimation
problems of nonlin ear models; (iv) the bilevel nonlinear optimization problems
that arise in the analysis of process systems under uncertainty: (v) the three-
dimensional structure prediction of oligopeptides, peptides, and proteins; and
(vi) the development of a distributed computing framework for the aBB global
optimization approach and the development of computational tools for (i) through
(v).