* 9528598
* Studies of the Compositional and Temperature Effects on the Optical Properties of Flame Soot
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2001
* Tryfon Charalampopoulos, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 01/31/2001
* USD 264,991.00

Abstract Charalampopoulos 9528598 The objectives of the proposed research is to
study the effects of chemical composition, temperature and/or microstructure on
the refractive indices of soot. The proposed studies involve both ex-situ and
in-situ measurements. In the ex-situ studies particles will be collected from
premixed propane/oxygen and acetylene/oxygen flames and formed into smooth
pellets. These pellets will be analyzed for their carbon/hydrogen ratios and
from ellipsometric measurements their refractive indices will be determined in
the wavelength range 0.30 - 10 mm and for the temperature range 25 to 2500C. By
correcting for voidage effects, the refractive indices of the particles which
constitute the pellet surfaces will be determined. In-situ studies on the same
flames, consisting of scattering, extinction and polarization measurements, will
be used to obtain particle diameters, number of primary particles/agglomerate,
number of agglomerates and the refractive indices of the primary particles.
Aggregates of known configuration and refractive indices will be added to a
CO/Air diffusion flame in order to test the experimental and data inversion
approaches. Through this investigation the PI hopes to be able to account for
the non-sphericity of the soot particles, test the methodology of the in-situ
studies using straight-chain agglomerates, compare refractive indices obtained
by the in-situ and ex-situ methods, and identify the critical parameters in
determining soot refractive indices.