* 9528966
* Collaborative Research:  Cytoplasmic Hyperparasites and     Their Influence on Plant-Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Douglas Taylor, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 09/30/2000
* USD 40,402.00

9528966 Taylor The potential for cytoplasmic hyperparasites to influence the
dynamics of plant-pathogen interactions will be the focus of this collaborative
research project. The theoretical portion of the research has three o`jectives:
(1) to identify conditions that allow the hyperparasite to invade a pathogen
population, (2) to generate predictions on the effects that hyperparasite
invasion has on plant-pathogen population dynamics, and (3) to generate
predictions on long-term evolutionary dynamics of the plant-pathogen-
hyperparasite system. Empirical studies will examine the chestnut blight system
involving the American chestnut, the fungal parasite of chestnut, and a double
stranded (ds) RNA hyperparasite of the fungus. One experiment will test
predictions for the distribution of dsRNAs within chestnut populations, and the
diversity of vegetative compatibility groups with and among fungal populations.
A second study will evaluate the genetic interaction between the fungus and
dsRNA in determining pathogen virulence. The relation between pathogen virulence
and disease transmission rates will be evaluated in a third experiment. This
work will determine the influence of hyperparasite infection on the relationship
between virulence and transmission rate. The last experiment will test model
predictions on the relative transmission rates of dsRNA-free and dsRNA-infected
lines that allow dsRNAs to invade fungal populations.