* 9528907
* Meteorological Research in Oxidants and Aerosols over the   North Atlantic: AEROCE Phase III
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1995,02/29/2000
* John Merrill, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 02/29/2000
* USD 482,519.00

9528907 Merrill The goal of this research is an understanding of the role of
meteorological influences on the oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere. In
collaboration with a team of atmospheric chemists and modelers we will study the
chemical behavior of the North Atlantic Ocean atmosphere using surface-based
measurements, ozonedonse, aircraft and remote sensing techniques. Our work
entails analysis to quantify the continuous and dynamic influence of transport
and removal processes on ozone and a number of chemical tracers. Pulses of high
surface ozone on Bermuda are often associated with the passage of cold fronts.
During the spring of 1995 we will observe the meteorological and chemical
properties across fronts from aircraft and ozonesondes and assess the relative
contributions of different sources. In conjunction with the field intensives
proposed for AEROCE phase III, we will provide extensive operational
meteorological support. In addition, we will be responsible for integration of
the resulting meteorological and chemical observations and will collaborate with
other AEROCE PI's in their interpretation. A series of high- altitude aircraft
flights are proposed for spring of 1996 and we will provide meteorological
information to differentiate the relative importance of natural and
anthropogenic sources. We will use potential vorticity analyses to assess the
importance of transport from the stratosphere and upper troposphere into the
middle and lower troposphere. We will prepare isentropic trajectory analysis and
combine these with the chemical observations using cluster analysis to filter
the data and identify data collected under similar large scale motion. These
will allow us to prepare chemical climatologies not only for 03, but for CO and
other tracers. With several years of ozone data, we will determine the extent to
which large-scale atmospheric motion controls the interannual variability over
the NAO. Finally, we will develop detailed case s tudies for selected periods of
meteorological interest, as well as during the groundbased and airborne
intensives. For these times we will make use of remotely- sensed rainfall and
other meteorological data. Results from these investigations will help to
resolve questions regarding the meteorological processes controlling ozone
cycling over the NAO.