* 9528493
* Acquisition of an X-Ray Diffractometer
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Judith Eglin, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan M. Frye
* 06/30/1999
* USD 120,100.00

This award from the Chemistry Research Instrumentation and Facilities Program
will assist the Department of Chemistry at Mississippi State University acquire
an automated X-ray diffractometer system with an additional computer for
structural solutions, specifically, a Siemens P4 four -circle instrument and a
Silicon Graphics Iris computer. This equipment will enhance research in a number
of areas including the following: (1) structural determinants of the energetics
of carbon-cobalt bond homolysis in alkyl-cobalamins, (2) reactivity of
ditungsten (II,II) carboxylates, (3) studies of the pi-coordination of alkynes
and nitriles to multiply bonded ditungsten compounds, (4) structural and
stereochemical assignments in the synthesis of triarylmethanes, discorhabdin D,
and staurosporine analogs, (5) structural studies of mono- and bi-metallic
complexes of 1,2-diethenyl cyclopentadienyl and 1,2-diethenylbenzene ligands,
(6) design and synthesis of binuclear manganese complexes for use as oxidation
catalysts, and (7) synthesis and properties of 1,2,3,5-benzothiatriazine-
1,1-dioxides,2,3-dihydro-1,2,3,5- benzothiatriazepine 1,1-dioxides, and their
tautomers and identification of the structure of homogeneous catalysts. The
X-ray diffractometer is used to make accurate and precise measurements of the
full three dimensional structure of a molecule. The information obtained gives
the precise values of all the bond distances and bond angles of a given molecule
and it gives accurate information about the spatial arrangement of the molecule
relative to the neighboring molecules.This award from the Chemistry Research
Instrumentation and Facilities Program will assist the Department of Chemistry
at Syracuse University acquire a modern single crystal X-ray diffraction system.
This equipment will enhance research in a number of areas including the
following: (1)metal oxide clusters and solid, (2) boron hydride clusters, (3)
metal-thiolate chemistry, (4) alkaline,alkaline- earth and lanth anide
chemistry, and (5) the development of technetium and rhenium
radiopharmaceuticals. The X-ray diffractometer is used to make accurate and
precise measurements of the full three dimensional structure of a molecule. The
information obtained gives the precise values of all the bond distances and bond
angles of a given molecule and it gives accurate information about the spatial
arrangement of the molecule relative to the neighboring molecules.