* 9528636
* Recycleable Elastomers:  Properties of Stereoblock          Polypropylene
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Robert Waymouth, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/1999
* USD 433,946.00

9528636 Waymouth This research investigates an innovative new strategy for the
synthesis of elastomeric polypropylene. The objective of the proposed studies is
to investigate the structure and properties of thermoplastic elastomers based
upon propylene homopolymers. These materials offer an environmentally attractive
alternative to conventional vulcanized elastomers, but little is known about
their properties. Specific aims are: (i) to establish the relationship between
molecular structure, solid-state organization, and physical and mechanical
properties, (ii) to prepare a series of elastomeric polypropylenes with
systematic variations in polymer microstructure, and (iii) to investigate how
changes in the microstructure of elastomeric polypropylenes influence solid-
state structure and organization. The experimental approach includes
characterization of elastomeric polypropylene to probe the structure of these
materials over a range of length scales, from the atomic length scale
(microstructure) to length scales appropriate for characterizing isotactic helix
lengths, crystallite dimensions and large scale morphological features. A
complementary set of experiments will investigate how changes in microstructure
influence the solid state organization, structure and properties of these
materials. %%% Thermoplastic elastomeric polypropylene has the properties of a
vulcanized rubber, but the production and processing advantages of polyolefin
thermoplastics. The development of this new material should enable the
substitution of less environmentally attractive vulcanized rubbers. The
environmental benefit of elastomeric polypropylene derives from the high
efficiency in manufacturing, processing, and recyclability. The ability to flow
upon heating and solidify on cooling allows manufacturers to produce rubber-
like materials using melt-extruders, blow molders and other energy-efficient
thermoplastic processing equipment. Expensive, wasteful, and energy-inte nsive
compounding and vulcanizing steps can be avoided and scrap from molded articles
can be re-used. These materials can be manufactured with minimal waste to give
materials that have elastomeric properties yet the recycling characteristics of
polyolefins. Elastomeric polypropylene should be readily incorporated into
normal polypropylene recycling streams. An important feature of the program is
the training of graduate and undergraduate students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***