* 9528615
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Design for        Environment of Electromechanical Product Families and       Generations
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Kosuke Ishii, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 350,000.00

9528615 Ishii This project develops a method to evaluate the environmental
impact of electromechanical products by focusing on modularity, material/process
selection, and retirement specification. The method will address the entire
product line (families) and product changes over time (generations). The project
focuses on identifying the data and formulae necessary to evaluate
reusability/recyclability. The pertinent factors include: (1) technology life-
cycle of embedded functions; (2) demand for reuse as service parts; (3) value of
recycle materials versus the reprocessing cost; (4) destructive or non-
destructive disassembly; and (5) trade-off with manufacturing and service costs.
Industrial collaborators will provide validation examples in developing the
method. If successful, the project will produce an Internet accessible tool that
simulates the product retirement process, identifies cost-drivers, and improves
the life-cycle design. The tool will enhance the recyclability and reusability
of products, while reducing life-cycle costs and improving quality. The method
should reduce solid waste and extend the life of resources by addressing not
only individual products but their families across product line and generations
over time. The project will contribute to engineering education through a
graduate course on Design for Manufacturability delivered to over twenty
companies through Stanford Instructional Television Network.