* 9528653
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Waste Reduction   through Mass Exchanger Network Synthesis
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,04/30/1999
* Vasilios Manousiouthakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/1999
* USD 205,000.00

9528653 Manousioutakis UCLA The design of environmentally conscious
manufacturing processes is a challenging problem. At risk are public health, the
competitiveness of US industry, and the well being of the key chemical and
manufacturing sectors of the economy. Direct costs dedicated to pollution
control are in hundreds of billions of dollars, and as public demands for
reduced or zero discharge grow, these costs escalate. These demands have made
conventional, end-of-pipe treatment technoogies inadequate and expensive. To
remain competitive in world markets, American industry must develop new
manufacturing processes designed to avoid the generation of pollutants, rather
than rely on technologies that capture pollutants once they have been generated.
A current approach to this problem is in the design of separation systems, since
recovery of raw materials and by-products from reactor effluents can lead to
reduced raw material consumption and waste disposal costs. Thus a multi-
technology based separation synthesis method that can systematically design
flowsheets, featuring the optimum combination of the many separation options,
could be instrumental in arriving at competitive, minimum waste generating
processes. In an effort to develop waste reduction methods based on separation
processes, and in particular distillation, the PI has been working on a concept
that he calls mass-exchange network (MEN) synthesis and the "State-Space
Approach". MEN synthesis systematically generates a cost-effective network of
mass exchanges that preferentially transfers certain species from a set of rich
streams to a set of lean streams. A mass exchanger is any countercurrent direct-
contact mass-transfer operation (for example, absorption, desorption,
adsorption, liquid-liquid extraction, ion exchange, vapor-liquid equilibrium).
Mass exchangers, together with heat exchangers or other technologies (such as
membrane separations), form the building blocks of separation networks. The
"State-Space Appr oach" provides a flexible tool to synthesize mass/heat
exchange networks, distillation column sequences and other hybrid networks using
such tools as the "pinch" concept for mass and heat exchange. The end result is
improved resource utilization through integration.