* 9528807
* Deep Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate       Layers (DOVETAIL)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,02/28/2001
* Bruce Huber, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 02/28/2001
* USD 633,838.00

9528807 Gordon The proposed project is part of a multi-institutional integrated
study of the outflow of newly formed bottom water from the Weddell Sea and its
dispersion into the South Atlantic Ocean. It builds upon earlier successful
studies of the inflow of intermediate water masses into the Eastern Weddell Sea,
their modification within the Weddell Gyre, and their interaction with bottom
water formation processes in the western Weddell Sea. The study is called Deep
Ocean Ventilation Through Antarctic Intermediate Layers (DOVETAIL) and includes
six components involving hydrographic measurements, natural tracer experiments,
and modeling studies. The study will be centered east of the Drake Passage where
water masses from the Weddell Sea and the Scotia Sea come together in the
Weddell-Scotia Confluence, and will be carried out in cooperation with the
national antarctic programs of Germany and Spain. This particular component
concerns observations of the temperature and salinity structure, as well as the
chemical nature of the water column in the confluence region. The study has four
related objectives. The first is to assess the quantity and the physical and
chemical characteristics of Weddell Sea source waters for the confluence. The
second is to describe the dominant processes associated with spreading and
sinking of dense antarctic waters within the Weddell-Scotia Confluence. The
third is to estimate the ventilation rate of the world ocean, and the fourth is
to estimate seasonal fluctuations in the regional ocean transport and
hydrographic structure and to assess the likely influence of seasonal to
interannual variability on rates of ventilation by Weddell Sea waters.
Ventilation of the deep ocean -- the rising of sub-surface water masses to the
surface to be recharged with atmospheric gases and to give up heat to the
atmosphere -- is a uniquely antarctic phenomenon that has significant
consequences for global change by affecting the g lobal reservoir of carbon
dioxide, and by modulating the amount and extent of seasonal sea ice in the
southern hemisphere. This component will make systematic observations of the
temperature salinity structure of the water and undertake an extensive sampling
program for other chemical studies. The purpose is to identify the individual
water masses and to relate their temperature and salinity characteristics to the
modification processes within the Weddell Sea. ***