* 9528228
* Crossing Number Problems in Geometric Drawings of Graphs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Farhad Shahrokhi, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/1999
* USD 48,098.00

Geometric drawings give rise to many interesting and important problems which
are the extensions, generalizations, or the dual forms of the well known planar
crossing problem. A k-crossing in a geometric drawing is defined to be a set of
k edges which pairwise cross in the drawing. An interesting problem here is to
generate geometric drawings with small number of k-crossings, for a given graph
and a given k>1. Another important problem is the crossing clique problem, in
which the objective is to generate geometric drawings so that the largest clique
of crossings (the largest k so that the drawing has a k-crossing) is small. This
problem is closely related to the page number problem and has nice applications
to the theory of VLSI. The dual concept to a k- crossing is a k-disjoint set:
Given a geometric drawing of the G, a k-disjoint set is a set of k edges which
are pairwise non- crossing in the drawing. The concept of k-disjoint sets gives
rise to problems which are similar to those of k-crossings, in a dual setting.
It is the goal of this investigation to study k- crossings, k-disjoint sets, and
the crossing clique problem. The aim is to develop algorithms which can generate
solutions whose quality can be guaranteed and/or to develop general structural
results in a form which could be applicable to a broad class of graphs. ***