* 9528189
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Archaeology of the         Maritime Peninsula
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Gary Wright, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/1998
* USD 10,188.00

Under the direction of Dr. Gary Wright, Mr. Adrian Burke will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. His goal is to understand the social organization of
prehistoric Native American inhabitants of the Maritime Peninsula, an area which
includes Maine and adjacent parts of Canada. This is a issue which is extremely
difficult to address because archaeological sites in this region generally have
poor preservation of remains and thus it is usually difficult to wring much
information from them. Mr. Burke has already conducted a significant amount of
excavation in this region and has recognized that it is possible both to locate
the geological deposits which provided the raw material for the stone tools
which were used throughout the area. In this study Mr. Burke will continue his
fieldwork to locate additional rock outcrops. Materials collected from these
sources will be subjected to both microscopic and chemical analysis to search
for identifying structural characteristics and chemical signatures. Mr. Burke
will conduct similar analyses on stone tools recovered from many sites across
the region. On this basis he will then be able to establish trade routes and
economic interactions. It will thus be possible to reconstruct one important
aspect of social organization. Mr. Burke will also analyze the kinds of tools
which were made and by this means describe a technological system which was
crucial for survival in this region which lacked metal. In addition to providing
information which is of interest to a wide range of archaeologists, the research
will also serve to advance archaeological methodology. Researchers have
postulated a number of models which concern how human populations, at a simple
level of technology, make use of irregularly scattered resources. Some have
postulated that individual mobility is limited and that trade serves as a
primary mechanism to distribute these resources. Others have argued for a high
degree of population mobility. The proposed research will address this question
directly. It will also assist in the training of a promising young
archaeologist.