* 9528908
* Instrumentation and Measurement Methodologies in            Atmospheric Chemistry Research Workshop, Buenos Aires,      Argentina
* GEO,AGS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Eugene Bierly, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/1996
* USD 68,256.00

9528908 Bierly The International Global Atmospheric Chemistry (IGAC) program and
the Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) program of the World Meteorological
Organization (WMO) have included monitoring activities in their plans that will
establish baselines for atmospheric chemistry research and assessment. The
baselines are to be established by operating a series of six monitoring stations
in remote, un-industrialized areas throughout the globe. A GAW baseline station
is currently operating on the Tibetan plateau, and will soon be followed by
baseline stations in Ushuaia, Sumatra, Mt. Kenya, South-east Algeria, and a
final proposed station North of Bel=E9m, in Brazil. Baselines are to be
established at each of these stations in five basic areas: a) the chemical
composition of rain and snow, b) atmospheric gases, including greenhouse gases,
ozone, and reactive gases like SO2 and NOx, c) aerosol chemical and physical
characteristics, including total concentration and vertical profiles, d) solar
radiation, including UV-B, and e) radio-nuclides. A series of GAW regional
monitoring stations also exists in more industrialized areas around the globe.
The data from these regional stations will be used in combination with the
baseline stations to assess anthropogenic impacts. An effective means of
establishing a stations for global atmospheric chemistry data set collection,
gathered using not only similar equipment, but similar measurement
methodologies, is to build a local capacity in atmospheric chemistry with a
series of standard courses offered in different areas of the globe by leading
scientists in the field. A pool of international volunteer lecturers has been
recruited by a previous effort of the IGAC and GAW, in collaboration with the
International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme (IGBP) and the Global Change System
for Analysis, Research, and Training (START). This NSF grant, on behalf of the
Inter American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), will cover tra vel
and per diem costs of Latin American scientists from countries that have or will
have GAW regional stations, as well as those scientists responsible for
operating, maintaining, and managing the GAW baseline station at Ushuaia. The
first two-week course will be held at the Instituto de Qu=EDmica F=EDsica de los
Materiales, Medio Ambiente y Energ=EDa (INQUIMAE) of the University of Buenos
Aires, and will cover emission, infra-red, UV/visible, and tumble diode laser
spectroscopy, gas chromatography, conductometry, colorimetry, coulometry,
enzymatic techniques, and quality assurance and control techniques, as well as
data assessment and management methods.%%% This program will train local experts
to operate global atmospheric chemistry monitoring stations. These 'baseline'
monitoring stations will collect data from areas relatively free of pollution,
and allow comparison with similar data from industrial areas in order to assess
how much atmospheric pollution is related to human activity. The training
program is being carried out as a U.S. contribution to the Inter American
Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), which has a strong commitment to
training scientists in the Americas. Sixteen nations of the Americas are Member
States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global
change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National
Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency designated by the White House
to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***