* 9528593
* Variations in Upper Atmospheric Constituents' Density and   Thermodynamics in the Polar Cusp and Polar Cap Regions over Longyearbyen, Svalbard
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Gulamabas Sivjee, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Continuing Grant
* Sunanda Basu
* 04/30/2000
* USD 300,000.00

The PI will study, through remote sensing, various disturbances in the polar
upper atmosphere over the Cusp Auroral Observatory in Longyearbyen, Svalbard.
This research will address two aeronomic problems: (1) the effects of charged
particles on thermospheric composition and thermodynamics, and (2) the effects
of planetary, tidal and gravity waves on the middle atmosphere and lower
thermosphere density and temperature. The unique location of Longyearbyen
permits monitoring optical signatures of upper atmospheric disturbances
triggered by the magnetospheric particles precipitating in the cusp, LLBL, and
poleward boundary of the night sector of the auroral oval, as well as in the
polar cap region. Large differences in the average energy of the particles
precipitating in these regions lead to optical emissions from distinctly
different heights. Absolute intensities of the emissions will provide the
necessary database for quantitative assessment of upper atmospheric
disturbances. Such data constitute the input needed for detailed numerical
auroral model calculations to derive thermospheric temperatures and constituent
densities at different heights. Finally, the proposed measurements can determine
the dynamical and chemical processes that convert the effects of zonally
symmetric non-migrating tides in the polar middle atmosphere and lower
thermosphere.