* 9528444
* A Framework for Knowledge-Based Abstraction of Time OrientedData
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1999
* Yuval Shahar, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/1999
* USD 239,739.00

A domain-independent knowledge-based framework is being developed, specific to
the task of abstraction of higher-level, interval-based concepts from time-
stamped data in a context- sensitive manner. The inference structure used is
knowledge- based temporal-abstraction, which decomposes the temporal-
abstraction task into five subtasks, each solved by a temporal- abstraction
mechanism. The research provides a formal method for specification of temporal-
abstraction knowledge and for facilitating its acquisition, maintenance, reuse,
and sharing. A representation of the knowledge in the web-based Ontolingua
language also is evaluated. The temporal-abstraction mechanisms are being
extended and validated within the RESUME system. An automated graphical tool for
acquiring temporal-abstraction knowledge is developed using the PROTEGE-II
system. An evaluation is being performed of the knowledge-acquisition tool, the
computational mechanisms, and the overall framework in the diabetes-therapy
domain and within the EON architecture for guideline-based care. The research
has implications for construction of knowledge-based planning and monitoring
systems in time-oriented domains, for automated summarization of temporal
databases, for the operational semantics of deductive temporal databases, and
for the semantics of queries to temporal databases; preliminary evaluation in
clinical and engineering domains is highly encouraging.