* 9528815
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Slag and Matte    Interactions with Chrome-Free Refractories for Copper       Production
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Mark Schlesinger, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/2000
* USD 228,357.00

9528815 Schlesinger This research on mineral processing will assess the
interaction of molten slags, mattes, and copper metal with potential replacement
refractories for the "mag-chrome" materials currently used in nearly all primary
and secondary copper production furnaces. Spent mag-chrome refractories have
been labeled as hazardous wastes and no metals industry is currently as
dependent on them as the operators of copper smelter, converters, and fire-
refining furnaces. Two potential replacement systems have been identified: "mag-
doloma" refractories from the magnesia-calcia system, and "mag-spinel" or
"alumina-spinel" compositions from the magnesia-alumina system. Process
mineralogy techniques will be used to examine the actual mechanisms of attack of
replacement refractories by the molten phases employed in the production of
copper metal, both from primary ores and scrap. By establishing a working
relationship with an Extractive Metallurgy Research Center in Australia, optimal
use of the US University's strengths in process mineralogy and refractories
research, and the Australian expertise in melt chemistry and high-temperature
thermodynamics can be realized. Iron, copper, and aluminum are major primary
metals manufactured all over the world. Refractories containing chromium are
used heavily in both iron and copper production. However, chromium poses a
disposal problem for used refractories. This international research effort has
the potential to eliminate one more hazardous "landfill" problem.