* 9528029
* New Stable Radicals for Magnetic and Conductive Liquid      Crystalline Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Piotr Kaszynski, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 12/31/1998
* USD 330,000.00

This award, in the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division, will
allow Prof. Piotr Kaszynski of Vanderbilt University to synthesize and
investigate liquid crystals which have the unusual feature of also being stable
free radicals. This leads to the ability to `tune` electrical and magnetic
properties either by controlling the nature of the liquid crystal by structural
variation or by controlling the nature of the free radical. The structures to be
studied are based on the thioaminyl radical fragment. Computational methods for
prediction of properties are used in the selection of specific preparative
targets and in refinement of such choices. Both the ultimate target materials
and the model non-liquid crystal free radicals, prepared in the course of
developing synthetic methodology, will be studied electrochemically, by epr, and
by X-ray spectroscopy when appropriate. It is intended that new materials with
unusual electrical and magnetic properties will result. This work involves the
preparation of new materials in which two attractive structural features are
combined. Liquid crystalline molecules respond to small electrical signals and
to temperature variation and are used as displays, thermosensors, and otherwise.
Stable free radicals possess unusual electrical and magnetic properties
intrinsically. This work combines them to produce, characterize, and study a
unique class of substances, and perhaps ultimately to develop novel devices
containing them.