* 9528854
* Ultrafast Carrier Transport, Screening and Space-Charge     Field Formation in Semiconductors
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/1996,08/31/1999
* A. Smirl, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 08/31/1999
* USD 281,302.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9528854 Principal Investigator: Arthur L. Smirl "Ultrafast
carrier transport, screening and space-charge field formation in semiconductors"
ABSTRACT Comprehensive studies of carrier dynamics and space-charge formation in
semiconductor structures will be performed. Future photonic and electronics
systems, and interconnects between the two, will rely on and be limited by the
ability to control carrier transport over micron and nanometer sized dimensions
and by an understanding of the space-charge formation, screening and changes in
optical properties that accompany such transport. Five interrelated research
tasks will form the main body of the research (1) measurement of time-resolved
Stokes parameters for the four-wave mixing signal to study exciton-exciton
interactions and carrier scattering in multiple quantum wells; (2) development
of sensitive new techniques to measure coherent plasma oscillations which
results from ballistic transport. These measurements are expected to provide
information about transport/scattering processes which cannot be obtained in any
other way; (3) measurement of the per volt electro-optic and per carrier
nonlinear optical responses of "stacked SEEDs" electro-optic modulator
structures; (4) investigation of the transport, screening and electro-optic
response of strained piezo-electric multiple quantum wells; and (5) use of
ultrafast techniques to measure/quantify the dynamics of photogenerated
carriers, space-charge field formation and the tunneling times in optically
switched resonant tunneling diodes.