* 9528250
* Spectroscopic Studies of Blue Copper and Iron               Sulfur Electron Transfer Active Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/2001
* Edward Solomon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 02/28/2001
* USD 567,694.00

Professor Solomon of Stanford University will conduct studies on metal-
containing active sites which have unique spectral features relative to small
molecule complexes of the same ion. The general goal is to understand these
features in terms of the active site geometric and electronic structural
contributions to the reactivity of these sites in biology. The proteins of
interest are the blue copper and iron-sulfur centers which occur in biological
electron transfer. The unique spectral features of these systems in their
natural state reflect novel electronic structures which affect the reduction
potentials and the kinetics of electron transfer. Specifically, the studies are
directed at `perturbed` blue copper sites which occur naturally or in mutated
proteins and have significant spectral and reactivity differences relative to
classic blue copper sites, and at a thorough understanding of the complete
orbital pathway for electron coupling over the blue copper-Cys-His-Type 2 (or
Type 3) unit involved in intramolecular electron transfer in nitrite reductase
and the multicopper oxidases. The iron-sulfur studies will focus on the
contribution of the electronics to the redox properties of the rubredoxin iron-
sulfur center, and extension to 2- and 4-iron sulfur centers and to heterometal
clusters. The ultimate goal in these studies is to experimentally determine the
changes in electronic structure associated with coupling to additional metal
centers and to understand the contributions of electron delocalization to the
reduction potentials and electron transfer reactivity. A diverse array of
sophisticated spectroscopic techniques will be used to learn about the bonding
at the active sites of two classes of metal-containing proteins. These proteins
contain either copper-sulfur or iron-sulfur centers, are found in most
organisms, and function in the physiological electron transport chains. The
approach to be taken will entail detailed experimental and theoretical study of
simple models of the active sites, as well as experimental study of a series of
modified copper proteins. The information obtained will lead to an understanding
of how the bonding at the metal sites controls the rates and energetics of
reactions of these proteins.