* 9528861
* Dissertation Research:  Ateline Primates as Seed Dispersers
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Peter Rodman, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 10/31/1998
* USD 9,668.00

The majority of the earth's biodiversity is found in tropical rainforest, and
species diversity is particularly high in the lowland tropics. As vast areas of
these habitats are destroyed worldwide, the ecological relationships between
plant and animal species in these areas, such as those between mammals and their
food plants, remain little-studied, although it is known that dispersal of the
seeds of trees and lianas must be critical to the maintenance of plant diversity
in tropical forests. The work proposed here constitutes an 18 month field study
to be conducted in the lowland rainforest of the Yasuni National Park in eastern
Ecuador to investigate the dispersal of seeds in fleshy fruits by primates. The
study will compare the feeding ecologies of two sympatric primate species,
Humboldt's woolly monkey (Lagothrix lagotricha) and the white-bellied spider
monkey (Ateles belzebuth). Research protocols include a dietary and behavioral
comparison of the two species, with particular emphasis on the dispersion,
morphology, and chemical characteristics of fruits eaten, as well as continuous
monitoring of the flowering and fruiting of trees in the area and tracking the
seed dispersal and seedling recruitment patterns of individual trees. By
studying primate feeding patterns in concert with the dispersal and germination
of food plants, the dynamics of these mutualisms will be documented in detail,
and will identify plant and animal species that appear to play the most
important roles as ecological interactors. The work will contribute
substantially to knowledge of the Amazonian rainforest community and the
dynamics of diversity in that forest by providing detailed information on the
composition of the plant community, the reproductive biology of the plant
community, and the interaction of plants and primates through the role of
primates as seed dispersers of key rainforest trees and lianas. The project will
also extend and deepen knowledge of the interactions of primate species. Woolly
and spider monkeys in the study share a recent common ancestry, similar body
size, and overlapping diets, and these characteristics make them excellent study
species to test hypotheses on niche separation and coexistence of rainforest
animals in conjunction with the study of their roles in dispersal of seeds.
Detailed study of the manner in which these two related species divide the food
resources in their shared habitat will benefit our understanding of their
relatively recent evolutionary divergence.