* 9528280
* The Climatic and Environmental History of the Amazon Basin  Since the Last Glacial Maximum
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1996,03/12/1999
* Paul Colinvaux, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 03/12/1999
* USD 278,085.00

Abstract ATM-9528280 Colinvaux, Paul A. Smithsonian Institution Title: The
Climatic and Environmental History of the Amazon Basin Since the Last Glacial
Maximum This award will contribute to the reconstruction of the vegetation and
climate history of the Amazon Basin at the last glacial maximum using. The
project will focus on core-drilling and pollen analysis of the sediments of
ancient Amazonian lakes. A climatic history of the Amazon (an area roughly as
large as the continental U.S.) is necessary for calibrating global climate
models. Changes in three climate parameters in ice-age time are likely: CO2,
temperature, and precipitation. Research to date has developed ice-age
temperature records at six sites in the tropical Americans. Pollen evidence
shows changes in the range of temperature-sensitive plants suggesting cooling by
6oC. This cooling suggests also that tropical rainforest occupied the lowlands
of the Amazon basin in glacial times, where the effects of cooling should have
been least. Pollen from a drill core through the Amazon fan also suggests that
dry vegetation was no more prevalent in the ice-age than it is today. The goal
of the present project is to test these conclusions with cores from ancient
lakes in the Amazon `asin. The prime method of paleoclimate and paleoecological
reconstruction will be pollen analysis, calibrated by a program of surface
pollen sampling. This work will allow reliable general conclusions both about
the ice-age climate and the recent history of the world's most diverse forest.