* 9528120
* Collaborative Research:  Invasion Success of the Red        Imported Fire Ant:  Role of Keystone Species in Competitive Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Lawrence Gilbert, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 03/31/2000
* USD 121,316.00

9528120 Gilbert Invasions of exotic ant species such as the red imported fire
ant (Solenopsis invicta) occur frequently and often threaten the integrity of
natural ecosystems in introduced ranges. Yet, the underlying ecological
mechanisms that allow some invasions to succeed and others not have not been
studied quantitatively. The research in this proposal is a collaborative effort
between Brazilian and U.S. ecologists designed to test several hypotheses
concerning the mechanisms of competitive dominance and invasion success of the
red imported fire ant. Replicate plots will be established at three sites within
the native range of S. invicta in southern Brazil. Experiments in these plots
will assess the ability of S. invicta to dominate co-occurring ant species
aggressively, both in the presence and absence of parasitic flies specialized on
S. invicta. This will be the first time that the interactions between the red
imported fire ant and other ant species have been examined in the native range
of S. invicta. This study also will be the first time that the relative impact
and synergistic interaction of competition and parasitism have been examined
experimentally in ant communities This study will have immediate applied value.
It will form the groundwork for future studies of the relative success of other
invasive ant species in their native and introduced ranges. Moreover, the
results of this study will provide a foundation for the development of effective
biological control of the red imported fire ant in the southeastern United
States, an area where it is having a devastating effect on biodiversity.