* 9528878
* SBIR Phase II: Reconstituted Skin
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Stephen Livesey, LifeCell Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9528878 Livesey The skin performs a number of functions essential to the
existence of mammalian organisms. The goal of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project from LifeCell Corporation is to produce a full
thickness replacement, a graft composed of both dermis and epidermis, for
damaged human skin. The current standard treatment for full thickness injuries
requires the use of split-thickness skin autografts (STSG), if available, or
application of the more recently developed cultured epithelial autografts (CEA).
These two techniques have significant draw backs including: 1) the need to
reharvest STSG donor sites in large surface area burn victims, 2) scarring and
contracture of STSG donor sites, 3) delays in treatment while awaiting the
production of CEA, 4) poor take rates for CEA requiring repeated applications
and 5) grafting with CEA alone leaves a deficit at the graft site due to absence
of dermis. The ideal graft for full thickness wounds would have the following
characteristics: It would 1) replace both lost dermis and epidermis, 2) not
require extensive in vitro cell culture to produce, 3) deliver a persistent
dermis and epidermis, and 4) require only one surgery, thereby decreasing
patient morbidity and mortality and reducing costs as a result of shorter
hospital stays. During the studies of the first phase of the research, LifeCell
developed the tools and approaches necessary to achieve a practical, cost-
effective configuration capable of delivering these characteristics. The
ultimate goal of this program is to enable grafting of full thickness skin
wounds with a reconstituted skin (human keratinocytes delivered with an
acellular dermal matrix), thereby replacing the need for extensive STSG
harvesting and avoiding the morbidity associated with skin graft donor sites.
ThisI research will focus on the identification, tagging, isolation and transfer
of epidermal stem cells to Liefecell's commercially available dermal transplant,
AlloDerm. The epidermal stem ce ll is responsible for all cell replacement in
the continually renewing epidermis. The absence of these cells in a composite
graft will lead to epithelial breakdown and loss of effective wound coverage
requiring repeat surgeries and longer hospital stays. Successful application of
the technology described here would lead to a fundamental change in the way
patients requiring skin grafting are treated This approach would enable
reproducible immediate application of reconstituted skin in a cost-effective
manner. Commercial applications include clinical situations involving full-
thickness skin loss. This includes burns and reconstructive surgery. In
addition, guided tissue regeneration may be assisted by a reconstituted skin
system including application to periodontal surgery and epidermolysis bullosa
for which there is no current effective therapy. Additional applications include
chronic ulcers or growth factor deficient wounds of a variety of etiologies
including venous stasis, diabetes ,and decubitus or pressure ulcers. This
composite could also have applications as a model system for testing of
pharmaceutical agents such as skin patches and transdermal agents.