* 9528915
* Theory of Inhomogeneous and Confined Fluids
* MPS,CHE
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* John Weeks, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 02/29/2000
* USD 222,000.00

Professor John Weeks is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to study the theory of inhomogeneous and
confined fluids. Weeks will use a novel and physically suggestive method for
treating nonuniform fluids that combines, in a self-consistent way, a mean field
treatment of the attractive forces with a potentially exact treatment of the
repulsive force correlations. The method yields a nonuniform repulsive force
reference fluid whose structure approximates that of the full system. A second
major theme of the research generalizes the work by David Chandler on a Gaussian
field theory for density fluctuations in liquids, where excluded volume effects
are taken into account. This allows a new and physically motivated way of
deriving important classes of integral equations. Proposed applications include
wetting and drying effects at walls, adsorption in slit pores and nanotubes,
polymers, and the free liquid-vapor interface. Both analytical theory and
computer simulations will be employed in this research. Experiments have shown
that both the static and dynamic properties of nonuniform fluids, particularly
when confined in small pores or slits, differ dramatically from those of uniform
systems. New theoretical ideas are needed to help make sense of these surprising
results that impact on a number of basic research areas in chemistry, physics,
and fluid mechanics. In addition, these ideas could have practical applications
to materials processing operations involving lubrication, friction and wear.