* 9528526
* SGER:  Montitoring Biological Processes in Single Living    Cells
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Michael Geusz, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 08/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

Proposal Number: IBN-9528526 Principal Investigator: Day, Richard N. Cells
respond to environmental and developmental stimuli through changes in
intracellular signaling pathways that lead to an altered pattern of gene
expression. Monitoring of these processes as they occur in living cells is a
major challenge for biological research. Dr. Day and his colleagues propose to
use a neuronal cell line which synthesize and secrete gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) as a model system to develop a combined approach to
simultaneously monitor gene expression, intracellular calcium and electrical
activity in single living cells with temporal resolution. These studies are
appropriate for a Small Grant for Exploratory Research because of the high risk
associated with establishing the technology to ascertain all of these cellular
parameters from a single cell and the significant impact of these studies to
biological research. If these experiments are successful, new understanding will
be forthcoming about the mechanisms used by cells to transmit signals from the
cell surface to the nucleus. An additional impact of this research will be, if
successful, the method used for these studies will be applicable to the study of
virtually any eukaryotic cell system providing unique temporal linkage of
membrane and nuclear events. The tpansfer of this technology to the organismal
level will permit this investigator to examine cells in their natural
surrounding without compromising their integrity, but permitting their
unambiguous identification.