* 9528265
* Organic Photochemistry Induced by Visible and Infrared      Irradiation and in Unusual Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1999
* Marye Anne Fox, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 11/30/1999
* USD 510,300.00

This renewal award is made in the Organic Dynamics Program in support of the
research of Dr. Marye Anne Fox. The structure, chemical properties,
photoreactivity, and new routes for the generation of stable radicals,
biradicals, radical ions and carbenes will be investigated. Structure will be
established by a comparison of solution phase and solid state NMR spectroscopy,
by electrochemical techniques, and by transient and steady state photochemical
probes for excited state reactivity. The effect of structure on the efficiency
of photoinduced electron transfer and whether novel photoreactivity can be
initiated by long wavelength visible or infared light will be explored. The
effect of phase and local environment on selective partitioning among competing
reaction pathways from a common excited state will be studied. This work will
focus on understanding differences in typical photochemical behavior elicited by
constraining a photoactive molecule within a size-constrained zeolite, within a
self-assembled monolayer, within molecular solids, and in supercritical fluids.
Progress in understanding the key reactions organic chemistry depends on the
knowledge of the properties, stabilities and structures of reactive
intermediates. Such knowledge is required for understanding the efficient
utilization of light-adsorptive organic dyes in mechanistic chemistry, for the
design of molecular conductors, semiconductors, and magnets, in the synthesis of
surface-modified catalysts, and as a vehicle for understanding aggregation
effects in controlling chemical reactivity. f8 Û-ª þ ; + S u m m a r y I n f o r
m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ ( Û ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ + Ûª▓ ÑOh
ª' +'ª▒0 Ý + ] $ H l + ¢ ╗ D h + ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT