* 9528152
* SGER:  DNA Thermal Profiling:  A New Technique in           Conservation Genetics
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Michael Perlin, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lisa D. Brooks
* 11/30/1996
* USD 28,000.00

9528152 PERLIN For purposes of wildlife conservation it is important to be able
to identify individual animals to be used in captive breeding programs and to
assess populations of endangered species. Several methods have been developed to
produce molecular "fingerprints" for such analyses. With the rapid decrease of
biodiversity, quick and effective methods of assaying biological molecules (such
as DNA) are important. Dr. Perlin has developed a simple technique called DNA
thermal profiling. The technique employs analysis of how an organism's DNA
melts. Initial evidence indicates that each individual or species may have a
unique melting profile. This technique circumvents the more tedious and costly
methods currently in use in many labs. The new method is also technically
simpler and data can be generated in less time. Furthermore, the amount of DNA
required is small (100-200 ng) and total genomic DNA is used as opposed to
small, selected portions. Thus, it has the advantage of detecting and utilizing
microheterogeneities throughout the test organisms' genomes. It may thus produce
a true DNA "fingerprint" of the organism. Dr. Perlin has applied DNA thermal
profiling to the study of redwing blackbirds, Cuban crocodiles, and alligators.
He proposes to determine the genetic basis of the technique and thereby further
strengthen its validity. The data obtained from animals with well-established
pedigrees (e.g., racehorses and beagles) will be examined for Mendelian patterns
of inheritance. In addition, populations of endangered animals maintained in
zoos or breeding facilities will be studied to determine whether this technique
can be used effectively for such population analyses. As much as possible, all
data obtained with DNA thermal profiling will be compared with that obtained by
already-established methods for DNA fingerprinting and population studies. Dr.
Perlin is primarily interested in studying the limits of this new and
potentially exciting method in environmental biology. If the method is robust,
the results of this study could demonstrate that DNA thermal profiling is a
quick and simple method for DNA fingerprinting with particular significance for
conservation biologists and captive breeding programs.