* 9528339
* Disseration Research:  Nuclear and Mitochondrial Phylogeny  of the New World Monkeys
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1997
* Maryellen Ruvolo, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dennis H. O'Rourke
* 08/31/1997
* USD 3,800.00

Understanding how animal species are related to each other is fundamental to
understanding the diversity of the living world, and provides the framework upon
which the rest of biology can build knowledge. Today, new genetic technologies
involving the acquisition and analysis of DNA sequence data are providing major
new insights in this area, allowing us to understand both how diverse organisms
are related to each other and how DNA itself changes over time. One group of
animals that is poorly understood is the family of New World monkeys. The
application of new DNA technologies to elucidating the relationships among the
members of this group has the potential to yield significant amounts of
information, clarifying our view of this branch of the primate order and
contributing to our overall knowledge about the natural world. Nuclear and
mitochondrial DNA sequence data will be collected for representatives of
fourteen taxa of New World monkeys. The genes to be studied are the nuclear
X-encoded glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase locus (G6PD) and the mitochondrial
cytochrome c oxidase subunit II (COII) locus. These newly-generated 32 kilobases
of DNA sequence data will be combined with existing DNA sequence data for the
same two loci from other New World monkey taxa to reconstruct phylogenetic trees
of the platyrrhines using a variety of tree-building algorithms (maximum
parsimony, maximum likelihood, and distance). These new data will be used to
measure the extent of genetic variation within seven genera of platyrrhines and
to increase the overall robustness of phylogenetic estimation. Molecular
evolutionary rates of change will be compared between these mitochondrial coding
and nuclear non-coding regions. The mitochondrial COII data will be examined to
gain a better understanding of the rate speedup within haplorhines at this
locus. Finally, substitution patterns at the functionally characterized
mitochondrial locus will be studied for evidence of constraints on nucleotide
substitutions.