* 9528458
* Ecosystem and Soil Studies of Native American Runoff        Agriculture
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Jonathan Sandor, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Edward T. Elliott
* 02/29/2000
* USD 479,550.00

9528458 Sandor Generations of Zuni farmers have used a storm runoff harvesting
system to grow maize and other crops in the area of the present day Zuni Indian
Reservation in the West-central New Mexico. As with other Pueblo tribes of the
semiarid southwest U.S. Zuni methods of runoff farming use on fertilizer or
irrigation in the conventional sense. Farmers credit ephemeral stormwater flows,
which they divert onto well placed fields, with supplying moisture and nutrients
to produce crops. The goal of this three year study is to analytically describe
agroecological structure and function of Zuni runoff fields. System inputs to be
evaluated are moisture, nutrients, and soil materials derived from natural
watersheds upslope from fields and transported by ephemeral runoff. System
output will be evaluated as productivity both in terms of immediate crop yield
and long-term productivity, reflected in agricultural soil quality. The approach
to be used in this project is based on two key areas of research on sustainable
land use: monitoring long-term condition of agricultural soils and developing
management practices that conserve ecosystem resources. The Zuni area, farmed
for over two thousand years, provides information valuable to both endeavors:
the Reservation contains some of the oldest identifiable agricultural land in
the U.S. Studies here extend knowledge about effects of agriculture on
landscapes into a time frame envisioned in the concept of sustainability,
complementing modern long-term ecological and agricultural experiments. This
research will also contribute to basic understanding of such semiarid
ecosystems. It will have applications to sustainable agriculture development in
other arid and semiarid areas, and to revitalization of a sustainable
agricultural system for Zuni. The project is a partnership between the Zuni
Tribe and an interdisciplinary research team, including scientists from New
Mexico, Iowa State University, and University of Wyoming. The Zuni Tribe's curre
nt plan for redevelopment of a sustainable agarian economy has direct
applications for the work.