* 9528062
* IDEAL Studies on the Paleolimonology and Paleoclimate of    Lake Victoria:  Fossil Invertebrate Assemblages as Proxies  for Climatic and Anthropogenic Change
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Tom Johnson, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Herman Zimmerman
* 01/31/1999
* USD 101,945.00

Abstract ATM-9528062 Johnson, Thomas C. University of Minnesota Title: IDEAL
Studies on the Paleolimnology and Paleoclimate of Lake Victoria: fossil
invertebrate assemblages as proxies for climatic and anthropogenic change The
IDEAL initiative is a multinational effort to study the limnology, modern and
past ecology, and paleoclimatology of the large lakes of East Africa.
Undisturbed recovery of an in situ sediment profile is a prerequisite for
successful paleolimnological study. This award supports the development of deep-
water freeze- coring technology to meet the sampling challenges presented by
tropical lakes, in particular deep productive lakes where fine stratigraphy can
become disrupted in unfrozen core samples by post- recovery degassing of
sedimentary methane. The device will be used to collect cores of recent
sediments in profundal and sublittoral areas of Lake Victoria, visited during
the IDEAL 1996 field campaign. Fitted with a well-constrained 210Pb-chronology,
these undisturbed sedimentary archives will permit reconstruction of Lake
Victoria's 19th- and 20th century history at the finest temporal resolution
possible. Study of the freeze-core samples will focus on natural and
anthropogenic changes in species composition of benthic and planktonic
invertebrate communities, for which currently no long-term data are available.
Analysis of fossil invertebrates in long piston-core records from Lake Victoria
collected by IDEAL will produce valuable independent information on the lake's
late Quaternary history and help constrain paleoclimatic interpretations based
on sedimentology and stable-isotope geochemistry.