* 9528841
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Running Out of Time:  The  Politics of Primary Elections
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Candice Nelson, American University
* Standard Grant
* Rosalind Wilson
* 01/31/1997
* USD 4,540.00

9528841 Nelson Since the late 1800s, the primary election has endured as the
predominant method of nominating candidates for federal office in the United
States. Each state has the constitutional authority to decide its own election
rules, resulting in primary election dates that span a seven month period. Not
all candidates have the same time to campaign for the general election. This
investigation explores the connection between the primary election and the
results of the general election in races for U.S. House of Representatives from
1988-1994. The central questions are: do candidates who are confronted with a
divisive primary late in the election season face a tougher battle than their
counterparts who face divisive primaries early in the election season? Does the
late primary disadvantage challengers even more than they are already impaired
or does it help them by increasing their name recognition when votes are paying
more attention? Do late primaries hinder a challenger's ability to raise money
and could they alter a candidate's campaign strategy? Employing a variety of
research methods such as multiple regression analyses and semi-structured
interviews, this dissertation refocuses the study of congressional elections by
expanding the scope of study to include a comprehensive, institutional analysis
of primary elections. ***