* 9528790
* Dissertation Research:  Archives Analysis of the Development of Archaeological Tree-Ring Dating
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Jeffrey Dean, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 09/30/1997
* USD 11,851.00

Under the direction of Dr. Jeffrey Dean, Mr. Stephen Nash will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will examine the archives and unpublished
documents of a number of scientists who helped to found and expand the technique
of tree ring dating and will analyze sample lists from laboratories which
pioneered this approach. He wishes to understand how the development of
dendrochronology affected the practice of archaeology in the United States and
also how archaeology itself served to guide the direction the technique took.
Until the 1920s, archaeologists in the United States had no means to date
prehistoric events and chronologies were all relative rather than absolute. Tree
ring dating provided the first of the many techniques now employed which can
assign absolute dates. It was first developed in the Southwestern United States
and is now widely used in this region. Because dendrochronology is based on the
analysis of variation in the thickness of annual tree rings which in turn are
dependent on local climatic events, chronologies must be developed independently
from region to region. What Mr. Nash notes is that early in its history,
researchers worked in a number of areas as far afield as Alaska to establish
tree ring chronologies. Ultimately however all were abandoned and it is only in
the Southwestern U.S. where the technique took hold. Mr. Nash wishes to examine
this process and understand why different outcomes emerged. This research is
important for several reasons. Archaeology is heavily technique dependent and is
driven, in significant measure, by the development of new analytic techniques.
The results of Mr. Nash's study will extend well beyond tree ring dating itself.
The project will also assist in the training of a promising young scientist.