* 9528054
* Cooperative Research:  Local Tsunami Effects and Their      Mitigation Measures
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Jane Preuss, Urban Regional Research
* Continuing grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 07/31/2000
* USD 70,191.00

9614120 Yeh Earthquakes which occur on ocean floors set in motion the entire
water column above the region of tectonic plate motion, generating a tsunami
(seismic sea wave). Such waves, when approaching shore, can reach a height of
more than 10 meters and can cause extensive flooding, property damage, and the
loss of human lives. This action is to support a comprehensive research program
to understand local tsunami effects on man-made and natural structures.
Particular emphasis is placed on understanding tsunami-structure interactions
that can lead to effective damage mitigation measures. The program includes
computational, experimental, and mitigation components conducted by research
teams at Southern Methodist University, the University of Washington, and Urban
Regional Research, respectively. The new robust method for the numerical
simulation of waves and their interaction with structures developed at Southern
Methodist University is used to simulate transient tsunami flows over and around
coastal structures. The highly sensitive capacitance-type wave gage, and the
optical water-surface profiler developed at the University of Washington is used
to conduct tsunami experiments in a specialized three- dimensional wave basin.
The direct field experience of Urban Regional Research in the assessment of
tsunami damage and the identification of vulnerability patterns guides the
computational and experimental research. The collaborative effort enables the
development of tsunami mitigation measures. The set of laboratory experiments
and numerical simulations are sufficiently simple that the basic physics of
tsunami actions on structures can be explored. At the same time, the
experimental set-up and choice of problems is realistic, so that the results
provide the means for the design and modification of shoreline structures.
Throughout the research, full advantage is taken of the multi-disciplinary
nature of the research team. The analyses of actual tsunami even ts guides the
numerical and experimental efforts by focusing the proposed investigations on
the most practical and relevant problems for tsunami hazard reduction. The
intended, primary impact of the proposed research is the mitigation of the
devastating consequences of tsunami events, including loss of human life,
destruction of property, damage to the environment, economic disruption, and
social dislocation. ***