* 9528675
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Process Systems   Tools for the Development and Management of Environmentally and Economically Conscious Manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Joseph Pekny, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Maria Burka
* 08/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

9528675 Venkatasubramanian Purdue Univ. The chemical processing industry (CPI)
constitutes one of the major competitive strengths of the US manufacturing
sector, but it is also the source of the of the majority of the total US
industrial output of hazardous wastes. In order to maintain and enhance the
global competitiveness of the CPI while ensuring a safe, clean, and sustainable
environment, waste minimization and processing measures need to be fully
integrated within the overall design and operation of future chemical
manufacturing facilities. The goal of this work is to develop and demonstrate
computing based modeling, optimization and intelligent control methodologies
which will facilitate such integrated designs and operations. The work is aimed
at the key issues which are characteristic of the batch thrust, the PI's plan to
investigate model and optimization based process design methodology which takes
into account a variety of relevant issues. Under the continuous process thrust,
they will develop tools and approaches which facilitate joint consideration of
design and operational decisions and the monitoring and diagnosis of control
systems. The technical work includes development of efficient methods for the
formulation and solution of highly structured mixed integer linear programming
(MILP) systems, control relevant metrics suitable for inclusion into steady
state design methodology, mathematical programming based approaches to large
scale model predictive control (MPC), and the formulation of control systems
performance monitoring problems in terms of a hierarchical, qualitative shape
analysis formalism. The key outcomes of this project will be a set of prototype
tools demonstrated on a set of industrial benchmark problems which, it is hoped,
will energize the industry to pursue environmentally sustainable designs and
plant operations.