* 9528731
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing of Large Area       Electroluminescent Displays and Illuminators
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Fotios Papadimitrakopoulos, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 12/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9528731 Papadimitrakopoulos Recent manufacturing breakthroughs in lightweight,
low-power light sources made at E-Lite Technologies, Inc., using polymer
encapsulated ZnS:Cu/Mn phosphor materials, gave substantially improved their
flexibility and allowed a cost-efficient coil-form production. Based on similar
phosphor (ZnS), employing a more rigorous all-inorganic ZnS-based approach,
multi-color electroluminescent (EL) flat panel displays are being manufactured
at Westinghouse-Norden Systems. This proposal seeks to develop an
environmentally conscious, solvent-free processing of large area ZnS:Cu/
electroluminescent illuminators. The present technology employs 85 weight %
solvent (a mixture of methyl ethyl ketone and N-methyl pyrrolidone) to disperse
the active EL ingredients and the polymeric binders. Subsequent evaporation of
the solvents poses environmental difficulties. The proposed process would be
based on 100% photopolymerizable monomers along with electrostatic phosphor
deposition. This would allow the manufacture of high quality EL films without
the requirements of any solvent. In addition, we propose to enhance light out-
coupling efficiency (with 50-100% increase in brightness) as a result of
"medium-transparent" EL particles. This novel process would involve matching the
refractive indices of the EL ZnS:Cu/Mn particles with that of the binder polymer
matrix. The refractive index of the polymer matrix would be substantially
increased by incorporation of nano- sized high refractive index, non-emitting
inorganic nanoparticles, such as GaP and A1GaP. The entire procedure can be
applied by a supercritical CO2 process, followed by ultra- violet curing. The
proposed process would not only increase the brightness and lifetime of EL
lamps, but it would also allow pixelation to realize flat-panel displays. This
will enhance the competitiveness of thin-film EL against upcoming competing
technologies, such as organic EL. In addition, the novel, environmentally
friendly and cost effective processing techniques and high efficiency structures
would provide the technological edge to compete in the large display market that
is forecasted to grow over two hundred billion dollars during the next five
years. The background of principal investigators at UConn, E-Lite Technologies
Inc. and Westinghouse Norden Systems, as well as the availability of
complementary research laboratories and production facilities makes the proposed
research a natural collaborative endeavor. ***