* 9528642
* Fluid Mechanics and Mass Transfer of the Rotating Screw     Electrode Process for Plating Through-Holes in Multilayered Printed Circuit Boards.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2001
* Ari Glezer, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* C. F. Chen
* 07/31/2001
* USD 139,694.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9528642 GLEZER GEORGIA INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY A key problem in
manufacture of multi-layered printed circuit boards is rapid and uniform
deposition of copper on inner surfaces of plated "through-holes." For
conventional boards (in which all interconnects are by means of through- holes)
as well as boards also using surface-mount technology, the trade-off between
plating speed, uniformity, and deposit ductility is such that acceptable yields
are achievable only at the cost of reduced speed, requiring large capital
investment and in-process inventory costs. For holes of higher aspect ratio in
future boards, incremental modification of the existing process will be
incapable of providing the desired uniformity at acceptable processing rates.
This project consists of a fundamental study of the fluid mechanics and mass
transfer of a radically new approach to plating high aspect ratio holes. The key
idea is to operate rotating screw electrodes (RSEs) in through-holes of
submerged boards. The RSE generates radial, azimuthal, and axial flow, leading
to much more effective mass transfer into and within the hole than is possible
using conventional technology. Experiment shows the thickness of the resulting
copper deposit has much greater axial uniformity than is achieved using the
popular oscillating board technique, which establishes time-periodic Poiseuille
flow in the hole. Flow modification by an axial pressure gradient, whose
magnitude will be chosen to give flow reversal, will also be considered. This
will provide countercurrent mass transfer between oppositely directed portions
of the flow and suppress formation of cation-depleted boundary layers in the
central section of the hole. This approach will lay the foundation for
industrial evaluation and development of an improved plating process for high
aspect ratio through-holes currently being developed. The results will also have
implications for enhancing heat and mass tra nsfer in other applications.