* 9528679
* ECM: Reducing the Use of Environmentally Hazardous Fluids in Grinding
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Adrienne Lavine, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 09/30/1999
* USD 251,090.00

9528679 Lavine The fluids used in grinding present an environmental hazard. They
adversely affect the health of personnel in the machine room, and used grinding
fluid containing metal chips is a source of pollution which must be properly
disposed of. The objective of this research is to develop a variety of
strategies for enabling dry or reduced fluid grinding which will work in
different situations. Research approaches are to include: (1) improving the
wheel design, e.g., Cubic Boron Nitride wheels with optimal grain size and
spacing, enhanced thermal conductivity bonds; (2) optimizing the grinding
conditions with the goal of reducing fluid usage; (3) using alternative cooling
strategies, e.g. "cold air guns" based on vortex tubes, evaporative cooling,
internal wheel cooling, and other approaches. These strategies are to be
explored experimentally and analytically. The results of the experiments will be
twofold: (a) quantify the efficacy of the various strategies in eliminating or
reducing fluid usage, and (b) provide the data needed as input to, and
validation of, the model. The analytical model will predict temperatures, given
the measured grinding power. With this information, the model can be used in
guiding the selection of wheel designs, explaining the experimental results,
suggesting new experimental conditions to explore, and thus ultimately, guiding
industrial process design. The final phase of the project will be the "proof of
concept," in which the most favorable strategies are used and optimized for a
realistic grinding application, chosen in cooperation with the industrial
partners, for reducing the environmental impact of the grinding process.
Grinding fluids containing metal chips pose a disposable problem and hence added
manufacturing cost. If the use of grinding fluids can be reduced without adverse
performance impact via alternate cooling strategies, recovery of "dry" metal
chips can be facilitated. If successful, the grinding industry could be on e
less contributor to the environmental problems.