* 9528889
* Study on Criteria for Federal Support of Research and       Development
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Norman Metzger, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Rolf Piekarz
* 09/30/1996
* USD 66,000.00

DPG SEPTEMBER 26, 1995 Present: A. Petersen, J. Bordogna, M. Cehelsky, M.
Clutter, K. Erb, W. Harris, J. Kull, W. Lester, C. Marrett, C. McLindon, K.
Rison, C. Sullivan, L. Sundro, J. Sunley, L. Williams Dr. Petersen briefed DPG
on the September 12 SMIG meeting. Topics included 1) presentation by J. Moore on
plans for the 1996 National Science and Technology Week and a proposed new
"youth challenge" program; 2) P. Young briefed the group on NSF's evolving plans
for the future of supercomputing; and 3) M. Clutter summarized the efforts to
develop a federal research agency-wide young investigators program. SMIG agenda
topics for today's meeting includes: PFF; FY 1997 OMB Budget submission; October
NSB meeting; and the FY 96 Opportunity Fund. On September 13, Drs. Petersen and
Erb met with Bruce Alberts, President, National Academy of Sciences, and others
to discuss the Seventh Annual Symposium on Frontiers of Science scheduled for
November 2-4, 1995 at the NAS. B. Harris encouraged DPG to attend the upcoming
symposium as an excellent mechanism to meet and talk with young investigators.
He reported that Germany held its first symposium this summer which was modeled
after the NAS symposium. It is expected that NAS will submit a proposal to NSF,
as well as other agencies, for future symposia. Dr. Petersen reported that NSF's
Proposal Review Process Forum held on September 15. The meeting went well and
overall the comments were very positive. Participants included members of all
NSF Advisory Committees, with representatives from academia and industry. The
group emphasized the importance of NSF program directors in the proposal process
and encouraged NSF to continue recruiting the most talented scientists. They
also suggested that a study be done on mail review vis a vis panel reviews. A
summary of the meeting will be made available when complete. Drs. Petersen and
Sullivan reporte d on their September 20-23 trip to Alaska. Visits included the
Anchorage School District, University of Alaska, Anchorage, visit to Ilisagvik
College, the North Slope Borough School District in Barrow and a tour of NOAA's
monitoring station including the UV monitor, the Barrow Environmental
Observatory and the ITEX Site. Meetings were also held with President J. Kitka
of the Alaska Federation of Natives, the Presidential Awardees for Excellence in
Science and Mathematics Education. Drs. Watson, Broadbent and Pyle also attend
the site visits. Action: OPP to provide DPG with Fairbanks newspaper article.
Drs. Clutter and Harris led a presentation on budget flexibility and the 6 month
proposal processing 6 month rule. Budget Allocations: M. Clutter reviewed the
current practice at NSF that at the beginning of each fiscal year, BFA provides,
for each line item, 75% of the previous year's operating plan. M. Clutter and B.
Harris provided comments on the importance of allowing maximum flexibility to
make allocations based on scientific needs. They stressed the point that in
order to maintain flexibility at the cluster level, division level, and
directorate level, managers need the capability to allocate at those levels and
the ability to establish reserves. Suggestions on ways to allow for the maximum
flexibility included: 1) BFA provide allocations for continuing commitments at
the line item level and the balance of the allocation be done at the Division or
Directorate level; 2) lower mortgage - lower out year commitments, i.e. reduce
out year commitments to 50-55% instead of 65% - make more standard awards; 3)
establish divisional/directorate reserves; and 4) establish independent office
with 5% of directorate budget from which only standard grants would be made.
Proposal Processing - 6 month rule: Dr. Petersen reminded the group that the six
month rule has been published as part of NSF's customer service guidelines. It
may be that the 6 months is not appropriate for some actions and that we should
not be looking at average by unit but looking at percent where we expect to
achieve 6 months processing times. She stated that what we don't want to do is
short cut quality in those cases where it is difficult to obtain adequate review
in 6 months. B. Harris reported that MPS applies the 6 month rule to all
unsolicited proposals and that they have made a commitment to have all decisions
finalized in 6 months. In those rare case when the 6 month rule cannot be met,
programs are required to provide an explanation. In addition, where taking
longer than 6 months would result in a funding gap for renewal proposals,
programs are required to provide supplemental funding in order to eliminate any
gaps. This practice was announced to the community in the MPS June 96
Newsletter. Harris reviewed the data base which has been developed in MPS to
track all actions and to provide "what if" scenarios. Efforts are ongoing in MPS
to use best practices and have staff work as teams. The allocation of S&amp;E
funds has been tied to performance at the Division level. M. Clutter reported
that BIO was within the 6 month rule although they had not instituted any
special procedures. She works with Division Directors in this area and program
directors are no longer holding proposals over for possible future funding. Drs.
Lane and Bordogna reported on their attendance at the Learning and Intelligent
Systems Workshop held on September 17-19. M. Clutter reported on the
Neuroinformatics Workshop held September 19 and 20. She also reported on the
U.S. - European Commission Task Force on Biotechnology Research meeting held on
September 21 and 22. Clutter co-chairs the task force with P. Fasella, Director
General for the Joint Research Center for the Directorate General 12, Science
Research and Development of the European Commission. Action: M. Clutter to
provide summary of meeting to DPG. L. Williams announced that t he NSTC's
Committee on Education and Training report, "A Strategic Planning Document for
Meeting the 21st Century" has been released. Copies will be provided to DPG. He
distributed a copy of the Alliances for Minority Participation publication
entitled, Demonstrating ACCOUNTABILITY in a Diverse Scientific and Technological
Workforce. This is the first time this information has been assembled.
Statistical information is provided on pages 6, 7, 10, 11 and 12. L. Williams
reported on the 1995 National Conference on Diversity held September 22-24,
1995. The conference was attended by over 800 students. In an effort to find a
way to involve more students this year's conference was modeled with the idea of
concurrent regional conferences which worked fairly well. L. Williams reported
that legislation on GOALS 2000 will likely have minimal effect on NSF programs
because many of the states have already developed a statewide systemic plan for
science and math. L. Williams distributed a draft agenda for NSF's conference,
Women &amp; Science: Celebrating Achievements, Charting Challenges to be held
December 13-15, 1995. A panel of Assistant Directors, chaired by Dr. Lane will
be held on Friday, December 15, 1995. M. Cehelsky distributed and reviewed the
agenda for the October 4-6, 1995 NSB meeting. Dr. Anita Jones will join the NSB
for lunch on Thursday. Dr. Mary Good and Mr. William Golden will join NSB for
dinner on Thursday evening. DPG is invited to both events. J. Kull reported that
NSF Bulletin 95-13, Guidance for NSF Awardees in the Event of an NSF Shutdown,
has been issued. A question and answer session is scheduled for Wednesday,
September 27 at 2:00 pm in room 380. C. McLindon reported that a notice would be
released on Friday to staff regarding reporting to work on Monday, with or
without a continuing resolution. C. Marrett r