* 9528578
* National Science Foundation Alan T. Waterman Award
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Matthew P.A. Fisher, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 08/31/2000
* USD 500,000.00

9528578 Fisher Dr. Matthew P. A. Fisher of the Institute for Theoretical
Physics, University of California, Santa Barbara, is the 20th recipient of the
Alan T. Waterman award. Fisher will receive $500,000 in research support over
three years as part of this award. The Alan T. Waterman Award Committee
overviewed the recommendation process after receiving 96 nominations. The
National Science Board unanimously agreed to present the award to this
theoretical physicist. The National Science Foundation presents this annual
award to a promising scientist, no more than 35 years of age or within five
years of receiving his/her Ph.D., who is judged to be in the forefront of
his/her field. The committee recognized Fisher for his pioneering contributions
to the theory of disordered superconductors. He is an outstanding condensed
matter theorist who predicted a new state of superconductive matter, the "vortex
glass" phase. This novel prediction was compellingly confirmed by experiment
shortly afterwards. The work of Fisher in this area has had a major impact on
the field of high-temperature superconductivity. He also developed a theory to
describe how superconductivity is destroyed with increasing disorder, predicting
that the material would pass directly into an insulating phase as disorder
increases. In other work, he developed a theory of quantum transport for one-
dimensional metals, enabling the first definitive experimental search for this
new metallic phase. Fisher has emerged as a leader among his generation of
condensed matter theorists. His creativity, originality, and leadership ability
set him apart in this field and have inspired both experimental and theoretical
progress. The award is the most prestigious honor of the National Science
Foundation for young researchers. *** Report on the 1995 Alan T. Waterman Award
recipient Dr. Matthew P.A. Fisher Institute for Theoretical Physics, University
of California, Santa Barbara DATE: 7/18/95 PROPOSAL: DMR-9528578 Dr. Matthew P.
A. Fisher of the Institute for Theoretical Physics, University of California,
Santa Barbara, is the 20th recipient of the Alan T. Waterman award. The National
Science Foundation presents this annual award to a promising scientist, no more
than 35 years of age or within five years of receiving his/her Ph.D., who is
judged to be in the forefront of his/her field. Fisher will receive $500,000 in
research support over three years as part of this award. The Alan T. Waterman
Award Committee (see following list of names) overviewed the recommendation
process after receiving 96 nominations in response to a September 1, 1994 Dear
Colleague letter. The National Science Board unanimously agreed to present the
award to this theoretical physicist at its March 20, 1995 Executive Closed
Session Meeting following a report by Dr. Neal F. Lane, Director and Chair of
the Executive Committee, on behalf of the committee. Dr. Lane and Dr. Frank
Rhodes (Chairman of the National Science Board) notified Fisher of the award by
letter on April 6, 1995. The committee recognized Fisher for his pioneering
contributions to the theory of disopdered superconductors. He is an outstanding
condensed matter theorist who predicted a new state of superconductive matter,
the "vortex glass" phase. This novel prediction was compellingly confirmed by
experiment shortly afterwards. The work of Fisher in this area has had a major
impact on the field of high-temperature superconductivity. He also developed a
theory to describe how superconductivity is destroyed with increasing disorder,
predicting that the material would pass directly into an insulating phase as
disorder increases. In other work, he developed a theory of quantum transport
for one-dimensional metals, enabling the first definitive experimental search
for this new metallic phase. Fisher has emerged as a leader among his generation
of condensed matter theo rists. His creativity, originality, and leadership
ability set him apart in this field and have inspired both experimental and
theoretical progress. The award is the most prestigious honor of the National
Science Foundation for young researchers. Craig Rottman Program Director,
Materials Theory, DMR/MPS