* 9528513
* Tailoring Surface Morphology of Epitaxial Layers on Silicon
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2001
* Ignatius Tsong, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/2001
* USD 349,473.00

9528513 Tsong This research project uses a unique combination of ultrahigh
vacuum (UHV) microscopies: low energy electron microscopy (LEEM) and scanning
tunneling microscopy (STM), to conduct in situ deposition and growth studies on
Si surfaces to clearly identify different growth modes, i.e. Frank-van der
Merwe, Volmer-Weber, and Stranski-Krastanov, and also to observe gross changes
of the surface during growth, such as faceting and step-bunching. The
investigation focuses on tailoring the surface morphology of homoepitaxial and
heteroepitaxial layers on Si surfaces with different orientations. Ge/Si(100)
and Ge/Si(311) and the homoepitaxial systems of Si/Si(100) and Si/Si(311) will
be studied. Real-time LEEM observations of the development of 2D-island density
during growth with and without a surfactant will be used to assess whether or
not the presence of surfactants increases or reduces the diffusion lengths of
adatoms to promote layer-by-layer growth. %%% The proposed LEEM/STM
investigations are expected to pinpoint the role of energetics versus kinetics
played by the high-index (311) substrate surface. STM, with its better spatial
resolution, is ideal for the study of the initial stages of nucleation; while
LEEM is particularly suited to examine growth kinetics dependent upon substrate
temperature, diffusion rates and mass transport. These two powerful lateral
spatial resolving techniques will enable identification of critical parameters
necessary to tailor growth morphologies, and hence the synthesis of new and
improved materials for microelectronic applications. The Ge/Si system is
significant from the technological point of view of enhanced carrier mobility in
SiGe/Si superlattices and their application in heterojunction bipolar
transistors, while Si/Si homoepitaxy is a model system to study fundamental
mechanisms controlling growth kinetics, in particular the minimization of
substrate temperature for step-flow growth. The knowledge and understanding
gained from this research pr oject is expected to contribute in a general way to
improving the performance of advanced devices used in computing, information
processing, and telecommunications by providing a fundamental understanding and
a basis for designing and producing improved materials. An important feature of
the program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***