* 9528072
* Molecular Systematics and Coevolution in Yucca Moths
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* James Leebens-Mack, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Mary C. McKitrick
* 01/31/2000
* USD 162,925.00

9528072 PELLMYR Understanding the mechanisms that determine host utilization and
specificity is central to the study of plant-animal interactions,
diversification, and the process of coevolution. This project will explore the
phylogenetic systematics of yucca moths in the genera Tegeticula Parategiticula
and Prodoxus (Insecta: Lepidoptera: Prodoxidae), some of which are obligate
pollinators of their host yucca plants, to test hypotheses about host
specificity, reversal of mutualism, and patterns of species diversification
among these moths. Phylogenetic hypotheses will be developed using morphometric
and molecular tools. The latter entails mitochondrial and nuclear DNA
sequencing, and denaturing-gradient gel electrophoresis. The results will be
used to test hypotheses of one-on-one host specificity between pollinators and
their host plants, multiple reversals of pollination behavior, congruence of
plant-insect phylogenies, constrained patterns of life history change, and host
shifts as a path for defection in cooperation. Modern systematic revisions will
also be compiled for all genera in these classical model groups for the study of
interspecific interactions. The results will be a framework for one of the most
important model systems of plant-insect interactions and will increase our
understanding of host shifts in plant feeding insects. The results could have
immediate application in agriculture and applied entomology by contributing to
understanding how pest organisms respond and change over time in their
interactions with plants.