* 9528434
* LTREB: Evaluation of Geothermally-modified Runoff and       Nutrient Cycling in a Lowland Tropical Stream
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/1996,09/30/2001
* Frank Triska, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Henry L. Gholz
* 09/30/2001
* USD 270,604.00

9528434 Pringle Previous research focused on the linkage between geothermally-
introduced solutes and stream ecology in lowland rain forests of Costa Rica.
Results indicated that phosphorus-rich streams exist 'side-by-side' with
phosphorus poor streams. The source of the high phosphorus is geothermally-
modified groundwater that creates a high spatial variability in stream solute
chemistry. These findings represent patterns among streams draining much of the
volcanic spine of Central America. This research will build on these previous
findings. The current project will evaluate stream solute chemistry and
incorporate important geomorphic features associated with local watershed runoff
and geothermal inputs along two major stream drainages in Costa Rica. The
hypothesis to be tested states that spatial and temporal patterns in solute
chemistry of surface- and ground-water are related to three major geomorphic
features of the volcanic landscape. Process oriented studies in one of the study
drainages will allow the linkage of stream solute chemistry and transport to
ecosystem- and landscape-level processes. Experiments and stream monitoring will
test the hypothesis that spatial and temporal patterns in nutrient limitation of
algal growth and leaf litter decomposition in surface waters are controlled by
the presence or absence of geothermally-introduced phosphorus, along with
physical/hydrological characteristics of the stream channel. Results from this
project will comprise the only long-term data set on stream solute chemistry for
primarily lowland tropical rainforest in Central America. Stream solute
chemistry and process-oriented data are of fundamental importance to scientists
seeking to understand and manage tropical forests and to predict the effects of
regional environmental change on these threatened ecosystems.