* 9528921
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Morphological Integration   in the Hominid Cranial Base
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Frederick Grine, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/28/1998
* USD 10,252.00

The research proposed here will evaluate the functional morphology of the
hominid cranial base, and its role in reconstructing patterns of early human
evolution (i.e., patterns of hominid phylogeny). This research is significant
because it will critically examine the functional and phylogenetic relationships
of an anatomical region that has been the subject of debate for most of this
century. In the process of doing so, it will collect quantitative postural data
that will vastly improve our ability to relate primate positional behavior and
morphology. Finally, it will propose an approach whereby functional and
structural inferences may be used in phylogenetic analysis. Namely, anatomical
features that are functionally or stucturally related to each other will be
grouped into complexes, and will then be treated as a unit (i.e., weighted as a
single feature) in a cladistic analysis (a method of phylogeny reconstruction).
This approach is relevant to cladistic analyses in all fields of biology,
regardless of the organism or anatomical region that is under investigation. The
cranial base is an appropriate anatomical focus for functional and phylogenetic
research. From the standpoint of functional morphology, a wide range of factors
may influence basicranial form. Such factors include brain size, posture,
vocalization, mastication, and facial architecture. Consequently, there are many
functional hypotheses available for testing. From a phylogenetic standpoint,
basicranial traits play a vital role in the controversey surrounding patterns of
early human evolution. Early members of our own genus (e.g., Homo habilis, Homo
erectus) share a number of advanced basicranial features with some
australopiothecine species. These features either indicate a close evolutionary
relationship between these species and the ancestral members of our genus, or
that advanced basicranial characters evolved independently in two or more
lineages of early humans. Finally, the cranial base is important from an
historical perspective. It has long been recognized that the cranial base of
humans is distinct from that of other primates. As a result, a basicranial
feature was among those used to identify the first recovered australopithecine
skull as being a human ancestor.