* 9528083
* Magnetorheaological Damping: A Practical and Affordable New Retrofit Technology for Life Extension of Civil Infrastructure Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Billie Spencer, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* John Scalzi
* 06/30/2001
* USD 272,807.00

9528083 Spencer This project conducts research on development of high-tech
devices for the safety and life extension of civil infrastructure systems.
Passive and active retrofit strategies represent the two ends of the spectrum in
the use of control for reducing the response of civil infrastructure system
subjected to dynamic hazard such as earthquakes. Semiactive and hybrid control
devices potentially combine the best features of both the passive and active
approaches for mitigating undesirable response. An interdisciplinary
investigation of a new semi-active control device that uses a magnetorheological
(MR) fluid in a controllable fluid damper is carried out. The MR damper
overcomes many of the cost and technical difficulties of current semi-active
control devices, and has high potential for use in civil infrastructure systems.
In addition to its great promise for retrofits, the MR dampers are also
attractive for new construction. The research will involve: (1) testing of the
MR damper to characterize its behavior and to identify control-oriented models,
(2) development of device specific nonlinear control algorithms that can take
maximum advantage of the unique features of the MR damper, (3) conducting proof
of concept tests for several structural system configurations in the Structural
Dynamics and Control/Earthquake engineering Laboratory (SDC/EEL) at the
University of Notre Dame, and conducting larger scale implementation and
verification tests at the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research
(NCEER) in Buffalo, New York. Successful completion of this research is expected
to accelerate economic and practical implementations of innovative retrofit
strategies for dynamics hazard mitigation in civil infrastructure systems. ***