* 9528746
* ECM: Development of Plasma-Based Techniques to Reduce the   Environmental Hazards Associated with Wet-Bath              Electroplating Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* John Conrad, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 09/30/1998
* USD 480,000.00

9528746 Conrad The objective of this research is to investigate Plasma Source
Ion Implantation (PSII), a dry, non-polluting surface modification technique, to
mitigate the problems associated with wet chemical bath plating procedures. PSII
is a non-line-of-sight, dry surface modification technique that has been shown
tos improve wear and corrosion of materials. In PSII, the parts to be treated
are placed in a plasma (ionized gas) and pulse-biased to a high negative
potential. As a result, ions in the plasma are accelerated into the parts'
surfaces at high velocities, resulting in the enhancement of its surface
properties. In addition to implantation, the PSII process can be used to deposit
overlay coatings with a degree of mixing at the coating-substrate interface that
assures good adhesion. This research will involve the application of the PSII
process in both the ion implantation and deposition modes. Process variables in
PSII such as energy, dose, and pulse shape will be utilized to control the
phases and microstructure of the coatings. The PSII-treated coatings will be
characterized using Auger spectroscopy and electron microscopy for
microstructural aspects such as grain size, cracks, and porosity. Wear,
corrosion, and adhesion characteristics of the coatings will be of primary
interest and will be studied in detail, modeled computationally, and compared to
existing electroplated coatings. The research will be performed in a multi-
disciplinary environment involving plasma physics, materials science, ion-
materials interactions, computer modeling, and tribology. Consequently, it will
develop new knowledge at the interfaces between these areas and apply the
fundamental knowledge in these fields to environmentally conscious
manufacturing, where it has the potential to make a significant impact on
ecology and workers' environment. The research will have a strong educational
component as well as industrial participation. Currently, wet chemical bath
platings (e.g., chromium and cadmium) are widely used for improving wear,
corrosion, and erosion resistances and lowering friction in a variety of machine
tooling, process equipment, and manufactured goods. However, the chemical baths
and the rinse water generated from the plating plants are environmentally toxic
and present significant problems in both handling and disposal. PSII provides an
appealing substitute to these wet chemical processes, because of its ability to
produce high performance material surfaces in a chemical-free, environmentally-
clean manner.