* 9528759
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Integrating       Environmental Issues into Product Design Planning and       Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Rao Tummala, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ronald L. Rardin
* 12/31/2000
* USD 400,000.00

9528759 Melnyk This research is focused on the development and evaluation of a
new process for integrating environmentally conscious manufacturing (ECM)
concerns and issues into the design of new products/processes and the planning
and scheduling of production, not only within the factory of a single firm, but
also within the product supply chain. Integration of the supply chain implies
bringing in the issues, activities, and actions of the suppliers into the
planning and scheduling process. The project will integrate parts of this
process into an existing material requirements planning (MRP) system to create a
"Green MRP" system. The objectives of the research are: (1) develop a working
prototype of an ECM product design/manufacturing system (PDMS), (2) examine the
process of incorporating Green MRP into an existing MRP system, (3) explore new
options with different production plans, including recycling, (4) provide
accounting reports, feedback, and support for environmental compliance, (5)
develop a working system for incorporating the supply chain into the ECM system,
and (6) develop implementation guidelines and procedures to follow when
incorporating environmental concerns into the PDMS. The research methodology
includes qualitative techniques, such as interviews, verbal protocol analysis,
and content analysis and quantitative analysis methods, including computer
simulation, data recording, fuzzy set theory, bills of waste, by-product
processing, waste streaming, and network theory. An interdisciplinary advisory
and review team from both academia and industry will be convened to support the
overall research. In today's competitive market, firms are under pressure to
develop and introduce new products quickly and at lower costs while meeting or
exceeding environmental requirements. Countries are investigating ways to come
up with legislation that would hold manufacturers directly responsible for the
entire life cycle of the products they manufacture. This research through its
devel opment of the PDMS and Green MRP can help a manufacturer by (1)
identifying potential problems in advance; (2) improving waste management
planning; (3) improving the ability of a manufacturer to ensure compliance; (4)
generating the formal documentation required for government regulations; and (5)
improving the ability of designers and planners to understand the link between
their decisions and the outcome to the environment.