* 9528491
* Numerical Studies of Three-Dimensional Turbulence in Small  Aspect Ratio Domains
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/1996,03/31/1998
* Leslie Smith, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger E.A. Arndt
* 03/31/1998
* USD 132,255.00

CTS-9528491 Smith This is a study of three dimensional turbulence in small
aspect ratio (SAR) domains, where the vertical height, H, is small compared to
the length, L, in the horizontal direction. The objective is to solve the
incompressible Navier Stokes equations using a pseudo-spectral code in a
periodic domain for varying resolutions. The study will be aimed at bridging the
gap between turbulence research and geophysical applications. Of special
interest is the transition from two dimensional to three dimensional turbulence
and related fundamental issues such as the change in the energy cascade. Two-
dimensional turbulence is characterized by an inverse cascade of energy to large
scales whereas the direction of the energy flux in three-dimensional turbulence
is in the direction of smaller scales. The interest in the SAR domain is the
apparent lack of detailed study in spite of the relevance to geophysical
phenomena such as atmospheric turbulence. One of the unique features of this
study is to consider SAR turbulence where the vertical velocity is not small in
comparison to the horizontal turbulence at small scales. this would allow the
modeling of phenomena that are inaccessible to quasi-geostrophic models, such as
atmospheric large scale motions that are partially driven by vertical convection
at relatively small scales. The interaction of coherent structures with
background forcing in SAR domains is one of the objectives of the research. The
research addresses an important aspect of turbulence dynamics that has not
received adequate attention in the past. The results of this research will have
an important impact on our ability to predict geophysical flows.