* 9528226
* Dynamics of Fundamental Optical Transitions in Gallium      Nitride and Aluminum Gallium Nitride
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Jingyu Lin, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2000
* USD 148,000.00

9528226 Lin This research project is targeted at the investigation of the
dynamics of band-to-band exciton, and band-to-impurity transitions in GaN and
AlGaN, including recombination lifetimes and quantum efficiencies, employing
time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy measurements. These dynamic
processes will be investigated in epitaxial layers, heterostructures, quantum
wells, and artificially structured laser cavities under different conditions--
temperature, excitation energy, intensity, and polarization. Fundamentally
important physical quantities, including the free- and bound-exciton oscillator
strengths which determine basic optical processes such as excitation,
absorption, and recombination, will be measured. The effects of post-growth
annealing, external fields, and alloy composition on the optical recombination
dynamics will be included in the study. In addition, the dynamics of optical
transitions will be investigated under conditions of optically-pumped stimulated
emission and lasing to ascertain information regarding preferable optical
transitions for laser applications as well as to provide model descriptions for
gain mechanisms and quantum efficiencies in GaN lasers. %%% In wide bandgap
semiconductor optical devices, such as UV emitters and UV-blue laser diodes, it
is the dynamic processes of the fundamental optical transitions that
predominantly determine their performance. The history of GaAs and ZnSe
semiconductor laser development shows that understanding fundamental optical
recombination dynamics is an important key to the understanding of laser
activity. Additionally, an understanding of the dynamic processes of optical
transitions provides new directions for improving material quality as well as
being of great value in designing and optimizing optoelectronic devices. The
research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental
level of technological relevance to several aspects of advanced photonics.
Additionally, the knowledge and understandin g gained from this research project
is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
advanced devices and circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials. An important feature of the program
is the integration of research and education through the training of students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***