* 9528957
* Origins of Stress in Elastic Membranes
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Thomas Witten, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 01/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

9528957 Witten Soft materials such as rubbers, foams, gels and biological
tissues will be the subject of this theoretical project. The project will
develop new ways to describe and predict this softness quantitatively using
mathematics, statistical physics and computer simulations. The research will
focus on two materials that show promise for improved prediction. The first type
are deformed elastic sheets, such as a wad of paper, a distorted red blood cell
or a crumpled fender. The amount of force to distort these elastic sheets will
be predicted by utilizing a recently discovered insight about how the
deformation energy is distributed in a deformed sheet. The results of this
research will assist engineers in designing sheets of materials which crumple in
controlled ways. The second type of material to be studied will be microscopic
layers of polymer molecules attached to surfaces. Such layers are used to keep
tiny solid particles suspended in many widely-used fluids such as motor oil or
ink. These layers resist deformation because of the tendency for the flexible
polymers to remain as random as possible. This drive to maximize randomness
leads the polymers to distort collectively rather than individually. The
research will predict how these layers distort in various situations. %%% This
theoretical research project will deal with two types of materials. First,
sheets of elastic materials, such as rubber, will be studied in order to
determine how they behave as they crumple under stress. These results will be
important for predicting the behavior of a large number of different materials
as they crumple. Second, the behavior of polymer layers attached to surfaces
will be studied. These materials are used to suspend small particles, such as
used in motor oils. The research will study the behavior of these materials as
they are distorted. ***