* 9528167
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Oyster Resistant to          Haplosporidium Nelsoni (MSX)
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Thomas Cheng, Atlantic LittleNeck ClamFarms
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/1999
* USD 224,826.00

*** 9528167 Cheng This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
designed to help solve a major problem for the oyster industry along the mid-
Atlantic seaboard of the United States. Since 1957, oysters in the Delaware and
Chesapeake Bays have suffered mass moralities due to lethal diseases caused by
two protistan parasites, Haplosporidium nelsoni (MSX) and Perkinsus marinus
(Dermo). Based on the results of Phase I research, it now appears fairly certain
that a yet uncharacterized saccharide, designated as lathyrose, that occurs on
the surfaces of a high percentage of hemocytes of oysters, Crassostrea
virginica, from certain areas along the Atlantic coast of the U.S. and along the
Gulf of Mexico coast may serve as a molecular marker for innate resistance to
Haplosporidium nelsoni (MSX). Lathyrose-positive hemocytes will agglutinate when
presented with the Lathyrose odoratus lectin. Phase II research will survey for
the presence of lathyrose in large samples of oysters ( > 400) from Maine to the
Gulf coast. This survey is designed to accurately determine whether there is a
high degree of correlation between the occurrence of lathyrose and absence of
MSX. If this phenomenon is successfully established, then trays of lathyrose-
positive oysters will be transplanted to Inlet Creek, Sullivan's Island,
Charleston County, South Carolina, where about 28% of the native oysters harbor
MSX. This will be done to field test the resistance of lathyrose-positive
oysters to MSX. Phase II research will then make genetic crosses to develop
strains of lathyrose-positive oysters resistant to MSX and develop (and
eventually market) simple diagnostic kit to identify oysters resistant to MSX.
***