* 9528686
* ECM: Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing of Carbon      Materials and the Simultaneous Creation of Oxidation        Resistant Carbons
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* J. Sekhar, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 12/31/1999
* USD 342,695.00

9528686 Shehar Carbonaceous materials, because of their resistance to molten
salt and high temperature conductivity, are used as electrode and cell lining
materials in commercial molten salt electrolysis cells. An important industrial
application is in Hall-Heroult cells used to produce aluminum. These materials
can cause pollution and health problems because of the evolution of sulfur
dioxide and other materials when the carbon sources and binders are baked during
fabrication or in use as electrodes or cell liners for bauxite conversion, where
they can evolve fluorine or cyanide. This research will investigate micropyretic
synthesis as a way to avoid much of the pollution during electrode fabrication.
The process involves the use of an exothermic chemical reaction to
simultaneously synthesize and sinter the desired part. Because of their superior
microstructure, these materials can reduce the oxidation rate for electrodes and
cell walls during operation in a cell. The work will investigate the fundamental
nature of the micropyretic microstructure of the carbonaceous materials, new
micropyretic sources and ways to increase the flexural strength, and to quantify
the environmental impact of micropyretic electrodes and linings in Hall-Heroult
cells. The impact of the research will be avoidance of sulfur dioxide emissions
during electrode fabrication, a key part of the aluminum conversion cell, and
reduced rates of emissions during the operation of these cells. ***