* 9528473
* Surface and Bulk Diffusion on Single-Crystal Ice and Acid   Hydrate Multilayers
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Steven George, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Bernasek
* 02/29/2000
* USD 305,000.00

The investigation of the diffusion of small, atmospherically relevant molecules
on and in ice is the subject of this research project supported jointly by the
Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Atmospheric Chemistry Program.
Laser resonant desorption methods will be used to probe the diffusion of ClONO2,
HOCl, HNO3 and HCl on the surface and in the bulk of ice and acid hydrate
multilayers produced and characterized in an ultra high vacuum apparatus. An
understanding of the diffusion process and a knowledge of diffusion rates is
important to developing an understanding of the heterogeneous chemistry of polar
stratospheric clouds that convert stable halogen containing reservoir molecules
into active halogen species which destroy ozone catalytically in the
stratosphere. This work will also provide new basic information about the
diffusion process on and in molecular solids. In order to understand the
detailed mechanisms and rates of stratospheric ozone depletion by man made
chemicals such as chlorofluorocarbon propellants and refrigerants, it is
important to know about the rates and mechanisms of diffusion of these molecules
and their decomposition products on the surfaces and in the bulk of the ice
particles which exist in the stratosphere. Obtaining this understanding is the
goal of this research project. Using laser desorption methods developed
previously by the principal investigator, the details of this diffusion process
will be examined. This information will help in developing models of the
chemistry of the atmosphere which will aid scientists in proposing solutions for
problems such as the depletion of the ozone layer in the stratosphere.