* 9528840
* Assessment of Community Size Structure in Adjacent Habitats: An Exploratory Experimental Study of the Benthic-Pelagic   System
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Stephen Threlkeld, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 08/31/1999
* USD 110,000.00

9528840 Threlkeld Plant and animal communities are often influenced by material
flows or organism movements from adjacent habitats, although the extent of
influence on neighboring communities is poorly known. In aquatic systems, these
neighborhood influences are mediated through water circulation, sedimentation,
resuspension, or the life history movements of key consumer or prey species.
Although the size frequency distribution of organisms in natural communities has
been used to understand trophic interactions in individual communities, the
proposed research will investigate the extent to which size structure changes in
adjacent habitats are related to each other, which might suggest important
inter-habitat linkages. The proposed research will use a 28-pond experiment to
examine the link between communities in bottom and open water habitats by
evaluating if experimentally-induced changes in size structure in one habitat
result in similar or complementary community size structure changes in the
adjacent habitat. A broad array of nutrient and consumer treatment combinations
known to influence size distributions of biomass and particulate phosphorus in
one of the two habitats will be used to measure how communities in adjacent
habitats are linked. Because heterogeneity is common in the spatial arrangement
of habitats, it follows that processes organizing the community of one habitat
may influence those of adjacent habitats, even beyond edge effects which are
often present and well documented. The proposed pond experiment is the first
aquatic study to evaluate directly if and to what extent size structure changes
in one habitat are related to those in adjacent habitats, providing evidence of
community linkage in aquatic systems and a means for evaluating landscape level
patterns in other systems.