* 9528445
* Collaborative Research:  Species Introductions as Ecological Experiments-Linking Biogeographical Patterns and Ecological Mechanisms
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Craig Osenberg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Palmer
* 07/31/1999
* USD 91,708.00

9528445 Osenberg The introduction of species outside their native ranges can
provide unique opportunities to study the factors determining species
distributions and abundances on both local and regional scales. Introductions of
fishes into lakes are particularly useful because they resemble experiments;
they are often replicated (introductions are made to multiple lakes), have
controls (nearby lakes that did not receive introductions), and are often
documented (recorded by agencies performing the introductions). For example, the
redear sunfish (native to the southeastern US) is currently being introduced
into Michigan lakes, where the pumpkinseed sunfish is native. The redear and
pumpkinseed are similar in morphology and ecology (both feed primarily on
snails), and are expected to compete strongly. Indeed, initial studies in
Michigan suggest that pumpkinseed populations decline by 80% following redear
introduction. The present research makes use of past and ongoing introductions
of sunfish into Michigan lakes, coupled with comparative studies of sunfishes in
the Carolinas (where both species are native), to explore the consequences of
species introductions on native species, examine the causes of geographic
distributions, and investigate some of the ecological mechanisms that drive
these relationships. Species introductions are an increasingly common source of
human impacts on natural systems, yet there is currently little ability to
predict their impacts, mitigate their effects, or discriminate between
introductions that have major effects and those that are relatively benign. This
work attempts to integrate functional morphology, community ecology, and
biogeography into a framework that can help resolve these shortcomings, and it
addresses these issues in a group of economically and recreationally important
fishes.