* 9528100
* Dissertation Research:  Structural Differences in the Corpus Callosum of Macaca fascicularis and Pan Troglodytes by     Confocal Microscopy
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Jeffrey Laitman, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 04/30/2000
* USD 10,963.00

This is an investigation of sexual differences in that part of the brain which
serves as the major communicating highway between the two cerebral hemispheres,
the corpus callosum. This study will examine the brains of two species of higher
primates, the cynomolgus monkey (Macaca fascicularis) and the common chimpanzee
(Pan troglodytes) using laser scanning confocal microscopy, a recent advancement
in microscopic imaging that allows for a level of investigation and analysis not
available previously. Data from this project will offer new information on both
the basic biology of the nonhuman primate corpus callosum and provide a
substrate which will enable reconstruction of the evolution of sex differences
in the primate brain. For example, findings from this study may directly relate
to observations on the existence of male-female cognitive and/or linguistic
differences in Old World monkeys and great apes. The proposed research will
address these claims by testing the hypothesis that sex differences in the
corpus callosum of Macaca fascicularis and Pan troglodytes are present in gross
morphology related to total and regional callosal areas, and also with regard to
the number of myelinated and unmyelinated nerve fibers. Knowledge about fiber
composition can shed light on the ability of the two cerebral hemispheres to
communicate with each other, and the speed at which this communication may
occur. For example, the quantity of fibers traversing the corpus callosum will
reflect the degree of connectivity between the hemispheres, and offer insight
into the lateralization (i.e., left-right compartmentalization) of functions.
The size of the myelinated fibers (i.e., those nerve fibers surrounded by a
myelin sheath which aids in conduction velocity) which pass through the corpus
callosum will offer insight into the speed at which messages are passed between
the hemispheres. In general, the larger the diameter of the nerve fiber the
faster the signal will be conducted. The ability to address these fundamental
questions on a largely unexplored region of the nonhuman primate brain will
offer significant new information on how sexual differences in the human brain
came to be.