* 9528291
* Dissertation Research:  Ideology, Agency, and Production in an Andean Peasant Community: The Collective Struggle for    Self-Determination
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Peter Little, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 10/31/1998
* USD 11,400.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Kentucky. The topic is to describe how recently developed
indigenous peasant social movements in highland Peru facilitate the economic
survival of households in light of the severe constraints of rural poverty. The
student will conduct a case study of one rural township near the city of
Cajamarca, involving the administration of a baseline questionnaire to a sample
of 80 households, participant observation in local economic, social and
political activities, in-depth analysis of the function of the communal
institutions, and a set of intensive life histories. The fundamental questions
to be asked involve how these rural Indians have organized to defend their
social and communal interests in two organizations, the rondas campesinas,
(defence-self-help groups) and the clubs de madres (mothers' clubs), and the
answers will come through analysis of household-level variations in economic
activities, social organizations and various aspects of cultural capital. This
research is important because it will advance our understanding of a fundamental
process occurring in the world today, the struggle for self-determination by
poor, disadvantaged peasant communities through new organizations in local civil
society. Case studies such as this will give planners and development
specialists information about how local communities self-organize under varying
social and economic constraints; information which will be useful to developing
new programs of aid to facilitate peaceful democratic institutions.