* 9528101
* Travel Support for A Plant Membrane Biology Meeting to be   held in Regensburg, Germany, August 6-11, 1995.
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Heven Sze, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eve Ida Barak
* 07/31/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9528101 Sze Plant membrane transport is undergoing rapid changes. Plant membrane
transport is a central feature of our understanding of plant growth, development
and metabolism. Young scientists, trained in excellent labs, are bringing new
technologies to the field, such as expression of channels in Xenopus oocytes to
study transport, patch clamping, laser surgery of plant cells to allow patch
clamping, and use of transgenic technologies to discover transporters through
complementation of transport defects in yeast mutants. Since the young
scientists are in many ways driving the field, they provided travel money for
this international meeting in plant membrane biology held this year in
Regensburg, Germany. This is a seminal meeting in this area of research and was
held last time, three years ago in California. There has been many new
approaches and discoveries made since that time and this is one of the few
platforms where these researchers can meet together as a community. No similar
meetings have been held during the three years. %%% Plant membrane transport is
undergoing rapid changes. Plant membrane transport is a central feature of our
understanding of plant growth, development and metabolism. Young scientists,
trained in excellent labs, are bringing new technologies to the field, such as
expression of channels in Xenopus oocytes to study transport, patch clamping,
laser surgery of plant cells to allow patch clamping, and use of transgenic
technologies to discover transporters through complementation of transport
defects in yeast mutants. Since the young scientists are in many ways driving
the field, they provided travel money for this international meeting in plant
membrane biology held this year in Regensburg, Germany. This is a seminal
meeting in this area of research and was held last time, three years ago in
California. There has been many new approaches and discoveries made since that
time and this is one of the few platforms where these rese archers can meet
together as a community. No similar meetings have been held during the three
years. ***