* 9528775
* Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially     Managed Areas
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Steven Smith, International Centre for Antarctic Information & Research
* Contract
* Joyce A. Jatko
* 04/30/1998
* USD 130,760.00

Abstract Preparation of Management Plans for Antarctic Specially Managed Areas
Annex V to the Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
provides a new framework for protection and management of areas in the Antarctic
with special environmental, scientific, historic, aesthetic, or wilderness
values. Sites of Special Scientific Interest (SSSI) and Specially Protected
Areas (SPAs), old categories used by the Antarctic Treaty Consultative Parties,
are replaced in Annex V by Antarctic Specially Protected Areas (ASPA). The
Protocol also includes provisions for the development of a detailed management
plan to protect the values for which the area was designated. While the Protocol
has not yet been formally adopted by the United States, there has been agreement
to voluntarily implement as many of its provisions as practicable. One of those
provisions is that the country which proposes a site for designation as an ASPA
prepare a proposed management plan for the site for submission to the Antarctic
Treaty Consultative Meeting. Several SPAs and SSSI in the Ross Sea area were
proposed by the United States. One, Linnaeus Terrace, Asgaard Range, Victoria
Land, has had a management plan prepared using the Protocol guidelines and is in
the submittal process. Six others still need to be prepared. One new area is
being proposed for protection and must also have a management plan prepared for
submission to the Treaty Meeting. Management plans are needed for the following
sites: Cape Hallett (SPA 7) - designated in Treaty recommendation IV-7 Cape
Royds, Ross Island (SSSI 1) - designated in Treaty recommendation VIII-4 Arrival
Heights, Ross Island (SSSI 2) - designated in Treaty recommendation VIII-4
Barwick Valley, Victoria Land (SSSI 3) - designated in Treaty recommendation
VIII-4 Cape Crozier, Ross Island (SSSI 4) - designated in Treaty recommendation
VIII-4 NW White Island (SSSI 18) - designated in Treaty recommend ation XIII-8
Cape Washington (to be proposed for designation) The content of the management
plans will follow the general format proscribed in Article 5, Annex V of the
Protocol on Environmental Protection.