* 9528428
* Dissertation Research:  An Investigation of Land, Water Use, and Social Organization at Guijarral, NW Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/1995,11/30/1996
* E. Wyllys Andrews, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/1996
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. E. Willis Andrews, Mr. Paul Hughbanks will collect
data for his doctoral dissertation. Mr. Hughbanks has conducted two field
seasons of archaeological research at Guijarral, a Mayan site located in
Northwestern Belize. Excavations to date indicate that it was occupied during
the Classic Mayan period. The site itself is located in the head of a small
watershed and contains numerous landscape features apparently related to water
management. These include both contour terracing and small scale cross-channel
terraces. Earth/stone ridges which run both parallel and across slope contours
appear constructed to channel water flow and an apparent reservoir has also been
located. With support from the National Science Foundation Mr. Hughbanks will
conduct an additional field season to complete this mapping work and to excavate
a series of habitation structures. He wishes to determine the social context
within which water control occurred and through excavation and analysis of
artifacts collected, he can both determine the relative status of household
inhabitants and the relationship between status and water control.
Archaeologists who wish to understand how complex societies developed have often
focused on the relationship between social organization and the control of
scarce resources. It has been postulated that in the Near East the rise of early
civilizations is intimately associated with the development of irrigation
systems and that the central function of the high status priestly class was to
control water distribution. In many parts of Middle America water is a scarce
resource and water related features such as those observed at Guijarral are
present. Mr. Hughbanks wants to determine through spatial analysis of the site
the extent to which household status and water management are related. Because
the site is relatively small, covering ca. 45 hectares, it provides an excellent
context for this kind of study. This research is important for several reasons.
It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light
on human-environment interactions and assist in training a promising young
scientist.