* 9529656
* IAI Workshop: Potential Use of Biological Proxy Data as     Climatic Change Impact Indicators in Southern American      Ecosystems
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Carolina Villagran, University De Santiago De Chile
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,875.00

9529656 Villagr=E1n This Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
(IAI) Start-Up Grant Phase I proposal will support two workshops, which have the
following goals: linking the research activities of the principal
paleoenvironmental research centers of southern South America; integrating
different sources of proxy data for paleoclimatic reconstructions; and
evaluating the effects of climate variability on the major ecosystems of the
region. The workshop will bring together researchers from the paleobotanical and
palynological laboratories of several universities located in Argentina, Brazil,
and Chile, recognized scientists from selected South American institutions, and
representatives from the main dendroclimatological institutions of the region.
In addition, in order to promote future academic interaction among the
institutions involved in this proposal, graduate students whose research deals
with paleoenvironmental questions will be invited to the workshop. The following
topics will be covered at the workshops: the relationships between proxy data
and climate in subtropical-temperate ecosystems in southern South America and
their values as analogs for interpretation of past paleoenvironmental changes;
the evaluation of methods from different proxy data sources; field trips to
select study sites; the determination of taxa to be studied; the design of
research strategies and an academic exchange program; and the development of an
IAI Phase II proposal with the purpose of predicting the possible effects of
global changes on the ecosystems of southern South America. This project will
contribute to the ongoing work of the International Geosphere-Biosphere
Programme's Past Global Changes (IGBP/PAGES) and Pole-Equator-Pole (IGBP/PEP-I)
projects. %%% This Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI)
Start-Up Grant Phase I proposal will support two workshops, which have the
following goals: linking the research activities of the principal
paleoenvironmental research centers of southern South America; integrating
different sources of proxy data for paleoclimatic reconstructions; and
evaluating the effects of climate variability on the major ecosystems of the
region. The workshop will bring together researchers from the paleobotanical and
palynological laboratories of several universities located in Argentina, Brazil,
and Chile, recognized scientists from selected South American institutions, and
representatives from the main dendroclimatological institutions of the region.
In addition, in order to promote future academic interaction among the
institutions involved in this proposal, graduate students whose research deals
with paleoenvironmental questions will be invited to the workshop. Considering
the limited availability of emerged lands in the southern hemisphere,
paleoenvironmental proxy data from southern South America are unique sources of
information for understanding the dynamics of global change. Antarctic ice
records and records for the last glaciation from the surrounding oceans document
changes in oceanic and atmospheric circulation patters, atmospheric carbon
dioxide levels, and some of the possible mechanisms of abrupt climatic change.
Furthermore, several paleoenvironmental records document the history of
ecosystem changes as a consequence of climate. Additionally, along with natural
vegetation changes, man has become a landscape-transforming agent which is as
strong as, or stronger than, climate. This proposal will make use of
paleoclimatic-biological indicators of different temporal and spatial
resolutions which have the potential to become excellent tools to evaluate the
impact of climatic variability and anthropogenic disturbance on southern South
American ecosystems, and provide a perspective for the prediction of future
changes. This proposal assembles a team of scientists from the following
countries: Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. These countries are Member States of
the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on g lobal change
issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites
States responsibilities within the IAI. ***