* 9529722
* SBIR Phase II:  Cyanide-Free Biocatalyzed Leaching of Gold  and Silver Ore
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Robert Hunter, Yellowstone Environmental Science, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 310,000.00

9529722 Hunter Gold and silver mines are often located in pristine environments
that are highly susceptible to pollution by mining and metals recovery
activities. While biotechnologies have been developed for freeing precious
metals from refractory ores, cyanidation is still the process of choice for
extracting gold and silver values. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase
II project will continue the development of a novel biohydrometallurgical
process for extracting gold and silver from bio-oxidized ore. The project
investigates the use of a bisulfide leaching solution as an effective, but more
environmentally friendly and less costly, alternative to the conventional
cyanidation process. However, in recent years, the addition of the environmental
costs to the total cost of mining gold and silver has stimulated a search for
options that are more environmentally acceptable. The proposed bisulfide
leaching approach takes advantage of the fact that sulfate-reducing bacteria are
capable of both (1) producing dissolved sulfides which act as a complexing agent
for precious metals and (2) consuming hydrogen gas generated by the complexation
(anaerobic corrosion) reaction. During Phase II, a laboratory prototype will be
designed, constructed, and operated; its performance will then be compared to
that of the conventional cyanidation process. The prototype will include
subsystems for bio-oxidation, gold extraction, and gold recovery. A change in
the basic technology of gold and silver extraction is proposed that will reduce
mining-related pollution at its source. The proposed process can be applied in
leaching precious metals (gold, silver and platinum group metals) from their
ores and from metal scrap, which is a multibillion market worldwide. If Phase I
results are borne out, bisulfide leaching could reduce chemical reagent costs.
The proposed biohydrometallurgical process could provide a means of gold and
silver recovery that is both profitable and relatively nonpolluting.