* 9529346
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Acquisition of a Rapid      Prototyping System
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Peter Allen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 61,334.00

CDA-9529346 Peter K. Allen Gerard Ateshian Van C. Mow John Kender Columbia
University Acquisition of a Rapid Prototyping System Rapid-Prototyping (RP)
machines have created an opportunity for development of a "3-D FAX" which can
transmit a physical object's model to another site where it may be
reconstructed. The initial goal is to automate the model scanning process,
reducing the time, cost and operator intervention needs of current systems. The
project also addresses system issues in model-acquisition, sensor-planning, and
data- compression that affect 3-D FAX; without the proposed RP machine this
cannot proceed. A second project is to use the RP machine in prosthesis design.
A large variety of cadaver joints can be imaged with stereophotogrammetry, CT,
and MRI to produce model prototypes. These models can then be built with RP
equipment and tested experimentally to verify that they adapt to different
individuals and produce normal joint mechanics. The goal is to take the imaging
tools required to perform the tasks outlined above and integrate them with RP
equipment to form an efficient and clinically proven process. The third project
is to create objects with varied surface depth to test a shape recovery method
using multiple light sources. The equipment allows production to specification
of different objects with unusual surface configurations to properly test and
evaluate the reconstruction method.