* 9529503
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Presentation Languages in    Multimedia Databases
* CSE,EIA
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 02/29/2000
* USD 54,187.00

CDA-9529503 Gultekin Ozsoyoglu Z. Meral Ozsoyoglu Case Western Reserve
University Presentation Languages in Multimedia Databases Multimedia
presentation refers to the concurrent presentation of multimedia data using
monitors for text, video or still images, and speakers for audio. Each
presentation contains multimedia segments retrieved from a database, and is
constructed and played out by a presentation manager software. This research has
three components. (a) A prototype system is developed to automate the assembly
of presentations from multimedia databases for beginning computer users. The
system is then revised and evaluated in different application domains. One
example is a Course-Assistant software in education. (b) A presentation
construction language for intermediate computer users is implemented and
evaluated in different application domains. The language provides control on the
number and contents of concurrent segments in a presentation, and has the
ability to specify playout-time changes in a presentation, and communication and
synchronization among multiple playout managers. (c) For advanced users, a
presentation manipulation language is developed and evaluated. The development
is carried out on multimedia personal computers with MPEG capture and playout
capabilities and on workstations, acquired by the instrumentation grant. The
development platforms are Windows NT and UNIX.