* 9529549
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Shared Interaction in       Support of Design, Learning and Planning
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Ernesto G. Arias, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 61,300.00

CDA - 9529549 Fischer, Gerhard Arias, Ernesto Eden, Hal University of Colorado
at Boulder Shared Interaction in Support of Design, Learning, and Planning Two
InterSim (Interactive Simulation) stations are being developed, each composed of
a large interactive surface and multiple 3-D interactors. These systems allow us
to move beyond the interaction model of single user/single computer--with an
emphasis upon shared interaction to mediate social aspects of learning, design,
and planning. These paradigms integrate the use of physical objects--to support
and encourage face-to-face interaction among the participants--with virtual
objects--to provide computational support for the model underlying the
simulation. When linked across a network, these systems can allow the
interaction with simulations and among individuals at a distance. A two-phase
prototyping process is being used: First, an initial version utilizing front-
surface projection is being developed, allowing us to deal with some of the
software and device-controller issues and demonstrating the applicability of the
approach. Subsequent development will utilize newer technology to create a back-
imaged system to resolve shadowing problems. To test and guide its development,
applications of the technology are underway in the form parallel efforts in the
areas of Conflict Resolution, Decision Making and Planning; Learning by Design:
Cross-Cultural Science Classroom Interchange; and Human-Centered, Intelligent
Agents Supporting Communication and Collaboration.