* 9529172
* Ceramic and Metal-Composite Membranes:  Synthesis,          Characterization and Reaction Studies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Arvind Varma, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2000
* USD 246,624.00

Abstract - Varma - 9529172 The eventual successful industrial application of
inorganic membranes for simultaneous reaction and separation in membrane
reactors depends on the ability to produce membranes of desired structural,
catalytic and permeation properties. In many cases of practical interest, the
optimal distribution of catalyst is a multiple-step function within the pellet
and in the membrane. In catalytic membranes, precise distribution of the active
element can be obtained using sequential slip-casting of active and inert sols.
In these membranes, permeation studies indicate Knudsen flow with high fluxes.
Synthesis procedures have been developed to prepare permselective metal
composite membranes and microporous membranes with controlled active catalyst
distributions. It has been demonstrated that for the same amount of catalyst and
active surface area, nonuniform pellets have a higher overall conversion than
uniform pellets. The PI plans to study metal composite and microporous ceramic
membranes. For the case of metal composite membranes, he will determine the
mechanism of film growth during electroless plating and osmosis, derive the
deposition kinetics and develop a mathematical model based on the experimental
findings. The synthesis chemistry and kinetics will be correlated with the film
microstructure (using computer simulation) and membrane performance. On the
basis of these results, the synthesis parameters will be optimized to yield
membranes of desired properties. In the case of microporous membranes, the role
of synthesis parameters (sol-gel and slip-casting characteristics) on the
structure, permeation and catalytic properties of membrane materials will be
determined to provide an understanding of the synthesis process. Further,
methods will be developed to obtain and maintain high catalyst surface area per
unit reactor volume. Finally, the stability of these membranes under the severe
chemical and thermal conditions encountered in practice will also be examin ed.
The performance of these membranes for reaction and separation, and that of a
novel thin film composite catalytic membrane, will be evaluated using
dehydrogenation (ethane to ethylene, ammonia decomposition) and partial
oxidation (ethylene epoxidation) as probe reactions. A successful completion of
this work will enhance the fundamental understanding of the relationship between
synthesis and structure, and how the structure affects the material, permeation
and reaction properties of the membrane.