* 9529788
* IAI Workshop: Andean Amazon Rivers Analysis and Monitoring  (AARAM) Project Start-Up Activities
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Jeffrey Richey, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 48,675.00

9529788 Richey This proposal seeks start-up funds for the Andean Amazon Rivers
Analysis and Monitoring (AARAM) Project, which was conceived and organized
specifically to address scientific questions and socioeconomic issues identified
in the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) scientific
research agenda, particularly within the theme of -T ropical Ecosystems and
Biogeochemical Cycles.+ The AARAM project unites researchers from Bolivia,
Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and the United States with the common objective
of investigating the effect of global climate change and regional land use
change on biogeochemical and hydrological cycles within terrestrial and aquatic
ecosystems of the Andean Amazon Basin. To accomplish this objective the project
will establish a network of river sampling stations throughout the Andean Amazon
region, employing standardized methods to gather high-quality biogeochemical and
hydrological data which is comparable over the entire region. The sampling
stations will be the foci for the following: more detailed process-based
studies; training of local scientists and students; and studies by other IAI
research teams with broader geographic coverage. The project will also assemble
and utilize diverse data types from different sources including historical
hydrological records, remote sensing images, and digitized map themes which mark
the course of land use change within the region. The AARAM Project will rely on
Geographic Information Systems-based management to assemble and organize these
varied data sets into a coherent project database. Specifically, this proposal
seeks financial support to convene two working meetings: the first meeting will
bring together project participants in Lima, Peru, to develop the project
research plan, devise a plan for student and young researcher involvement, and
work out collaborative agreements between participating institutions. The second
meeting will be a smaller -writing+ meeting where the Project PIs gather in
Seattle, Washington to write the IAI Phase II Proposal for the project. The
institutions involved are the following: the Greater University of San Andres
(Bolivia), the Bolivian National Meteorological and Hydrological Service, the
Center for Nuclear Energy and Agriculture (Brazil), the National Agency for
Water and Electric Power (Brazil), the National Institute for Environmental
Studies (Colombia), the National Politechnical School (Ecuador), the Ecuadorean
National Meteorological and Hydrological Service, the National Agrarian
University at La Molina (Peru), the Peruvian National Meteorological and
Hydrological S ervice, the Peruvian Hydrographic and Navigational Service, and
the University of Washington at Seattle. %%% The proposed project and working
meetings are being organized by a group of scientists with extensive experience
in multinational research efforts and Amazon ecosystems. The characterization
and monitoring of the biogeochemistry and hydrology of Andean Amazon rivers will
provide a variety of benefits to the researchers and institutions involved. The
benefits to the Andean region will be the following: increased knowledge of the
state and functioning of their ecosystems; usefulness of the project data to the
establishment of national and regional environmental policies, the raising of
the level of local expertise through influx of technical and financial
resources; and an increase in reg ional collaborative links. Brazilian and U.S.
researchers will benefit from the expansion of their current research by gaining
input from local experts and the access to laboratory facilities, field
stations, and human resources. The larger global change community will gain from
this project a high quality base of data relevant to large-scale st udies of
water balance and cycles of bioactive elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and
phosphorus. The AARAM Project has assembled a highly qualified team of research
scientists. The PIs have extensive experience in proje ct management, including
such major international efforts as the Carbon in the Amazon River Experiment
(CAMREX), and NASA+s Earth Observing System Regional Amazon Model Project
(EOSRAM). Additionally, this project will have links with the following large
international research programs: the Large-scale Biosphere-Atmosphere Program
(LBA), the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme+s Land-Ocean Interactions
in the Coastal Zone project (IGBP/LOICZ), the International Council of
Scientific Union+s Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment
(ICSU/SCOPE), U NESCO+s Man and the Biosphere Program (UNESCO/MAB), and the
French sponsored Bolivian Amazon Basin Hydrological and Climatological Program
(ORSTOM/PHICAB). The AARAM Project will integrate itself into the larger IAI
Network by sharing data with these projects, and inviting other IAI projects to
conduct research at its sampling stations. The par ticipating countries of
Bolivia, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and the United States are Member
States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global
change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The U.S.
National Science Foundation is the Government agency designated to carry out
U.S. responsibili ties within the IAI. ***