* 9529872
* IAI Workshop: Landscape Fragmentation Effects on Faunal     Biodiversity in the Americas
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Brenda McComb, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/1999
* USD 47,425.00

9529872 Bradshaw This workshop has been designed to address several key issues
proposed by the IAI Biodiversity and Temperate Terrestrial Ecosystems focus
areas. The central goal is to understand fragmentation effects on biodiversity
as driven by human land-use patterns and climate change interacting with natural
landscape heterogeneity. The workshop will discuss the following topics: the
effects of landscape alteration and fragmentation patterns on faunal
biodiversity; underlying processes influencing landscape patterns and resultant
faunal responses; interactions and trends in human land development and
conservation; and the evaluation of common, effective adaptable metrics to
capture change. Comparisons will include effects of major land -use activities
among various ecosystems leading to an IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II proposal.
The workshop seeks to identify common principles and methods of assessment as
well as understanding the limits of their application to specific biomes.
Although the workshop will focus on terrestrial systems, the intent is to
contribute insight across ecosystems, and it seeks to complement other time-
space issues of connectivity faced by aquatic and marine scientists. In the
development of a conceptual common ground, the PIs seek to coordinate technical
communication by collating extant GIS, remotely sensed imagery and tabular
databases which are all necessary for effecting consistent comparisons between
systems. The multiple-scale approach to be used by this proposal facilitates
linkages with climate change and economic-ecological models. %%% This workshop
has been designed to address several key issues proposed by the IAI Biodiversity
and Temperate Terrestrial Ecosystems focus areas. The central goal is to
understand fragmentation effects on biodiversity as driven by human land-use
patterns and climate change interacting with natural landscape heterogeneity.
The workshop will discuss the following topics: the effects of landscape
alteration and fra gmentation patterns on faunal biodiversity; underlying
processes influencing landscape patterns and resultant faunal responses;
interactions and trends in human land development and conservation; and the
evaluation of common, effective adaptable metrics to capture change. Comparisons
will include effects of major land-use activities among various ecosystems
leading to an IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II proposal. Land conversions,
deforestation, and landscape alteration are processes which increasingly concern
scientists and resource managers in southern and northern hemispheres. One of
the chief issues relating to these land changes has been the loss of faunal
habitat and the drop in biodiversity. These declines have occurred because of
both direct and causes of mortality. Despite the current scientific discussion
concerning measures and approaches to reducing the rate of decline of
biodiversity, the transferability of present monitoring and conservation plans
among biomes remains largely untested. The Americas provide an opportunity to
compare relationships between human-generated landscape patterns and faunal
patterns among quite different systems. Many nations in this region seek to
accommodate pressures of human development while retaining indigenous flora and
fauna. The similarities and differences in geologic and climate history, biotic
evolution and human land-use patterns found in the two continents provide the
opportunity for a coordinated effort to understand the issues of land alteration
and biodiversity variability. This proposal involves the following countries:
Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Chile; Colombia; Ecuador, Mexico; Paraguay; and the
United States. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues in the Americas. The
National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency for
carrying out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***