* 9529049
* Electron Magnetic Resonance Studies of Transition Metal Ions on Oxide Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Larry Kevan, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth L. Busch
* 01/31/1998
* USD 420,000.00

Electron magnetic resonance methods at 9 and 35 GHz will be used to investigate
the structural features of transition metal ions of catalytic importance
incorporated in microporous molecular sieve oxide surfaces in this research
project supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program. The emphasis
will be on determining the location of transition metal ions in framework or
non-framework sites in aluminophosphate (AlPO4) and silicoaluminophosphate
(SAPO) materials. Spin echo modulation spectrometry methods will provide
information about adsorbate number, geometry, and orientation. This structural
information will be related to the catalytic efficiency of the paramagnetic ion
for probe reactions such as olefin dimerization and propylene oxidation. The
behavior of Ni(I), Pd(I), and Rh(II) species in AlPO4 and SAPO materials will be
investigated. In order to understand the mechanisms of heterogeneous catalysis
by high surface area microporous oxide materials, structural information about
the active transition metal ion incorporated into these materials must be
obtained. This research project will utilize electron paramagnetic resonance
methods to obtain this structural information and relate it to the catalytic
activity of catalyst materials for various probe reactions. The understanding of
the mechanisms of catalytic activity is crucial to the rational design and
implementation of catalytic processes which underlie much of modern chemical
industry.