* 9529247
* Dissertation Research:  A Political Economy of Ethnicity    Among Cambodian Refugees in Southern New England
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* Deborah Kaspin, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 03/31/1997
* USD 8,600.00

This project involves the Ph.D. research of a cultural anthropologist from Yale
University, studying Khmer refugee communities in New England. The student will
compare three Cambodian refugee communities in Lowell and Fall River, MA, and
Providence RI. The focus of the study is to understand how Khmer refugees deal
with their economic, social and cultural problems by using ethnically-based
resources. Through in-depth ethnographic participant observation, semi-
structured interviews with a sample of about 100 individuals, and a survey of
about 100 individuals in each site, the student will study how transnational
connections lead to resources useful to the refugees, and how their self-
identity as Khmer assists and obstructs their access to valuable resources in
their adopted US homeland. This research is important because it will lead to
advances in our understanding of how refugee communities use their existing ties
with their homeland and their self-defined and other-defined identities as
ethnic populations to adjust to their immigrant situations. This sort of
understanding is increasingly more important as migration grows in volume and as
the conception of a `melting pot` where ethnic differences are blended into a
new homogenous US identity give way to an ideal of a democratic civil society
composed of mutually cooperating distinctive groups.