* 9529451
* Identification of the Chemical Mechanisms of Heterogeneous  Processes on Sea Salt Particles Using Stable Chlorine       Isotope Ratios
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Martin Wahlen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1998
* USD 103,955.00

Abstract ATM-9529451 Wahlen, Martin University of California, San Diego Title:
Identification of the Chemical Mechanisms of Heterogeneous Processes on Sea Salt
Particles Using Stable Chlorine Isotope Ratios Field and laboratory and
laboratory evidence indicates that significant quantities of sea salt chloride
are volatilized by one or more chemical pathways other than desorption of
hydrochloric acid following reaction with nitric or sulfuric acid. Laboratory
experiments indicate that heterogeneous reactions can occur between sodium
chloride and reactive atmospheric species such as nitrogen oxides and ozone,
however, the prevalence of these reactions in the lower troposphere is still not
understood. The primary objective of this project is to use stable chlorine
isotopes ratios to support or dismiss reactions potentially responsible for
chlorine volatilization throughout the world's oceans. The isotopic ratios are
altered during chemical reactions where covalent bonds are formed or broken.
Thus, different chemical reactions lead to different isotopic signatures.
Measured isotopic fractionation in residual salt particles can be compared to
the fractionation factors of the reactions simulated in the laboratory. In this
project, laboratory investigations will be carried out in collaboration with
Prof. Jonathan Abbatt at the University of Chicago to determine the isotopic
fractionation factors of individual volatilization reactions. In addition,
archived aeroslo samples from various oceanic regions will be analyzed for
chlorine fractionation, From this information, the heterogeneous processes
responsible for chlorine volatilization in the aerosols will be determined.