* 9529924
* TQO: Effective Implementation of High Performance Process   Management Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* John Ramberg, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Quinetta Roberson
* 04/30/2001
* USD 147,357.00

Many U.S. companies implement activities known as high performance process
management, or HPPM. Under HPPM, companies strive for extraordinary levels of
product quality, great process efficiency, intensive process control, and very
rapid response. The desired effect is a dramatic increase in customer
satisfaction and financial returns. The agenda is augmented by improved vendor
relations, increased employee involvement, and more rational product and process
design. While HPPM can deliver results, its implementation is difficult and
failures do occur. This project is a field study of the strengths and weaknesses
of HPPM implementation at four companies. The research will be
interdisciplinary, involving both industrial and systems engineering expertise
(including statistical analysis, process mapping, and control theory), and
social science based organizational design and management of change frameworks
(including organizational diagnosis and surveys, and anthropological field
techniques). The project engages the organizational partners in both design and
execution of the research. Expected results include an identification of generic
HPPM implementation success factors and barriers, discovery of mismatches
between current academic research on process management/engineering and actual
industry needs, and recommendations for changes in how process
management/engineering is taught in universities.