* 9529402
* Modelling Studies of Coupled Biological-Physical            Processes Affecting Recruitment on Georges Bank
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Cabell Davis, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 08/31/1997
* USD 170,000.00

The project involves the development of a series of coupled biological-physical
models to examine the effects of wind forcing and seasonal stratification on the
recruitment of zooplankton and fish to Georges Bank. These models will examine
the influence of transient and seasonal forcing of an idealized bank ecosystem,
with the goal of elucidating the mechanisms which lead to trophic uncoupling.
Trophic uncoupling results from spatial or temporal dislocation of populations
within a community, and can lead to rapid growth or depletion of affected
populations. Physical modelling will focus on the response of an idealized bank
and bank-shelf system to wind forcing and to seasonal buoyancy forcing. The
biological modelling will have three major objectives: (1) to understand the
long term effects of `wash out` events and advective losses on trophic
interactions and recruitment; (2) to study the mechanisms by which the dynamics
at tidal fronts influence trophic coupling and production; and )3) to explore
novel techniques of reducing complexity of biological models while maintainin g
biological system necessary for robustness. The ultimate goal of this work is to
investigate the couplings between the biological and physical systems, in
particular the effect of advective losses on recruitment of cod and haddock and
the influence of tidal fronts on primary and secondary production. These results
can then be tested by, and used to guide the upcoming field observations and
further analysis of historical data.