* 9529609
* Cryogenic Helium Turbulence Research
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/1996,10/31/2002
* Russell Donnelly, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 10/31/2002
* USD 5,536,953.00

9529609 Donnelly Turbulence is undoubtedly the most outstanding unsolved problem
of classical physics. From a practical turbulence is the 'limiting factor' in
the design and operation of various energy systems in aeronautical, chemical and
mechanical engineering. It is a central theme in geophysics, meteorology, and
other areas which strongly impact human life. For these reasons, an enhanced
ability to understand and predict turbulent flows will have a large payoff. This
project focuses on fundamental turbulence research using a non-traditional
fluid: cryogenic helium near its critical point of 5 K. Helium is theoretically
capable of providing the highest Reynolds and Rayleigh number conditions for
controlled turbulence experiments in a laboratory on earth. However, the working
temperature range of 4-5 K presents challenges to existing techniques and
instrumentation for turbulence measurements. In addition, to reach the limits of
ultra-high Reynolds and Rayleigh numbers requires major cryogenic facilities
which are currently found only at high energy physics projects requiring large
volumes of cryogenic fluids for cooling superconducting magnets or other
apparatus. This project brings together for the first time a team to meet these
challenges. The team is composed of faculty at the University of Oregon
(Professor Russell J. Donnelly) and Yale University (Professor Katapali R.
Sreenivasan), together with co-workers (Michael S. McAshan and James R.
Maddocks) who will conduct on-site research at the Brookhaven National
Laboratory Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) Cryogenic Facility (Dr.
Satoshi Ozaki, Project Director). The members of the team include world leaders
in helium turbulence, fluid hydrodynamics and cryogenic technology. The project
goals are to develop instrumentation for turbulence measurements using cryogenic
helium, to use this instrumentation for fundamental turbulence measurements, and
to construct a major convection chamber at RHIC. Successful completion of this
project will place the U. S. in a world leadership position in cryogenic helium
turbulence research and lay the foundation for future research in ultra high
Reynolds and Rayleigh number phenomena. %%% Turbulence is undoubtedly the most
outstanding unsolved problem of classical physics. From a practical turbulence
is the 'limiting factor' in the design and operation of various energy systems
in aeronautical, chemical and mechanical engineering. It is a central theme in
geophysics, meteorology, and other areas which strongly impact human life. For
these reasons, an enhanced ability to understand and predict turbulent flows
will have a large payoff. This project focuses on fundamental turbulence
research using a non-traditional fluid: cryogenic helium near its critical point
of 5 K. Helium is theoretically capable of providing the highest Reynolds and
Rayleigh number conditions for controlled turbulence experiments in a laboratory
on earth. However, the working temperature range of 4-5 K presents challenges to
existing techniques and instrumentation for turbulence measurements. In
addition, to reach the limits of ultra-high Reynolds and Rayleigh numbers
requires major cryogenic facilities which are currently found only at high
energy physics projects requiring large volumes of cryogenic fluids for cooling
superconducting magnets or other apparatus. This project brings together for the
first time a team to meet these challenges. The team is composed of faculty at
the University of Oregon (Professor Russell J. Donnelly) and Yale University
(Professor Katapali R. Sreenivasan), together with co-workers (Michael S.
McAshan and James R. Maddocks) who will conduct on-site research at the
Brookhaven National Laboratory Relativistic Heavy Ion Collider (RHIC) Cryogenic
Facility (Dr. Satoshi Ozaki, Project Director). The members of the team include
world leaders in helium turbulence, fluid hydrodynamics and cryogenic
technology. The project goals are to develop instrumentation for turbulence
measurements using cryogenic helium, to use this instrumentation for fundamental
turbulence measurements, and to construct a major convection chamber at RHIC.
Successful completion of this project will place the U. S. in a world leadership
position in cryogenic helium turbulence research and lay the foundation for
future research in ultra high Reynolds and Rayleigh number phenomena.