* 9529715
* Advancing the State of Knowledge on Social and Economic     Outcomes of Fundamental Research
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1998
* Deborah Johnson, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* James W. Dean, Jr.
* 02/28/1998
* USD 36,000.00

ADVANCING THE STATE OF KNOWLEDGE ON SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC OUTCOMES OF FUNDAMENTAL
RESEARCH WORKSHOP ABSTRACT In a competitive global environment where the
allocation of scarce resources is a matter of intense interest and debate, it is
important that policy-makers have a clear picture of the social and economic
outcomes of public expenditures for fundamental scientific and engineering
research. Since World War II, policy-makers and the public have come to expect
social and economic returns from public investment in fundamental research. The
National Science Foundation has responded to these expectations by supporting
research aimed at understanding the contributions of science and engineering to
the U.S. economy and society at large. Such research has been conducted
predominately by economists, who have developed several methodologies which
measure the influence of research and development (R&D) on outcomes. While
economic studies have confirmed a strong relationship between R&D and growth of
output and productivity, they are limited in their focus on economic outcomes.
Consequentially, many other putative benefits that may result from investments
in science and engineering research have scarcely been investigated, including
quality-of-life outcomes in the areas of public health, food and nutrition,
environmental quality and sustainability, the development of human capital and
its relation to socio-economic mobility, communications and transportation,
education, neighborhoods and communities, and the nature of work and recreation.
This over-reliance on economic outcomes has resulted in the underestimation of
the full-range of benefits that are derived from fundamental research.
Furthermore, results from economic studies are accompanied by a high degree of
uncertainty that makes interpretation difficult, and limits their utility for
policy purposes. An expansion of the body of knowledge concerning the
interrelationships between science, engineering, and society as they pertain to
the impact of new research activities would enable a more complete understanding
of the social and economic outcomes of fundamental research. Advances in the
state of knowledge in this area require that we move beyond our historic focus
on economic outcomes, and toward alternative conceptualizations and measurements
of outcomes in other areas that are important to Americans and their quality-of-
life. The purpose of this grant is to support a workshop focused on developing
these alternative concepts and measures of the social and economic outcomes of
fundamental research.