* 9529253
* Special Project:  NCSTRL:  A National Computer Science      Technical Report Library
* CSE,EIA
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1997
* James French, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,128.00

9529253 French, James C. University of Virginia Special Project: NCSTRL: A
National Computer Science Technical Report Library This project proposes to
integrate two successful existing on-line computer science technical report
servers into a single service called the Networked Computer Science Technical
Report Service, or NCSTRL. The project will be carried out by a consortium of
six universities which have been involved in the development of the two existing
services, WATERS (Wide Area TEchnical Report Service) and Dienst, developed in
the ARPA sponsored CS-TR project. The technologies developed in these earlier
projects will be integrated and extended to provide the new service. After the
completion of the integration effort, a major promotional effort is planned to
increase the number of participating institutions. To that end of the
endorsement of the Computing Research Association has been secured. The latter
represents the PhD granting computer science departments in North America as
well as several industrial laboratories that engage in fundamental research.
These activities are expected to lead to a service that will improve computer
science research while providing cost savings to computer science departments.
It will be a valuable resource to the nation, and can be reached quickly and at
a remarkably low cost. ***