* 9529589
* U.S.-Polish Collaborative Research on Electroanalytical     Chemistry in the Absence of a Bulk Solution Phase
* O/D,OISE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* James Cox, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Cassandra Dudka
* 01/31/2000
* USD 39,171.00

9529589 Cox This U.S.-Polish Cooperative Research award will study
"Electroanalytical Chemistry in the Absence of a Bulk Solution Phase." The
principal researchers are Dr. James A. Cox of Miami University, Ohio, and Dr.
Pawel J. Kulesza of the University of Warsaw. The general goal of this program
is to characterize certain ionically-conducting solids in terms of their ability
to serve as media for electrochemical studies in the absence of a contacting
solution phase. Of particular interest would be to establish conditions where
electrolyses of gas-phase components can be performed at cells using these
electrolytes under conditions where the rates and mechanisms of the electrode
reaction are not influenced by concomitants in the gas phase. The components of
interest in this study are generally electrochemically silent at conventional,
bare electrodes, so the investigation of catalysis in the environment of these
solids is a required part of this program. The researchers will investigate two
general materials as solid electrolytes, glassy substances prepared by sol-gel
processes and polyoxometallate powders. The former will be xerogels with known
or predicted ionic conductivity such as polymeric vanadium, ruthenium, and
iridium oxides. The catalysts will be in the form of surface layers on
electrodes coated with films of the xerogels or dispersions with these films. In
addition, conversion of selected xerogels into redox mediators by
electrochemically generating lower oxides of the metal centers will be explored.
Keggin-type heteropoly-12-tungstates will comprise the primary polyoxometallates
investigated. The test systems will be selected on the basis of formation of
mixed-valent systems. The kinetics of electron self-exchange will be determined
along with the effective transport coefficient. Once characterized, the
polyoxometallates will be encapsulated in xerogels. Here, the objective is to
exploit the catalytic activity of the former in an envi ronment that permits the
selected redox reaction to proceed without interference from other components,
including water, of the surrounding atmosphere. The studies will be performed
with conventional electrochemical instrumentation, including voltammetric and
a.c. impedance methodology. The results of this investigation will guide the
development of amperometric sensors for hazardous components in air and for the
presence of targeted solids or liquids with finite vapor pressures. In addition,
these electrochemical systems are projected to be suited to purifying the
atmosphere of small environments. Other possible applications include the design
of energy-storage devices and microscale electronic components such as bilayer
switches. This research in chemistry fulfills the program objectives of bringing
together leading experts in the U.S. and Poland to combine complementary efforts
and capabilities in areas of strong mutual interest and competence on the basis
of equality, reciprocity, and mutuality of benefit.