* 9529779
* SBIR Phase II: Volumetric 3D Display Based on Switchable    Binary Optic Element Array
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1997,07/31/2000
* Tin Aye, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/2000
* USD 385,213.00

9529779 Aye This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to
develop a new volumetric three-dimensional (VTD) display based on the switchable
binary optical element (SBOE) concept. Current direct view volumetric displays
have limitations in their performance due to mechanical movement of the display
screens, which can be overcome in the proposed VTD display. In this concept, a
2-D array of surface printed binary optical elements (BOEs) are coated with a
rapidly switchable Ferro- electric liquid crystal layer. A stack of these arrays
form the volume medium of the display. Each BOE, which forms a volume pixel
(voxel) element, can be rapidly switched on and off while a 3 color (RGB) low
power laser beam is scanned across the display volume. When in an unswitched
state, the medium will be transparent. while in a switched state. the scanning
laser beam will be diffracted and diffused into a cone shape from the switched
voxel elements. In order to produce a 3D image, the scanned laser beam is
modulated while scanned over the BOE plane. It is anticipated that this research
will result in a real-time flicker-free 3D volume display prototvpe without any
moving parts. The proposed VTD system will be extremely valuable for true 3D
display technology. Commercial applications of this VTD technology will be in
entertainment (ie, video games), medical imaging, CAD/CAM, surveillance
photogrammetry, training and simulation, air traffic control, molecular
modeling, telerobotics and cockpit or shipboard displays.