* 9529455
* GOALI: Highly Dispersed Supported Bimetallic Catalysts:     Preparation, Structure, and Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Bruce Gates, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 02/29/2000
* USD 253,598.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9529455 This is a cooperative research effort between the
University of California at Davis and the Ford Motor Company. It is an
investigation of a new class of supported metal catalyst consisting of a noble
metal (platinum or palladium) bonded to an oxide support (magnesia, alumina, or
silica) by means of a strong interaction with an oxophilic metal (chromium,
molybdenum, or tungsten). The intent is to maintain high dispersion in clusters
smaller than one nanometer. The catalysts are prepared from organmetallic
clusters in which the noble and oxophilic metals are bonded to each other. The
supported bimetallic structures are characterized structurally and used to
catalyze a series of test reactions including n-hexane dehydrocyclization,
3-methyl-2-butenal hydrogenation, and selective nitric oxide reduction. A
practical goal is the establishment of stability limits for these catalysts with
respect to temperature and composition of the reactant gas stream, and to
ultimately lay down a foundation for the rational design of supported bimetallic
catalysts. Bimetallic catalysts are used in a number of very demanding
industrial and environmental applications including liquid fuels production,
synthesis gas conversion, and automotive exhaust control. This effort lays the
groundwork for a new generation of catalysts with better selectivity and longer
life.