* 9529509
* Instrumentation For Computer Science & Engineering          Research in Image Segmentation, Registration, Modelling     and Interactive Model-Based Task Optimization
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Lawrence Wolff, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 01/31/1999
* USD 113,207.00

CDA-9529509 Taylor, Russell H. Wolff, Lawrence B. The Johns Hopkins University
Baltimore, Maryland Instrumentation for Computer Science and Engineering
Research in Image Segmentation, Registration, Modeling, and Interactive Model-
based Task Optimization A computation server and visualization workstation are
provided for a new laboratory in Computer Science Department at The Johns
Hopkins University for interdisciplinary research in robotics, image-processing,
computer vision, modeling, and computer-integrated surgery. Specific research
projects include: (a) segmentation, modeling, and characterization of complex
tubular structures such as blood vessels and bronchial trees from 3D tomographic
images; (b) accurate vision-based camera-to-model registration and navigation
within modeled 3D structures; and (c) development of methods for combining
numerical optimization, geometric modeling, path planning and uncertainty
analysis, and interactive visualizations to help a human expert plan a complex
3D task for robotically-assisted execution. This research combines numerically
intensive computation on 2D and 3D images and models with interactive
visualization of models and intermediate computational results, using examples
from biomedical modeling, using problems in biomedical imaging, endoscopy, and
radiation therapy planning to provide motivation and focus. The provided
equipment significantly promotes this research by permitting realistic
experimental evaluation on full-scale image data sets and models of novel
algorithms and methods in computer vision, modeling, computational steering, and
human-machine partnerships.