* 9529623
* Coupling of Micro- and Meso-Scale Processes During Early    Stage Plasmaspheric Refilling
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Nagendra Singh, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* kile baker
* 04/30/2000
* USD 138,390.00

This study addresses the problem of ion-beam driven waves and their effects on
the accumulation of ionospheric plasma in the outer plasmasphere. This addresses
a major problem in magnetospheric physics, that is, the refilling of the
plasmasphere following geomagnetic storms. The primary goal of the project is to
firmly establish the methodology of the following basic paradigm and modeling
approach assumes that as soon as the plasma flow parameters cross marginal
stability conditions for the waves, the instabilities are triggered and clamp
the flow near the conditions for marginal stability. Thus, from the waves and
instability standpoint, the quasisteady state of the plasma is known a priori.
When the macroscopic processes drive the plasma away form this state toward
instability, we know the excess momentum and the directed kinetic energy which
need to be thermalized by the instability process. This facilitates an easy
calculation of the anomalous plasma transport coefficients to be included in a
mesoscale model based on plasma transport equations without knowing the details
of the instabilityprocess. This approach is termed the Anomalous Plasma Effects
or APE model. The research strategy consists of 1) systematic determination of
easy-to-use semiempirical relations for the marginal stability conditions for
the plasma during the refilling situation, 2) small-scale particle- in-cell
simulations to characterize plasma heating by the instabilities and to test the
APE model, and 3) mesoscale modeling using two-stream hydrodynamic code
including the anomalous transport coefficients.