* 9529791
* IAI Workshop: Global Change in the Southwestern Atlantic    from the Coast to Adjacent Deep Basins
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Edmo Campos, University of Sao Paulo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/1997
* USD 49,840.00

9529791 Campos This proposal builds on a 1994 meeting of the Southwestern
Atlantic Program (SWAP). This workshop will develop concrete research projects
around the issues of mesoscale shelf processes, large-scale shelf dynamics, and
issues concerning the impacts of these dynamics on several other biological,
ecological and socio-economic processes. The overlaps between these perspectives
will be integrated during the proposed meetings to ensure that the various
components of the program are well-connected. The end product of the meetings
will be a Phase II proposal for the IAI Start-Up Grants. %%% This proposal will
support a series of meetings of the Southwestern Atlantic Program (SWAP). In
order to continue work that was begun at a workshop in December 1994, the SWAP
group will hold a series of meetings to discuss mesoscale shelf processes,
large-scale shelf dynamics, and issues concerning the impacts of these dynamics
on several other biological, ecological and socio-economic processes. The
meetings will include physical and biological oceanographers as well as social
and other environmental scientists whose goal would be to develop
multidisciplinary projects focused on the impact of oceanic circulation on the
ecology, on the environment and on sociological aspects in the coastal area
extending from Cabo Frio in Brazil to Patagonia in Argentina. The result of the
meetings will be a Phase II IAI Start-Up Grants proposal. This proposal includes
participants from Argentina, Brazil, the United States, and Uruguay. These
countries are members of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate global change
research among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI. ***