* 9529655
* IAI Workshop: Fire and Global Change in Temperate Ecosystems of Western North and South America
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Thomas Veblen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 49,930.00

9529655 Veblen This project proposes an international workshop on "A comparison
of Fire Regimes in Terrestrial Ecosystems of Western North and South America" to
be held in southern Chile in September of 1996. Within the context of fire and
global change research, the goals of this workshop are to: assess current
knowledge of potential influences of global change on fire regimes; devise a
research agenda on the potential effects of global change on fire regimes;
evaluate methodologies for analyzing the influences of climate and land-use
changes on fire regimes; form a network of researcher and research institutions
interested in developing an interdisciplinary research agenda that focuses on
inter-hemispheric comparisons of fire regimes and global change; and to develop
research proposals for Phase II. The temperate ecosystems of western North and
South America are chosen for this research program because of the comparable
climates and ecosystems of these regions. They are broadly similar in climate
and vegetation physiognomy but differ importantly in terms of climatic history,
phylogenetic origins of the biota, and human history. Broad similarities in
present day climate and vegetation of these two regions provide the potential
for comparative studies of the effects of climate variation and human activities
on fire regimes and the responses of these ecosystems to altered fire regimes.
Comparative studies can effectively exploit the important differences in
settlement history, land use, and resource technologies between temperate North
and South America to disentangle the influences of climatic variation and human
activities on fire regimes. The specific goals of the proposed workshop are to
assess and synthesize the existing knowledge of fire and global change, to
define a research agenda, to evaluate methodologies appropriate to the study of
fire history in different ecosystems, to develop research proposal to be
submitted to Phase II , and to develop a network of researchers and institutions
capable of carrying out the research agenda on fire and global change. %%% This
project proposes an international workshop on "A comparison of Fire Regimes in
Terrestrial Ecosystems of Western North and South America" to be held in
southern Chile in September of 1996. Within the context of fire and global
change research, the goals of this workshop are to: assess current knowledge of
potential influences of global change on fire regimes; devise a research agenda
on the potential effects of global change on fire regimes; evaluate
methodologies for analyzing the influences of climate and land-use changes on
fire regimes; form a network of researcher and research institutions interested
in developing an interdisciplinary research agenda that focuses on inter-
hemispheric comparisons of fire regimes and global change; and to develop
research proposals for Phase II. One of the major research challenges in ecology
is to identify and quantify the ecological mechanisms and processes that control
ecosystem responses to altered climatic conditions. Such studies are required to
understand how present landscape patterns have been influenced by climatic
variation and to predict future landscape patterns that may develop in response
to climatic change. Fire frequency in any ecosystems is a consequence of
interactions among fuel accumulation, fuel moisture content, and ignition
sources. Climatic variation influences fire regimes across a broad range of
temporal scales. Analysis of fire regime responses to climatic variation across
a range of time scales is important for separating the effects of seasonal and
annual variations on fuel desiccation and ignition from longer-term climatic
influences on fuel types and loads. Additionally, it has been recognized that
understanding climatic influences on fire regimes is critical to predicting the
effects of climatic variation on vegetation change. The f ollowing countries are
participating in this proposal: Argentina; Canada; Chile; and the United States.
These countries are Members Statesof the Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI), a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The U.S.
National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency designated to carry
out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***
--========================_13392216==_--