* 9529473
* Workshop:  Toward an Ordinary Citizen Interface to the      National Information Infrastructure
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Marjory Blumenthal, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Gary W Strong
* 09/30/1997
* USD 181,000.00

; R o o t E n t r y F V: e C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t
P o o l %9 e %9 e % &amp; ' ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 F Microsoft Word 6.0
Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; h j D u r ;V r w ;F r Ã• EU F HHu - tZ- t v
h F u v h v $ = u v G 9F t v G v v h ;F u}Ph v j j v h $ v h F t5 v h j $ v h v
j j The spread of information systems, and, in particular, information
infrastructure throughout the economy and social fabric raises questions about
the ease of use by all kinds of people, especially those with limited technical
acumen or know-how and those with various disabilities. Therefore, an
interdisciplinary group (computer scientists and other relevant disciplines)
will evaluate and suggest fruitful directions for progress in user interfaces. A
two-day workshop will produce a summary report with analysis derived from
deliberations by the steering committee. A workshop would serve to bring
together individuals from different disciplines, perspectives/schools of
thought, and activities (research, product development, and so on) to identify
and begin to narrow down the capabilities of desirable ordinary citizen
interfaces (OCIs). It could determine the state-of-the-art of research in CS and
other disciplines, identify the questions most important to investigate next,
identify what is known from research on the longer-term problems that will aid
in the near-term human-computer communications de sign, and identify important
long-term research issues. Further, there is a need to promote university-
industry collaboration to provide reality-checks on the utility of research and
to create theoretical bases for development, enhancing the application of
research. Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT S u m m a r y I n f o
r m a t i o n ( $ The spread of information systems, and, in particular,
information infrastructure throughout the economy and social fabric raises
questions about the ease of use by all kinds of people, especially those with
limited technical acumen or know-how and those Michele R Johnson Michele R
Johnson @ e " e @ @ e " e @ Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e j j j j j j j j j I 1 +
z T 5 I j I j j j j ~ j j j j 7 The spread of information systems, and, in
particular, information infrastructure throughout the economy and social fabric
raises questions about the ease of use by all kinds of people, especially those
with limited technical acumen or know-how and those with various disabilities.
Therefore, an interdisciplinary group (computer scientists and other relevant
disciplines) will evaluate and suggest fruitful directions for progress in user
interfaces. A two-day workshop will produce a summary report with analysis
derived from deliberations by the steering committee. A workshop would serve to
bring together individuals from different disciplines, perspectives/schools of
thought, and activities (research, product development, and so on) to identify
and begin to narrow down the capabilities of desirable ordinary citizen
interfaces (OCIs). It could determine the state-of-the-art of research in CS and
other disciplines, identify the questions most important to investigate next,
identify what is known from research on the longer-term problems that will aid
in the near-term h