* 9529310
* Mathematical Sciences: Low Dimensional Manifolds: Their     Symmetries and Topological Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Ronnie Lee, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Gerard A. Venema
* 07/31/2000
* USD 53,800.00

9529310 Lee A famous problem in 3-dimensional topology is to list all finite
groups which are the fundamental group of some closed 3-manifold. Since all the
known examples come from subgroups of the rotation group that act freely on the
3-sphere, the manifolds involved have positive constant curvature, and the
problem is known as the spherical space-form problem. Together with I.
Hambleton, Ronnie Lee plans to solve this problem using Donaldson's theory of
instantons. Closely related to the above and in collaboration with S.Cappell and
E.Miller, Ronnie Lee plans to study generalizations of Casson's invariants and
show that they belong to the so-called "finite type invariants." With Weiping
Li, the principal investigator plans to investigate two types of Floer
homologies. The first, known as the instanton Floer homology, is obtained by
applying Morse theory to an infinite dimensional space of connections, and the
second, known as the symplectic Floer homology, is based on the Lagrangian
intersection theory of a representation variety. They plan to show that these
are the same theory and hence establish a conjecture of Atiyah. Finally, with
Wilczynski, the principal investigator plans to study the problem of finding
locally flat surfaces of minimum genus representing a given homology class of a
simply connected 4-manifold. In the smooth setting, the corresponding problem is
known as the Thom conjecture and has been solved recently by P.Kronheimer and
T.Mrowka to great acclaim. In short, the project plans to study several well-
known problems in 3- and 4-dimensional manifold theory concerning the basic
symmetric nature of these objects and also the geometry of the submanifolds
inside them. Many of the techniques to be used in solving these problems are new
and were not previously available. They were developed through the interaction
between quantum physics and topology in recent years. On the mathematics side
they are known under the heading of Sympl ectic Invariants, while on the physics
side they have their counterpart in Quantum Field Theory. ***