* 9529961
* SBIR Phase II:  Range and Image Acquisition Using Active    Control of CCD Plane
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1996,10/31/2000
* John Hart, Vision Technology Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/2000
* USD 417,199.00

9529961 Hart This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop a new imaging technology called nonfrontal imaging. The core of this new
approach is active control of imaging geometry to eliminate the mechanical
adjustment of sensor plane location usually required for focusing, and exploit
imaging geometry and optics to achieve focusing from camera's panning motion
alone. This not only results in high imaging speeds but also in seamless
panoramic images. A nonfrontal imaging camera can obtain a panoramic focused
image of all objects in an arbitrarily large scene regardless of their
locations, which is in registration with a range map acquired in parallel.
Development of algorithms and the building of a working prototype are proposed
which will have the following capabilities: panoramic focused image acquisition,
panoramic range image acquisition, and omni-focused 3D stereo display. All these
capabilities will be achieved at multiple resolutions and for up to 360-degree
views of the scene. Sensor surface orientation will be controlled in a dynamic,
data-driven mode. The prototype will be tested primarily in applications
involving photography and surveillance, and to a lesser extent surgery and
manufacturing. The system development will be done in consultation with
industry. It is expected that the resulting technology will introduce hitherto
unavailable capabilities as well as lead to significant strides in existing
capabilities. A US patent on the camera has been awarded, and foreign patents
have been filed. Potential commercial applications are: Wide-scene studio
photography; Outdoor nature photography; Endoscopic and neurosurgery; Television
broadcasting; Geometric modeling for computer aided manufacturing; Surveillance
of homes, stores and compounds; Virtual reality using omni-focused 3D display;
Advertising; Visual art; Monitoring and control of hazardous environments;
Visualization; Interactive video games.