* 9529766
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Empirical Software           Engineering Laboratory for Research in Software             Engineering
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Krishnamurthy Ganesan, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 07/31/1998
* USD 49,828.00

CDA 9529766 Khoshgoftaar, Taghi M. Ganesan, Krishnamurthy Florida Atlantic
University Empirical Software Engineering Laboratory for Research in Software
Engineering The proposed Empirical Software Engineering Laboratory supports
following research projects in software engineering. (1) Modeling of Software
Quality Using Artificial Neural Networks for improving the accuracy of software
quality models by conducting case studies exploring neural network architectures
and training algorithms. (2) Measurement and Validation of Software Testability
for characterizing relationships between testability and static software
metrics, and for determining whether or not testability measurement can enhance
software reliability prediction. Case studies to address these issues
empirically are used. (3) Fuzzy Case-Based Reasoning for identifying fuzzy case-
based methods for software quality prediction by developing prototype systems
using industrial case study data. These research projects are making significant
contributions by characterizing ways that people actually develop software by
using data on large systems from industrial partners which have professional
development organizations. The equipment includes five high performance
engineering workstations that are significantly faster than others that are
available. Purchased software includes measurement and modeling tools that are
specifically applicable to the projects. Thus, the hardware and software of the
Empirical Software Engineering Laboratory are critical to the above research
projects.