* 9529730
* Biochemical Control of Larval Settlement and Recruitment    of the Major Reef-Building Coral, Acropora Palmata
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2002
* Daniel Morse, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 04/30/2002
* USD 375,000.00

9529730 MORSE The goal of the research is to determine whether molecular signals
and mechanisms similar to those that control larval settlement, metamorphosis
and recruitment of the Agariciid corals also regulate these centrally important
processes in Acropora palmata, one of the most ecologically important, abundant
and rapidly growing major reef-building corals of the Caribbean. This question
is of major ecological significance because A. palmata is representative of the
most specious genus of corals on Earth, and is representative of the
ecologically dominant corals that reproduce by synchronous mass spawning to
yield larvae that lack endosymbiotic algae (zooxanthellae). The corals in which
signal-dependent induction of larval settlement and recruitment previously had
been demonstrated (the Agariciid corals) reproduce by brooding and release of
mature larvae that already contain endosymbiotic zooxanthellae, and these corals
often play relatively minor ecological roles in the natural environment.
Following up on recent research leads, the specific objectives of the proposed
renewal are to test the following specific hypotheses: (1) That specific
crustose coralline algae are required to induce larval settlement and
metamorphosis of the mass-spawning A. palmata; (2) That chemosensory recognition
mediates larval responsiveness to any such required substratum; (3) That the
molecular inducer of settlement and metamorphosis recognized by A. palmata
larvae is an algal (or microbial) cell- wall compound identical or closely
similar to that which controls larval settlement, metamorphosis and recruitment
of the sympatric Agariciids; (4) That larval recognition of this inducer
molecule (purified and immobilized on a "larval flypaper") can be shown to be
responsible, in part, for substratum-specific settlement, metamorphosis and
recruitment of A. palmata in the natural environment; and (5) That species-
specific differences in larval orientation at settlement reduce the potential
for competition between Acropora palmata and Agaricia humilis. ***