* 9529227
* SGER:  Fast Queries and Updates in Probabilistic Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Simon Kasif, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Larry H. Reeker
* 08/31/1997
* USD 30,620.00

IRI-9529227 Kasif, Simon Johns Hopkins University $30,620 - 12 mos. SGER: Fast
Queries and Updates in Probabilistic Networks Knowledge representation using
networks is one of the most promising approaches to Artificial Intelligence. The
main goal of another current grant to the same investigator is to develop very
efficient algorithms for network-based AI tools such as constraint networks and
probabilistic networks, focusing on utilizing parallel processing to achieve
execution time that is sub-linear in the size of the network. A by-product of
this existing project recently was several new compilation strategies for
probabilistic networks that allow, after fast preprocessing, the processing of
both queries and updates in time that is logarithmic in the size of the
database. This represents an exponential improvement in current algorithms. At
present, the techniques are known to be applicable to certain special cases, but
it appears possible to extend them to more general networks. If they can be
extended adequately, it will have a strong impact on technology, given the wide
applicability of the ability to define, manipulate, and update probabilistic
information. This small grant for exploratory research is to explore the
applicability of these techniques, which were not a part of the existing grant's
research plan.