* 9529105
* Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics           in Simple Liquids
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Charles Harris, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Celeste M. Rohlfing
* 03/31/2000
* USD 671,000.00

Charles Harris is supported by a grant from the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program to continue his research in femtosecond studies of chemical
reaction dynamics in simple liquids. Two main lines of research will be pursued.
The first line of research involves the investigation of solute/solvent
interactions of polyatomic molecules in solution using femtosecond and
picosecond infrared and visible laser experiments as well as molecular dynamics
simulations. This work will extend the work already completed on iodine in
liquid krypton and xenon to diatomic molecules such as diatomic iodine anion,
iodine chloride and iodine bromide in liquid krypton and xenon. Infrared pump
and probe techniques will also be used to examine carbon-hydrogen stretching
mode relaxation times of simple polyatomic as a function of pressure in krypton
and xenon solvents. The second area of study involves the use of femtosecond and
picosecond infrared and visible spectroscopic techniques to study reaction
mechanisms of several organometallic compounds whose branching ratios and
quantum yields are controlled by the ultrafast energy transfer between solute
and solvent. These studies will encompass a broad range of mechanistic studies,
including carbon-hydrogen and silicon-hydrogen bond activation in transition
metal compounds and photochemical ring slippage of an aromatic ligand. Since
many commercially important chemical reactions take place in solvents, it is
important to understand the influence that such solvents have on the reaction
dynamics. A number of effects, such as solvent cage effects, vibrational
relaxation and quantum mechanical tunneling, that are not present in the gas
phase, completely dominate condensed phase chemical reactions. It is important
to develop reliable theories for model chemical systems that can then be applied
to improving the efficiency of commercially important chemical reactions. The
work that is being performed by Harris provides an important experimental basis
for the development of such theories.