* 9529990
* SBIR Phase II:  Multiphase Method for Highly Efficient      Mixing
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Michael Izenson, CREARE INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* TIMOTHY J. RUDD
* 12/31/1998
* USD 298,681.00

9529990 IZENSON This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II Project will
investigate a novel, multiphase mixing technique for combining and dispensing
foamable compositions (such as polyurethane foams). Dispensers for foam
ingredients are unreliable because the reactive ingredients must be thoroughly
mixed inside the dispenser. Solids form inside the dispenser, eventually causing
failure. The opportunity is to investigate a dispensing method that dramatically
increases reliability, reduces costs, and produces high-quality foam. In this
novel method, the foam ingredients are pre-mixed with a high concentration of
tiny air bubbles to form "froths" prior to mixing. Mixing improves dramatically,
and the dispensers can be made much more simple and reliable. The objective of
the Phase II research is to understand and characterize basic phenomena to
enable the design of an economical dispenser based on froth mixing.
Specifically, we will focus on good foam quality, commercially useful, reliable
operation, and simple processes for commercial applications. We will
investigate: (1) methods to produce the proper multiphase mixing conditions, (2)
methods to accomplish multiphase mixing, and (3) optimal foam quality as a
function of mixing parameters. Results of the research will be data and analysis
methods for the design of economical and reliable foam dispensers. Research
results from Phase II are key to developing reliable foam dispensers to produce
high-quality foams for packaging, insulation, structures, and textiles. The
froth mixing process is novel, conceptually simple, reliable, easy to scale, and
makes efficient use of foam reagents.