* 9529470
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Research in Parallel and    Shared-nothing Database and Storage Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Theodore Johnson, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1997
* USD 61,028.00

CDA-9529470 Hanson, Eric N. Johnson, Ted Su, Stanley University of Florida
Gainesville, FL CISE Instrumentation: Research in Parallel and Shared-nothing
Database and Storage Systems The University of Florida Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE) department is undertaking the following three
research efforts: (1) a project investigating the use of shared-nothing
multiprocessors for fast rule processing in active database systems using a
partitioned, parallelized discrimination network, (2) a project to develop and
evaluate parallel techniques and algorithms for object-oriented knowledge-base
management systems to support data partitioning and distribution, query
processing, query optimization and knowledge rule processing using a network-of-
workstations (NOW) environment, and (3) a project to develop high performance
storage servers to allow storage and processing of data generated by high energy
physics experiments. All of these projects are experimental in nature, and
involve implementing parallel software prototypes. This experimentation is
essential to help validate design proposals and get feedback on the designs to
help refine and improve them. The research instrumentation, consisting of four
new high-speed workstations and a very-high-speed communication network, allows
the construction of a parallel processor to conduct the work described.