* 9529161
* University of Washington Engineered Biomaterials (UWEB)     Engineering Research Center
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/1996,12/31/2008
* Buddy Ratner, University of Washington
* Cooperative Agreement
* Sohi Rastegar
* 12/31/2008
* USD 30,353,916.00

9529161 RATNER The Engineering Research Center for Engineered Biomaterials
(UWEB) at the University of Washington is established with the primary objective
to exploit specific biological recognition mechanisms in order to develop new
generation of biomaterials for medical implants that will heal in the body in a
facile, physiologically normal manner. A new generation of biomaterials will be
developed that can interact with specific cell receptors or bind with
appropriate proteins, and then initiate the desired biological responses
allowing control of healing. Direct spin-offs from this approach include
affinity chromatography supports, biosensors, nonfouling surfaces, manipulation
of inflammation and cell culture substrates. An interdisciplinary team of
materials scientists, molecular and biologists, biomolecular engineers, and
physicians will collaborate in three independent thrust areas: (1) Design,
synthesis and characterization of new molecular materials, (2) Modulation of
cell signaling to develop biomaterials that heal, and (3) Medical application
and healing. The major knowledge advancement will be mainly in the area of
understanding the biology of healing at the molecular level and consequently, on
the ability to manipulate the macrophage cells. The technology advancement will
be the coupling of materials engineered at the molecular level into macroscopic
signaling system of the human organism which will lead to radically different
kinds of medical implants. The UWEB will begin with twenty seven sponsoring
companies collaborating in the research program and technology transfer
activities. Industry will participate in research as resident technical fellows,
and will be involved in clinical research and testing which will not be funded
by the NSF award. The Center will provide integrated education and training in
life sciences and engineering to the graduate and undergraduate students through
new courses, teaching laboratories, and self-paced t utorials. The University's
K-12 and High School Outreach Programs will be expanded to include the
activities of the UWEB. The ERC will collaborate with the NSF supported ECSEL
Coalition Program. ***