* 9529972
* Dissertation Research:  Landscape Transformation and Power  in the Amazon Estuary
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Nancy Peluso, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 01/31/1997
* USD 9,155.00

This award supports the dissertation research of a student of social forestry
at Yale university. The project is to interview smallholder farmers in the
Amazon estuary of Brazil on their interactions with the estuarine floodplain
over the past 30 years and explain how these interventions have been involved
with resource conflict and property relations. The student will seek to explain
how human management of streams has transformed the local landscape, how
changing labor and property relations and conflicts over resources shaped and
were influenced by changes in the physical landscape, and how local people
understand their ability to act autonomously in economic and ecological issues.
The methods will include a survey and intensive interviews with about 100
households, the population of the local study area, about productive relations
over time and resource conflicts. Aerial photographs will be used as an
interview aid. A geographic information system database will be developed to
analyze trends over time; the distribution of different crops and economically-
exploited forest products will be analyzed and related to local events and
conflicts. This research is important because it adds to our expertise about the
economic behavior of farmers in this area of the world, and will provide
valuable information about local people's feelings and understandings of
environmental issues. If the deforestation of the Amazon is to be controlled in
the future, policies must be based on understanding of what local people do in
environmental interactions, and why they do it, information which will be
produced by this sort of study. + - +- ±- f8 Û-ª þ &gt; + + _ Ûª▓ ÑOh ª' +'ª▒0 Ý
+ ] $ H l + ¢ ╗ D h + ++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT 9529972 stuart plattner Harriet R. Eason @ ÀR║/O+
@ -+Y+ª) S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ++++++++++++ ) Û ++++++++++++
++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ @ +ªWZ++ @ Fª# Microsoft Word 6.0 3 f8 Û-ª þ &gt; + ++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++]ªe =- e ª ; ª ` ` ` ` ` ` ` p p p p p p Á p { 1 e
Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó - á á á ª = ª = ) - T ; { ` Ó Ó Ó Ó Ó { Ó ` ` Ó e Ó Ó Ó Ó ` Ó ` Ó
- ╝ Ý ` ` ` ` Ó - Ó S Ó