* 9529809
* Recurrent Modeling
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Patrick Flynn, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 05/31/2000
* USD 211,435.00

Current fractal tools lack the level of control necessary to model specific
natural structures. For example, many fractal models of trees have been
constructed, but given a particular tree, it would be difficult to represent the
tree's specific shape using current models of fractal modeling. The recurrent
modeling project identifies three aspects to this problem, and attempts to solve
each with several new fractal modeling tools. Objective I: Recurrent Model
Representation. Recurrent modeling strives to elevate fractal representation to
the level of sophistication that smooth surfaces enjoy in computer-aided
geometric design by translating their classical self-referential representation
into standard implicit and parametric forms. Recurrent modeling also attempts
"procedural geometric instancing," and enhancement of the classic object
instancing paradigm that enables it to more efficiently represent the
development fractal models currently specified by L-systems. Objective II:
Interactive Recurrent Modeling. Recurrent modeling extends the tools of
computer-aided geometric design to fractal geometry. A direct manipulation
interface provides real time feedback in the fractal modeling process. The
implicit formulation from the previous objective allows the application of
standard blending formulations specifically designed for natural modeling.
Extending constructive solid geometry to include fractal models supports the
construction of complex shapes from primitives. Objective III: Automatic
Recurrent Modeling. Recurrent modeling attacks the inverse problem of fractal
geometry: "find the parameters of a fractal model that approximates a given
shape" from the domain of model-based computer vision. The second PI is an NSF-
supported model-based computer vision researcher. His unique perspective on this
problem resulted in a new solution, called "similarity hashing". Similarity
hashing successfully detects self-similarity and returns the paramete rs of the
selfsimilar model in initial tests. Recurrent modeling continues this research
to develop an automated system for discovering selfaffinity in natural
structures. The new tools recurrent modeling proposes would impact the fields of
computer graphics and forest science. The new tools would represent highly
detailed geometrics, such as a forest and crops. Such models would have
applications in image synthesis, particularly in animation, virtual
environments, physically- based modeling and remote sensing. As the smooth
representations of computer-aided geometric design aid manufacturers, the
efficient representations of detail proposed by recurrent modeling
representations would aid the study of the environment. ***