* 9529856
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Frequency Shearing Interferometer Emission Velocimeter (SIEVE) for High-Temperature Gas Diagnostics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* PETER ROSTLER, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 08/31/1999
* USD 282,152.00

Rostler 9529856 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop a powerful optical diagnostic for high temperature gases that is
fundamentally different from any technique currently in use. This diagnostic is
spatially localized but completely nonperturbing. For hot luminous gases it
utilizes the optical emission from the gas itself. For less luminous gases, the
new method can also be used by monitoring refractive effects on laser beams
passed through the flow. In either realization, the light emerging from the gas
is separated into two components whose intensity difference is due only to
fluctuations of selected scale size in a spatially localized region within the
extended volume of the flow. For low-frequency (&lt;10 MHz) phenomena, the
method has already been demonstrated and is currently being developed under
other programs. The purpose of this Phase II program is to extend the technique
to much higher frequencies, which will allow study of smaller-scale phenomena
and faster flows, as well as fast waves in plasmas. In Phase I a high-frequency
detector head was designed and a new ultrahigh-frequency instrument was
invented. Prototypes of both instruments will be fabricated and tested in Phase
II. A high-frequency localized optical velocimeter would be a valuable
diagnostic for very hot gases such as are found in arcs, combustion furnaces and
industrial plasma processing chambers. It would also be useful for detailed
studies of small-scale phenomena in flowing gases, such as boundary layers and
turbulent wakes in wind tunnels. In the future, it is envisioned that this new
instrument could also be used in process control applications. Groups conducting
research on gases and plasmas would be the initial customers for such an
instrument.