* 9529112
* A Workshop and Symposium to be held in Boston, March 1-3, 1996
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1997
* Tian Yu Cao, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Edward J. Hackett
* 07/31/1997
* USD 16,000.00

Our present conception of nature, concerning the ultimate constituents of the
physical world and the laws and principles that govern them, is largely shaped
by quantum field theory (QFT). Hence, many philosophers of science see QFT as
the locus of research when they try to use current physical theory as a guide to
resolving questions such as "is the world ultimately continuous, or discrete, or
dual in nature?" "what is individuality?" and "what is the relation between
matter and force?" Novel features of QFT have been developed since the 1950's.
These features include the non-linearity of non-Abelian gauge theories and its
consequences (asymptotic freedom and topological solutions). These new features
also bring new philosophical implications on such issues as the nature of a
vacuum, a particle, and the global features generated by QFT, a local theory.
QFT also raises questions concerning the causal connections between different
levels of the physical world as is embodied in the idea and technique of
renormalization group and symmetry-breaking. The issues raised by these new
features of QFT need very much to be incorporated into philosophy of science. In
order to bring philosophers and historians of physics up to date on QFT and to
set a new agenda for future research, Dr. Cao has organized a symposium that
aims to analyze various formulations and understandings of the foundations of
QFT. Following the symposium, Dr. Cao has organized a workshop to investigate
the historical and philosophical issues associated with these formulations.
Participating in this combined symposium and workshop is a stellar group of
mathematicians, physicists, philosophers and historians of science. These
include two Nobel Laureates, Sheldon Glashow and Steven Weinberg as well as such
leaders in their respective fields as S. Coleman, R. Jackiw, D. Gross, A
Wightman, A. Jaffe, M. Redhead, J. Cushing, and L. Brown. This workshop and
symposium promise to promote a mutually beneficial dialog among the sci entists,
mathematicians, historians and philosophers interested in foundation issues in
science.