* 9529293
* Collaborative Research:  Late Quaternary Glaciations of     Northern Novaya Zemlya, Russia
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Steven Forman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Odile de la Beaujardiere
* 06/30/1997
* USD 88,222.00

The extent and timing of Pleistocene ice sheets over northern Eurasia remain
unresolved. The views range from full coverage of the Barents and Kara Seas by a
marine-based ice sheet to land-based ice-cap systems on adjacent archipelagos.
The heart of the divergence on the nature of last glaciation in northern
Eurasian is uncertainty on ice sheet thickness over Novaya Zemlya and extension
into Siberia. In collaboration with the Murmansk Institute of Marine Biology we
propose to initiate basic glacial-geologic, stratigraphic and geochronologic
studies to provide new field data to independently evaluate the limits and
timing of Weichselian glacial and deglacial events on Novaya Zemlya, Russia.
Field research will focus on three field areas on northern Novaya Zemlya, where
ice-free forelands contain abundant raised marine and glacial features. We plan
to use the following approaches to decipher the record of Quaternary glaciations
on Novaya Zemlya: 1) High resolution (10-m pixels) SPOT satellite imagery will
be used to evaluate large scale sea-level, glacial erosional and depositional
features (moraines) that may not readily be discernible in the field. 2)
Documentation of the timing and rate of the glacial-isostatic response by
radiocarbon dating of subfossils included in raised beaches of known elevation.
3) A study of the stratigraphy and sedimentology of superimposed Quaternary
sediments in cliff sections. Particular attention will be given to the
recognition of glacial damicts and unconformities, and the collection of micro-
and macro-fauna for paleoenvironmental assessment and chronologice control.
Provenance studies of clasts from glacial diamicts and fabric analysis should
provide new information on glacial source area. 4) Age control for the latest
glacial/sea level events will be derived from conventional and AMS radiocarbon
dating of included marine subfossil and driftage. The number and timing of older
events will be constrained by amino acid epimerization analyses of mollusks
using L-isoleucine/D-alloisoleucine ratios and higher resolution D/L aspartic
acid ratios. Numeric age will be determined by luminescence geochronometry on
the fine-grained fraction (4-11(m) from raised sublittoral sediments. 5)
Integration of field data with isostatic and glaciological modeling to provide
insight into glacier thickness, position of ice divides, domes and streams and
response to sea level rise. Results from this study are important for evaluating
if ice sheets on northern continental shelves responded synchronously, if the
Barents, Kara and Norwegian Seas deglaciated prior to 14 ka ago, and the effect
of Eurasian ice sheets on North Atlantic thermohaline circulation. This field-
based research will provide new data on Weichselian glacier geometry in the
Russian Arctic, where little currently exists, which is a critical boundary
condition for evolving global climate models.