* 9529706
* SBIR Phase II:  Design and Development for a Decision       Support System for Emergency Services
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Paul Sorensen, Isera Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1998
* USD 299,806.00

*** 9529706 Sorensen This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
from ISERA Group, Inc. involves the research and development of a prototype
decision support system (DSS) for fire protection and emergency medical services
(EMS). Currently, most fire and EMS agencies resort to manual planning
techniques in the development of deployment strategies, leading to the
probability of inefficient resource deployment. To address this situation, the
DSS will support optimization routines for the design of efficient deployment
strategies, including station/vehicle location models, crew scheduling models,
and dynamic vehicle move-up models. In addition, the DSS will provide a
simulation model to allow for the evaluation of altemative deployment strategies
prior to actual implementation. To insure the accuracy of the optimization and
simulation routines, the DSS will include a sophisticated point-to-point travel
time estimation model that incorporates a variety of geographic, temporal, and
response-specific factors. Each of the models will be based on the specific
planning needs encountered at various fire and EMS agencies visited during the
Phase I research study. The models will be constructed in a generalized format
and equipped with a variety of customizable elements in order that they may be
tailored to the individual needs of different agencies. The DSS will also
include data communication protocols for transferring planning-related data from
existing sources, including computer-aided dispatching (CAD) systems and
geographical information systems (GIS), along with a sophisticated, intuitive
graphical user interface. Use of the DSS will result in efficient resource
deployment strategies, leading to significant cost savings and/or improved
levels of service. The principal commercial application of this research will be
an Emergency Services DSS for use in medium- and large-sized fire departments
and EMS agencies/companies facing planning problems of significant scope and
complexity. Within the United States alone there are more than 4,600 fire
departments and more than 1,800 EMS agencies serving populations in excess of
25,000. ***