* 9529459
* CISE Research Instrumentation: High-Performance ATM         Network for Computational Science
* CSE,EIA
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Mark Jones, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 02/28/1997
* USD 100,000.00

CDA-9529459 Michael W. Berry Jens Gregor Mark T. Jones James S. Plank Padma
Raghavan University of Tennessee An ATM networked 12 high-performance
workstations supports several research projects in the Computer Science
Department at the University of Tennessee, including in particular: Scientific
Applications in a Distributed Computing Environment, PET Image Reconstruction in
a Distributed Environment, Parallel Algorithms and Software for Unstructured
Mesh Computations, Fast Checkpointing in Parallel Environments, and Parallel
Sparse Matrix Computations. This computing laboratory provides required
resources of CPU time, local memory, communication bandwidth and disk storage
for the computationally intensive projects. Some of the research tasks require
this dedicated laboratory for their exceptionally long runtimes. The systems
project requires access to such an environment to run meaningful experiments. In
addition, the dedicated laboratory facilities may be reconfigured or subjected
to simulated faults without concern about the effects on other users. The
research projects will produce public-domain software. Because several
government and industrial sites will soon have facilities similar to that which
we propose, regular access to such a laboratory is essential for quality
software research and development.