* 9529185
* Dissertation Research:  Exchange, Local Meanings of Exchange and Their Consequences among Youth in Chuuk State,         Federated States of Micronesia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Michael Burton, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1997
* USD 12,000.00

This project involves the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Calivornia-Irvine. The project is to conduct ethnographic
research among adolescents in Chuuk, Micronesia, on the topic of resource
exchanges and teen-aged conflict. The student will test several hypotheses
involving the status of adolescents within their households and among their
peers and their presence in exchange networks for resources. This region has
seen high rates of teen-aged suicides, and the project will test hypotheses
relating to how and why adolescents feel marginalized in varying situations and
how this relates to their ability to exchange various sorts of resources.
Methods will include a sample of three villages to be censused and a sub-sample
of young men, young women, mothers and fathers to whom cognitive tests will be
administered. In addition narratives of exchange and support as well as event
histories will be collected. This research is important because it will add to
the nation's expertise about this important region of the world, and will
advance out cross-cultural understanding of the teen-aged transition to
adulthood. This transition is difficult in many societies, as shown by rates of
teen suicide, and case studies such as this which shed light on the strengths as
well as stresses involving individuals going through the transition will be
valuable to policy makers.