* 9529787
* IAI Workshop: Biological Invaders - Their Increasing Role as Disrupters of Earth System Processes
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Mary Arroyo, University of Chile
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,912.00

9529787 Kalin Arroyo Invading organisms often cause enormous economic and
environmental impact, resulting in the disruption of many earth systems
processes. Invaders represent a major but poorly understood global change
element. This proposal would start a process with the following foci: the
development of a new protocol to quantify the changing presence of invaders in
carefully matched managed and natural ecosystems in the western Americas,
extending from the subarctic to the true deserts; the development of new
approaches for assessing the impacts of the invaders in both environmental and
holistic economic terms; and the preparation of a Phase II proposal for the
establishment of a research network in the Americas to apply the new tools
developed and to promote the development of new research expertise. For some
biota, there is relatively good information on the numbers of species of
invaders in given regions, and to a certain extent, how these numbers are
changing through time. To a larger degree though, there is not much information
on the abundance of invaders, their population dynamics, or their particular and
total environmental impacts. There is virtually no fine structure of information
on the changing abundance of invaders through time or how many invaders remain
at low levels of abundance, for how long, and when they may suddenly increase in
abundance as climate, land use, or management practices change. This proposal
will try to fill these information gaps through a planning meeting in Phase I to
develop a Phase II proposal for the study and analysis of, and predictions about
the biological invaders. Specifically, Phase I will develop a research plan
which addresses the following areas: assessing the current knowledge and
information gaps on the distribution of invasive species; assessing the
available information for invasive species patterns affecting international
trade, quarantine control, and commercialization of flo ra and fauna; developing
criteria and methodologies for rapid field assessments of invasion patterns of
exotic species in different ecosystems and under different types of management;
developing criteria for selection of field sites so as to represent different
land-use patterns and the main natural vegetation types; developing criteria to
determine relevant experimental work for determining predictions about the long-
term impacts on difficult invasive species; developing methods to assess impacts
of species on ecosystem functions; assessing the sort-term and long-term
manpower and institutional requirements in the participating institutions to
undertake the project successfully; initiating discussion on how to value the
impacts of invasive species in both economic and environmental contexts; and
establishing mechanisms for evaluation of the progress of the project, data
sharing, communications, publication of results, and making results available to
managers and government agencies. %%% Invading organisms often cause enormous
economic and environmental impact, resulting in the disruption of many earth
systems processes. Invaders represent a major but poorly understood global
change element. This proposal would start a process with the following foci: the
development of a new protocol to quantify the changing presence of invaders in
carefully matched managed and natural ecosystems in the western Americas,
extending from the subarctic to the true deserts; the development of new
approaches for assessing the impacts of the invaders in both environmental and
holistic economic terms; and the preparation of a Phase II proposal for the
establishment of a research network in the Americas to apply the new tools
developed and to promote the development of new research expertise. One of the
largest, but perhaps least recognized elements of global change is the
increasing homogenization of the world's biota. We are witnessing a massive
exchange of b iological material between previously isolated continents and
regions. Although many of these exchanges are purposeful and beneficial to human
endeavors, they may do tremendous harm to the productive capacity of natural and
managed ecosystems. Furthermore, they can alter fire and nutrient regimes, water
quality and quantity, sediment movement, forest regeneration, as well as disrupt
genetic systems and fragment or homogenized biotic communities and habitats. One
reason introductions can be so detrimental is that their population densities
can be far higher in new areas than in their native habitats, because they are
often removed from their natural controls in their new homes. Because of the
potential ecological and economic consequences of invaders, both good and bad,
there is a great need for knowledge on the biology, origins, movement and fates
of invaders in order to develop predictive tools for evaluating their potential
success and impacts in any given region. This proposal will address the
information on the characteristics, impacts and controls of invading species
which have relevance for local national and international policy-makers.
Therefore, this proposal includes participants from the following countries:
Argentina, Chile, Mexico, and the United States. These countries are Members
States of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S.
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The U.S. National Science Foundation is
the U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within
the IAI. *** --========================_13392216==_--