* 9529088
* Collaborative Research:  Biogeochemical and Hydrologic      Controls on Solutes and Flowpaths in Alpine Watersheds
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Diana Wall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 08/31/1999
* USD 74,000.00

This research will elucidate geochemical and biogeochemical processes that are
important at the watershed scale in alpine basins. It will examine these
processes using a multidisciplinary approach that combines stable and radiogenic
isotopic tracers, plot level experiments, process-level modeling, and field
research to constrain the modeling results. New isotopic tools will be used in
combination with field measurements of water quality and quantity to separate
the relative contributions of atmospheric and soil-derived sources of nitrate in
streamwaters, increase our understanding of the biogeochemical reactions
controlling alkalinity, and provide insights into the dynamics of sulfur
deposition. A key objective is the development of a robust model for solute
transport built on fundamental principles to predict the fate of a variety of
chemical constituents at many sites and under a variety of conditions. The
relevant geochemical, biogeochemical and hydrologic processes are interconnected
at the watershed scale and therefore must be studied together. The algorithms
used for this ph ysically-based mathematical model provide an integrated
approach to modeling the hydrology and biogeochemistry of seasonally snow-
covered alpine basins with model development and field work inextricably linked.
This research will contribute to a better fundamental understanding of the
biogeochemical and geochemical processes, which can be used in responding to
anthropogenic perturbations. The multidisciplinary research team has cooperative
support from the National Biological Service, U.S. Geological Survey, the
National Park Service, and the Long-Term Ecological Research Program. The two
study areas are Niwot Ridge/Green Lakes Valley and Lock Vale Watershed, which
lie on the east slope of the Colorado Front Range.