* 9529940
* Pleistocene Sea-Level and Glacial Fluctuations, Coastal     Ahklun Mountains, Southwest Alaska
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* Darrell Kaufman, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Odile de la Beaujardiere
* 05/31/1999
* USD 207,568.00

Recent work in the south part of the west coast of Alaska (eastern Bristol Bay,
59oN) demonstrates that glaciers experienced extensive advances during the late
Pleistocene. In northwestern Alaska (Seward Peninsula, 65oN, and western Brooks
Range, 67oN), on the other hand, early Wisconsin glaciers were restricted to the
highest mountain valleys and occupied an area approximately an order of
magnitude less extensive than during middle and early Pleistocene advances. The
most-recent major advance of glacier ice to the coast in southwestern Alaska was
at least 300,000 yr younger than the last advance of ice to the coast in
northwestern Alaska. To understand the cause and significance of this apparent
glacial- geologic and paleoclimatological incongruity, the following must be
addressed: (1) Where and over what distance along the coast between eastern
Bristol Bay and Seward Peninsula does the cross-over between late Pleistocene
glacial maxima and middle Pleistocene maxima occur? (2) To what extent to valley
hypsometries control the extent of ice from the different source areas? (3) What
does the geographic distribution of late-Wisconsin and pre-late-Wisconsin ice
imply about equilibrium line altitude (ELA) lowering and equilibrium line
altitude (ELA) gradients, and consequently, moisture sources and other climate
variables? Solving these questions will require extensive field, aerial
photographic, and geochronologic research in the only glaciated region between
eastern Bristol Bay and Seward Peninsula-the Ahklun Mountains. It will depend on
a multi-disciplinary effort to obtain numerical-age control on the deposits.
State-of-the-art geochronologic and sedimentologic techniques will be applied to
reconstruct the spatial and temporal pattern of Pleistocene sea-level and
glacier fluctuations. This work will improve the understanding of the
paleoclimatological controls of glaciation across western Alaska and their
relation to the global climate system; should enable to address whether gl
aciation in southwestern Alaska is synchronous with Northern Hemispheric ice-
sheet fluctuations, or whether major glaciations here precedes ice build-up at
lower latitude.