* 9529691
* IAI Workshop: Development of an IAI Research Center on Red  Tides and Harmful Algal Blooms
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Donald Anderson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/1998
* USD 39,297.00

9529691 Anderson The proposed workshop will bring scientists from nine IAI
countries together to establish a cooperative research program. An IAI Research
Center for the study of Harmful Algae Blooms (HAB) will be formed, consisting of
a group of investigators and institutions from the region. The participants will
work on common problems using uniform techniques and approaches. The overall
goal of the program will be to examine the trends of HAB incidence, mechanisms
underlying their formation, and possible linkages to human activities and global
change phenomena. The ultimate objective is to develop common strategies to
reverse the trend, manage affected resources and mitigate impacts. Workshop
participants will develop four to five projects for the proposed Research
Center, to be submitted to IAI for Phase II of the IAI Start-Up Grants. The
scientific areas which will likely be addressed within the context of an IAI HAB
Research Center are the following: oceanographic and environmental mechanisms
underlying HABs; the relative importance of natural versus anthropogenic factors
in HAB dynamics and distribution; HAB events associated with river outflows into
coastal water; cooperative research into toxic dinoflagellate physiology and
bloom dynamics; and assessing the extent to which harmful species have
dispersed, either naturally or with accidental human assistance. In addition,
the Phase II proposal for an HAB Center could also be used as a information
network linking scientists, administrators, agencies involved in HAB issues. The
HAB Center may also be used for educational activities which target both the
scientific community and the general public. %%% The proposed workshop will
bring scientists from nine IAI countries together to establish a cooperative
research program for the study of Harmful Algae Blooms (HAB), consisting of a
group of investigators and institutions from the region. The participants of
this Research Center will work on common problems using uniform techniq ues and
approaches. The overall goal of the program will be to examine the trends of HAB
incidence, mechanisms underlying their formation, and possible linkages to human
activities and global change phenomena. The ultimate objective is to develop
common strategies to reverse the trend, manage affected resources and mitigate
impacts. The workshop participants will develop four to five projects for the
proposed Research Center to be submitted for Phase II of the IAI Start-Up
Grants. The nature of the HAB problem has changed considerably over the last two
decades in the Americas. In recent years, there has been a steady and alarming
increase in marine HAB incidence that poses a serious threat to human health and
economic development throughout the Americas, and there is therefore an urgent
need to better understand this increase in marine HAB incidence. Two decades
ago, only a few countries were affected, and then only in scattered locations.
Now virtually every coastal country is threatened, in many cases over large
geographic areas and by multiple harmful or toxic algal species. All coastal IAI
member states have serious HAB problems, including Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico, Peru, the United States, and Uruguay. Each of these
countries will participate in the workshop as Member States of the IAI, an
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues in the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government to
carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***