* 9529295
* Wave-Cyclone Interaction in the Near Field Associated with  Non-Axisymmetric Adjustment
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Michael Montgomery, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pamela L. Stephens
* 03/31/1999
* USD 167,663.00

9529295 Montgomery When an isolated vortex is subject to non-axisymmetric
forcing, an adjustment process ensues. Adjustment consists of an excitation of
gravity waves and shear waves, but surprisingly little is known about the near-
field wave-mean flow interaction that accompanies it. A fundamental question in
cyclone dynamics is the extent of the coupling between a large-scale vortex and
small-scale excitations confined near the radius of maximum winds. In the realm
of non-axisymmetric dynamics, a possibility exists for mean flow acceleration by
sheared disturbances. Shear-induced acceleration represents an unexplored
mechanism for vortex growth at subsynoptic scales that may contribute
significantly to cyclone development in tropical cyclones and extratropical
marine cyclones. In his recent work, the principal investigator (PI) identified
and analyzed a class of vortex Rossby waves that owe their existence to the
radial gradient of storm vorticity. The initial studies were done in a non-
ditergent flow framework. The PI will now explore the impact of such waves on
cyclone development under more realistic conditions. The focus of the new work
will be on understanding and quantifying the impact of both vortex-Rossby waves
and gravity-inertia waves on the near-field wave-mean flow dynamics accompanying
the adjustment process. Investigative techniques will be both analytical and
computational. ***