* 9529403
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  Real-time, Multimedia and   High Performance Computing in Distributed Systems
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Marina Chen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 95,167.00

CDA-9529403 Chen, Marina Bestrides, Azer Heddaya, Abdelsalam Boston University
Real-Time, Multimedia and High Performance Computing in Distributed Systems The
requested instrumentation is to enhance and support a rapidly growing research
group in areas of high performance computing and communication, digital
multimedia, and real-time systems. The instrumentation consists of a 12 x 12 ATM
switch connecting nodes that serve as compute engines, files servers, and video
clients which provides high bandwidth access to the university's supercomputing
facility. Five research projects will directly benefit from the requested
instrumentation: 1. Parallel compilers, 2. Performance prediction of high-
bandwidth networking environments connecting a heterogeneous set of computers
and supercomputers, 3. Efficient multi-threaded shared memory parallel computing
on distributed systems, 4. Information dispersal and retrieval protocols to
provide for real-time, fault-tolerant comunication, and 5. 3D extension on
deformable shape modeling for content-based retrieval for video and image
databases. The advancement of these projects depends on emerging technology of
high-bandwidth networking environments connecting a heterogeneous set of
computers and supercomputers, and the availability of a network that delivers a
guaranteed bandwidth and real-time graphics and video I/O capabilities.