* 9529399
* IAI Workshop: Integrated Study of Temperate Coast Estuaries
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Gerardo Perillo, Instituto Argentino
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9529399 Perillo This proposal is for a series of three workshops which have the
purpose of beginning preparations for an international system for the integrated
study of estuaries within the IAI region, establishing the basis for a
structured estuarine management system, and defining specific temperate coast
estuaries where comprehensive, multidisciplinay investigations will be proposed
for IAI Phase II. The goals of the workshop are the following: to integrate
researchers with common estuary interests; to define the elements of an estuary
management system; to establish common methodologies that can be used in all
regions, emphasizing measurements that can be made by low budget research
groups; to define the characteristics of representative estuary systems; and to
form groups to develop an IAI Phase II proposal to initiate research in those
systems. The Phase II proposal will address setting up an international IAI
estuary study system which will be composed of a pool of experts that can devote
their attention to problems in any IAI country. The Phase II will establish the
basis of an estuary management system to be used in all countries and will
select several temperate estuaries as representative systems and design the
research that will be carried out on those systems. %%% This proposal is for a
series of three workshops which have the purpose of beginning preparations for
an international system for the integrated study of estuaries within the
Americas, establishing the basis for a structured estuarine management system,
and defining specific temperate coast estuaries where comprehensive,
multidisciplinary investigations will be proposed for IAI Phase II. The Phase II
program will develop a comprehensive multidisciplinary investigation combining
both long term monitoring and intensive sampling strategies on each of the
selected estuaries by an international team. This will allow for the testing of
new instrumentation, new field methodologies and will also provide a training
gro und for groups willing to develop projects for studying estuaries in their
own country. The ultimate goal of Phases I and II is to provide decision makers
with the basic elements for them to evaluate and to make decisions and to take
actions in order to prevent harmful effects of climate change on their
respective country's estuaries, the population and biota associated with them,
and the general economic welfare of the region. This proposal brings together
participants from Argentina, Brazil, Canada, Chile, Mexico, Peru, the United
States, and Uruguay. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative
to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues in the Americas. The
National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government to carry out U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI. ***