* 9529213
* Symposium on Health and Global Climate Change, to be held   September 11-12, 1995, Washington, DC
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Andrew Pope, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* H. Lawrence Clark
* 08/31/1996
* USD 55,000.00

9529213 SETLOW Changes in climate and other natural systems may have profound
impacts on health and the human condition in a variety ways. Natural system
changes can have direct impacts on human physiology, and they can have indirect
affects by altering the development and transmission of disease. At the request
of the Committee on Environment and Natural Resources (CENR) of the National
Science and Technology Council (NSTC) and the White House Office of Science and
Technology Policy (OSTP), the Institute of Medicine and the National Research
Council will convene a two-day symposium in Washington in September 1995 to
address the complex interactions between human health and global environmental
change. More than 300 scientists, health professionals, and key decision makers
from the public and private sectors will participate in discussions designed to
identify aspects of human health-natural systems interaction that require more
research in the future. A published proceedings will help disseminate results of
those discussions to a much broader audience. Support for the planning and
conduct of the symposium is being shared by a number of CENR agencies. This
award effectively provides support from NSF ($15,000), the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration ($25,000), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration ($15,000). This symposium will be an important gathering that
brings together leaders from a number of different communities whose interests
intersect because of the complex dynamics that link human health and global
change. The symposium will provide valuable insights into important problems,
and it will provide guidance to federal agencies participating in the U.S.
Global Change Research Program and other CENR-related activities.