* 9529770
* Stablized Molecular Assemblies for Advanced Synthesis and   Sensing Technologies
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Robin McCarley, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Gene W. Wilds
* 03/31/2000
* USD 255,000.00

In this work, supported in the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in the
Chemistry Division, Robin L. McCarley of Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge, will study ways to modify self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on an in place
basis. A major thrust of the project is to use electrochemical polymerization to
manipulate reactions in SAMs to produce surfaces with specific properties. The
chemistry uses conducting thin film poly(pyrrole) polymers produced from
substituted alkyl thiols attached to gold surfaces. A number of instrumental
methods will be used to study the films that are produced. One, attenuated total
internal reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, is particularly
useful because it produces information about the chemical composition of the
surface of the material. Scanning tunneling microscopy and scanning force
microscopy are to be used to provide information about surface topography and
structure. The objective is to correlate macroscopic properties of the thin film
materials with molecular structure. This investigation will study ways to
control the chemistry involved in the formation of organic thin films
constructed on gold surfaces which serve as a physical support for the film. The
purpose is to produce film materials with physical and chemical characteristics
tailored to a specific application. In the long term, this will enable
construction of sensors for environmental monitoring and other purposes which
have high molecular specificity.