* 9529825
* SBIR PHASE II:  A High-Energy Electron Injector for X-ray   Chip Lithography and Microfabrication
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* David U. Yu, DULY Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Juan E. Figueroa
* 09/30/1998
* USD 290,797.00

9529825 Yu This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project
explores a compact, high-gradient electron linear accelerator as an injector to
a multiport, high-throughput, synchrotron X-ray radiation storage ring. The
device will be used in X-ray lithography machines for manufacture of
microelectronic chips and microelectromechanical systems (MEMS). Phase I
produced a compact design for a full-energy injector that matches well to a
superconducting storage ring X-ray source. A pulsed septum and kicker magnet
were also designed for use with full-energy injection. Phase II will produce a
detailed design of the X-ray source system and run simulation tests of high
current stored and maintained in the compact ring using the new injection
scheme. In concurrent Phase III development, under private-sector funding, a
commercial prototype of a new full-energy, high-gradient injector will be built.
By subcontract to Oxford Instruments of Carteret, NJ, Phase II will also modify
a Helios 2 superconducting ring for full-energy injection. Potential commercial
applications are expected in a new generation of high-throughput X-ray machines
for lithography at feature sizes finer than 0.18 micron. This is expected to
enable a major expansion in quality and productivity of the microelectronics
industry. The new injection technology can also be adapted to MEMS
microfabrication, which is also expected to grow significantly.