* 9529530
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Layered Manufacturing        Machine in Support of Rapid Prototyping and Unmanned        Manufacturing
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Samuel Drake, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1997
* USD 76,918.00

CDA-9529530 Cohen, Elaine Drake, Samuel H. Henderson, Thomas C. Riesenfeld,
Richard F. University of Utah Layered Manufacturing Machine in Support of Rapid
Prototyping and Unmanned Manufacturing A rapid prototyping machine, Helisys,
supports research in computer and information science and engineering,
particularly in following projects: (1) Science and Technology Center for
Computer Graphics and Scientific Visualization, (2) Concurrent Integrated Design
and Manufacturing, (3) Rapid Virtual Prototyping of Mechanical Assemblies, and
(4) Sensing Strategies for Advanced Manufacturing. The machine is a Laminated
Object Manufacturing (LOM) System which is used to generate visualization
models, to help in verification of reconstructed models, and to support a
variety of casting operations and other secondary manufacturing operations
including vacuum forming and silicon rubber molding. The LOM process in the
Advanced Manufacturing Laboratory is used primarily for research in
manufacturing and to produce prototype parts for other research programs. The
process is also used to offer a variety of experimental manufacturing services
over the network. The educational use of rapid prototyping provides strong
visualization feedback in solid modeling and shape understanding for
undergraduate and graduate level courses as well as for high school students
selected from the state of Utah under a National Science Foundation Young
Scholars Program.