* 9529309
* Relation of Gas Phase Species to Film Growth by Pulsed Laser Deposition
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* David Goodwin, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 05/31/1999
* USD 300,059.00

Goodwin 9529309 In the last five years, considerable effort has been devoted to
diagnostic analysis of the plumes of matter produced when pulsed lasers are used
to ablate a solid target. this has been primarily motivated by a desire to
better understand the basic physical and chemical processes important to pulsed
laser deposition, a newly popular thin film growth technique which is finding
ever-increasing application to growth of superconductor, insulator and
semiconductor structures. The objective from laser-induced plumes, rather than
to study exclusively plume formation. The approach taken is a combined
experimental and theoretical effort. Briefly, the aim is to determine the extent
to which film stoichiometry and microstructure are determined by: Evolution of
the energy distributions (both translational and internal) of the gas phase
species as the plume approaches a substrate for thin film growth. The incident
species' energy will affect the sticking probability, the dissociate probability
and mode of dissociation and incorporation (i.e., adsorption or implantation) of
gas phase constituents into the films. Evolution of species distributions as the
plume moves from the target to the substrate, including formation of reactive
intermediates in the gas phase, which then condense onto the solid surface.
Prominent aspects of the experimental work are laser-induced fluorescence (LIF)
measurements of gas phase plume an intermediate species in their electronic
ground states, in situ surface analysis by reflection high energy electron
diffraction (RHEED) and a complementary core level spectroscopy technique
developed at Caltech, reflection electron energy loss spectroscopy (REELS).
Various forms of postgrowth film microstructural analysis will be used to
analyze film stoichiometry, density, crystallinity, bonding state, and optical
properties. The theoretical work will involve several efforts, including
molecular dynamics (MD) simulations of energetic plume-surface interact ions and
Director-Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) simulations of gas-phase plume dynamics,
including chemical kinetics and substrate interactions. ***