* 9529946
* SBIR Phase II:  Heavy Metals Removal from Industrial and    Environmental Wastes Using Exopolysaccharide Adsorbants     Produced by Marine Microorganisms
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Alan Chmurny, NOVASCREEN BIOSCIENCES CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

9529946 Chmurny This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
designed to establish the commercial feasibility for use of a novel marine
microbial polysaccharide in the removal of heavy metals from industrial
effluents and environmental media including potable water. These metal
pollutants are among the most prevalent and problematic waste treatment and
environmental remediation targets. Current technologies provide only partially
effective treatment and are costly to implement and use. It is proposed that
this complex polysaccharide cell matrix designated MHS-3, which was shown in
Phase I work to have exceptional affinity for heavy metals including lead and
mercury, be developed into an integrated metals removal system. Cell mass
fabricated into a number of resin-like matrices will be evaluated for its
ability to adsorb heavy metals from complex waste streams containing non-
hazardous metals and organic materials under anticipated field conditions. The
objectives of this Phase II project are to: 1) establish conditions for the
cost-effective production of MHS-3 cell mass; 2) characterize the performance of
MHS-3 bioadsorbents against a full panel of regulated and nonregulated metals;
3) characterize bioadsorbent performance in at least two treatment system
configurations; 4) evaluate prototype bioadsorbents in the treatment of model
and real-world streams 5) establish procedures for the cost-effective
preparation of selected bioadsorbent(s); and 6) carry out bench scale, large
laboratory-scale and small pilot-scale demonstrations with prototype adsorbent
treatment systems. It is anticipated that this work will document that these
adsorbent systems offer superior treatment economics for many wastes and are an
enabling technology for the treatment of others, including the removal of trace
metals from drinking water. This research will form the basis of lower cost,
more efficient, and lower energy- demanding methods for removing heavy metals
from metal finishing plants, la ndfill leachates, contaminated aquifers and,
potentially, radioactive materials storage sites in the U.S. and world-wide.
Initial commercialization of this technology will target applications with low
volume, well defined, highly similar wastes, modest equipment and capital
requirements for the treatment system, low projected operating costs and ease of
market entry. Such applications include printed wiring board manufacturing sites
and lead-acid battery reprocessing facilities. Sales of materials and systems in
these areas are expected within three years and should provide Phase III program
revenue to fund significant portions of the longer term development targets in
high volume applications such as potable water treatment and refinery effluent
clean-up.