* 9529418
* CISE Research Instrumentation:  A Next-Generation High      Performance Network of Commodity PCs
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Oscar Ibarra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1997
* USD 86,840.00

CDA 9529418 Ibarra, Oscar H. Rinard, Martin C. Schauser, Klaus E. Yang, Tao
University of California, Santa Barbara A Next-Generation High-Performance
Network of Commodity PCs The proposed instrumentation consists of a collection
of commodity personal computers (PCs) connected by a commodity ATM network. This
computing platform supports four experimental research projects in the area of
high performance parallel and distributed systems. The first project
investigates efficient communication primitives for cost-effective commodity
computing and networking platforms. The objective is to enable important
parallel computations to execute efficiently in this computing environment. The
second project investigates a new parallelizing compiler technique called
commutativity analysis. The objective is to extend the range of parallelizing
compilers to include computations that manipulate complex pointer-based data
structures. The third project investigates scheduling and run-time supporting
techniques for irregular scientific computations. The objective is to understand
how to map these computations efficiently onto a modern parallel computing
environment consisting of commodity hardware components. The final project
investigates issues in developing a scalable WWW server for digital library
applications. The objective is to strengthen the server's processing
capabilities to match huge expected increases in simultaneous access requests
from the Internet. The main research activity in all of these projects is
developing, testing and measuring software. The instrumentation provides the
hardware platform required to perform these activities.