* 9529170
* Astrophysical Studies of Gravitational Lenses, Faint        Galaxies, Active Galactic Nuclei, and Pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Roger Blandford, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Susan M. Simkin
* 05/31/2000
* USD 455,924.00

AST 95-29170 PI: Roger Blandford Astrophysical Studies of Gravitational Lenses,
Faint Galaxies, Active Galactic Nuclei, and Pulsars. Four subject areas are
included in this proposal. The first is gravitational lenses. A survey for
multiply-imaged compact radio sources is hoped to discover some good cases with
well-understood optical configurations that can measure the Hubble constant from
time delays between variations in the multiple images. It is also proposed to
explore the possibility of measuring the masses of distant faint galaxies
through detecting their mutual weak distortion and by performing imaging
spectroscopy on giant arcs formed by rich clusters. Distant faint galaxies are
the subject of the second investigation. New data from the Keck and Palomar
telescopes will be obtained and applied to learning the distances and
fundamental properties of these galaxies. .....The third area is active galactic
nuclei, with studies ranging from the theoretical question of the causal
behavior of a black hole magnetosphere to analysis of broad absorption and
emission lines in quasars. New computational capabilities allow 3-D
magnetohydrodynamic simulations to explore the evolution of magnetic field in a
giant radio- emitting lobe. The last investigation will be the physics and
observational implications of a model of radio pulsar emission that relies on
cyclotron-Cerenkov maser action.