* 9529541
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Research in Parallel Computer System Design using Workstation Clusters with High-Speed   Networks
* CSE,EIA
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Samir Das, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rita Rodriguez
* 01/31/1998
* USD 51,546.00

CDA-9529541 Psarris, Kleanthis Das, Samir, R. Boppana, Rajendra, V. The
University of Texas at San Antonio Research in Parallel Computer Systems Design
using Workstation Clusters with High-Speed Networks This award is for the
acquisition of a cluster of four multiprocessor workstations to support several
research projects, including the research on the design of architectures and
compilers for distributed shared memory multiprocessors and on large-scale
applications such as the design and implementation of parallel discrete event
simulators. The proposed instrumentation provides a multi-granular parallel and
distributed computing platform, where both tightly-coupled and loosely-coupled
systems coexist. It interconnects four Sun workstations with an SCI (scalable
coherent interface) based high-speed network. The SCI interconnect will provide
low-latency message passing and shared memory support. The SUN workstations with
Solaris OS support threads and high precision clocks. The low-latency inter-
workstation communication and threads will be used to implement parallel
architecture simulators and parallel discrete event simulators. Precise clocks
will be used to extract message communication and shared memory traces from
applications. These traces in turn will be used to evaluate the new
architectural mechanisms through simulations. The shared memory support provided
by the interconnect will be used to run the parallel code generated by a
parallelizing compiler. Several benchmark applications will be compiled and run
on the equipment to evaluate the effectiveness of various dependence analysis
techniques.