* 9529926
* Code Delay in Legacy Software Systems: Measurement, Models, and Statistical Strategies
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Alan Karr, National Institute of Statistical Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Mariann Jelinek
* 03/31/2000
* USD 247,946.00

This research program is directed toward key problems regarding a massive, but
largely unappreciated problem -- decay of computer software. Three key problems
to be investigated include describing code decay, identifying factors that cause
code decay, and evaluating effects of reductions in code decay. The research
team, which represents a partnership between AT&amp;T and the National Institute
of Statistical Sciences, will develop indices (measures) of code decay that
reflect key behavioral and managerial characteristics in the software
development process. Changes in controllable (for example, organizational)
factors will change the indices, which in turn impact key responses: cost, time
and quality. By incorporating adequate behavioral and organizational factors, as
well as code characteristics, we will develop techniques to identify relevant
factors and evaluate their effects on code decay. The research team is cross-
disciplinary, including experts in software engineering, behavioral issues,
organizational theory, management and statistics. Statistics -- especially
measurement, modeling, prediction, and experimentation -- serves as the `glue`
and enabling technology for progress on problems of code decay, and as the means
to apply paradigms from the traditional sciences to software engineering.
Statistic strategies will be developed and used to model and control the effects
of design decisions, software architecture and organizational factors. The
products will be the basis for management tools for achieving reductions in cost
and development interval, increases in software quality and enhanced capability
to predict cost, interval and quality.