* 9529133
* Assessing Holocene Environmental Change in the Kara Sea,    Eurasian Arctic
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Leonid Polyak, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/1999
* USD 95,741.00

Little is known about the environmental change in the Eurasian Arctic, a major
site for the formation and passage of sea-ice and water masses in the Arctic
Ocean. The knowledge of climatic and oceanographic fluctuations in this region
on a millenial and submillenial scale is especially important in view of the
special role of the Arctic in the modern global change. This project is aimed at
the first time-constrained reconstruction of Holocene paleo-environments in the
Kara Sea, which is strongly influenced by both the extensive continental run-off
and the Atlantic water advection. The Kara Sea sediments contain a unique record
of variations in the discharge of Siberian rivers, Atlantic water flow, and the
formation of bottom waters. A number of sediment cores and surface sediment
samples were collected recently in the Kara Sea. Cores from key sites located in
a corridor between the estuaries of Ob' and Yenisey Rivers and the marginal
Saint Anna Trough, are chosen for a study of the Holocene environmental change
on a millenial to centennial time-scale. Core stratigraphy will be time-
constrained by AMS 14C dating of in situ calcareous faunal remnants.
Mineralogical, geochemical, and grain-size analyses will be used to assess
sediment dispersal sources and depositional environments. Stable isotopes will
be measured on planktonic foraminifers from the northern Kara Sea to understand
the relation between the Siberian river discharge and oceanographic change in
the eastern Arctic Ocean. Modern distributional patterns of foraminifers and
ostracodes with respect to the Kara Sea hydrology will be established to provide
reliable paleo-environmental reconstructions for the Holocene. Results of this
collaborative research will significantly improve our knowledge of environmental
change in the Eurasian Arctic. Reconstruction of amplitude and timing of
riverine and Atlantic water pulses throughout the Holocene will reveal new
insights in mechanisms of heat and water vapor transfer from the North Atlantic
to the Arctic, and their controls on the extent of sea ice and formation of
water masses in the Arctic Ocean.