* 9529520
* CISE Research Instrumentation: Multiprocessor Workstation for Advanced Digital Signal Processing Research
* NONE,NONE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Kang Yen, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Rita V. Rodriguez
* 01/31/1997
* USD 31,051.00

CDA-9529520 Barreto, Armando B. Yen, Kang Florida International University CISE
Research Instrumentation: Multiprocessor Workstation for Advanced Digital Signal
Processing Research Emerging Digital Signal Processing techniques are being
applied to the solution of challenging problems of signal detection and system
modeling: Dynamic neural networks are used as spatio-temporal classifiers for
the detection of electroencephalographic (EEG) patterns that can be elicited
voluntarily, as part of the process of motion preparation. Reliable detection of
these patterns will provide the basis for the development of a new form of
computer interface that will be accessible even to individuals deprived of motor
execution functions. Similarly, chaotic dynamics analysis is being applied for
the detailed study of the three-dimensional propagation of ocean acoustic waves.
Indices such as the Lyapunov exponent are numerically estimated using real sound
propagation data collected in the North Atlantic to characterize the chaotic
properties of the phenomenon. While these emerging DSP techniques hold great
promise to increase our capability to obtain useful information from signals and
develop accurate models of physical phenomena, they are complex and
computationally intensive. The availability of multiprocessor workstations is
necessary to shorten the algorithm development and analysis cycles (i.e., large-
scale dynamic neural network training, numerical Lyapunov exponent estimation,
etc.) to practical levels. Additionally, these systems will familiarize our
faculty and students with parallel algorithm development techniques