* 9529569
* Modeling Primary Production of the Southern Ocean for       ROAVERRS (Research on Ocean-Atmosphere Variability and      Ecosystem Response in the Ross Sea)
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Michael Lizotte, University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/28/1999
* USD 63,855.00

9529569 Lizotte This proposal describes modeling studies of primary production
in the water column and sea ice for an NSF-funded field program to take place in
the southwest Ross Sea between October and March of 1996-97 and 1997-98. The
focus of the initial modeling studies will be to derive initial estimates of
primary productivity for the Southern Ocean. These initial estimates will be
based on: 1) current understanding of the physiology, biochemistry and ecology
of Southern Ocean phytoplankton and sea ice algae; 2) climatologies for sea ice
cover, cloud cover, sea surface temperature and algal pigments; and 3) existing
modeling approaches for depth-dependent (1-D) primary production in sea ice and
water column. One of the primary goals is to make the first determination of the
relative amounts of primary production in the water column and in the sea ice
using a consistent, modern estimation method (bio-optical modeling) for both
systems. Sensitivity analyses will then be performed to guide planning of the
ROAVERRS Project; these analyses will be directly applicable to planning for
JGOFS and GLOBEC activities related to the question of estimating primary
production in the Southern Ocean. Specifically, they will study model
sensitivity to sampling scales (temporal and spatial) in the ROAVERRS study
region and to variation in the variables proposed for measurement during
ROAVERRS (e.g., algal bio-optics, photosynthetic parameters, spectral quality of
light, nutrient concentration, sea ice thickness, snow cover, water column
mixing rates, temperature). Following completion of this modeling study, the
ROAVERRS Project will make improvements to the models based on an expanded data
base (e.g., tuning the model for different types of sea ice habitat or
phytoplankton blooms) and carry out testing of these models against field
observations.