* 9529810
* IAI Workshop: Organization of a Regional Center for Climate Studies in Mexico, the USA, Central America and the         Caribbean
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Victor Magana-Rueda, National Autonomous, University of Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 40,850.00

Author: pfilmer@nsf.gov (Paul E. Filmer) at NOTE Date: 5/29/96 8:58 AM Priority:
Normal TO: jmayi at nsf12 Subject: Magana Abstract (29810)
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
--========================_13293532==_ Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-
ascii" --========================_13293532==_ Content-Type: text/plain;
name="AB29810.DOC"; charset="iso-8859-1" Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-
printable Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="AB29810.DOC" 9529810
Maga=F1a-Rueda This proposal will organize a group of scientists from Mexico,
the United States, Central America, and the Caribbean with the main objective of
bringing together, into an Inter-American Institute (IAI) Regional Center,
members of those scientific communities with common interests in the study of
the IAI scientific theme "El Ni=F1o Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and Interannual
Climate Variability," as well as in the theme "Ocean-Land-Atmosphere
Interactions in the Intertropical Americas." Specifically, the objectives of the
Regional Center will be achieved through periodic meetings during which members
of the group will inform, discuss and examine their work within the framework of
the IAI Science Agenda. The objectives of the meeting are: to promote greater
collaboration and flow of information and expertise among the members of the IAI
Regional Center; to constitute a scientific forum where critical discussions
abut the achievements in joint scientific projects can be held; to encourage
participation of individuals at all levels in multinational projects in the
field of climate variability; and to promote educational and training activities
in the field of climate change. Meteorological and climatological data bases for
Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean will also be compiled. Preliminary
versions of these data bases will be distributed among members of the Research
Center to prepare stud ies aimed at proposal preparation for joint work. The
proposed Regional Center would be composed of a group of research institutions
which share their resources for the study of particular problems. The Regional
Center would also be a forum in which critical discussions of the collaborative
studies could be held, and it would promote scientific excellence. The
collaborative projects of this proposed Regional Center would enhance the
interest in studying various aspects of climate change and would educate new
generations of scientists. The results of these projects would be made available
to other scientists studying cross-cutting issues such as human dimensions of
climate change and training and education. %%% This proposal will organize a
group of scientists from Mexico, the United States, Central America, and the
Caribbean with the main objective of bringing together, into an Inter-American
Institute (IAI) Regional Center, members of these scientific communities with a
common interests in the study of the IAI scientific theme "El Ni=F1o Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) and Interannual Climate Variability," as well as in the theme
"Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Interactions in the Intertropical Americas."
Specifically, the objectives of the Regional Center will be achieved through
periodic meetings during which members of the group will inform, discuss and
examine in a critical manner their work within the framework of the IAI Science
Agenda. The objectives of the meeting agenda are: to promote grater
collaboration and flow of information and expertise among the members of the IAI
Regional Center; to constitute a scientific forum where critical discussions
abut the achievements in joint scientific projects can be held; to encourage
participation of individuals at all levels in multinational projects in the
field of climate variability; and to promote educational and training activities
in the field of Climate Change. There is also a plan for the cr eation of a
meteorological and climatological data bases for Mexico, Central America and the
Caribbean. Preliminary versions of these data bases will be distributed among
members of the Center to prepare studies aimed at proposal preparation for joint
work. ENSO and other climatic events involve interactions between the ocean and
atmosphere. The signal of ENSO on Mexican climate also relates to interactions
with land, on local and on regional scales. It has not been until the last
decade that some physical mechanisms associated with the summer rainy season
over Mexico have been identified. For example, cold sea surface temperature
anomalies along the equatorial eastern Pacific seem to lead to a strengthening
of moisture convergence along the western coast of Mexico and to an enhanced
rainy season over the Mexican western coast. Most of the climatic processes that
affect Mexico are not geographically unique. The richness of the climatic
phenomena in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean has not been examined in
as much detail as its mid-latitude or tropical western Pacific counterparts.
This is due in part to the small number of atmospheric scientists in the region,
their traditional and empirical approaches used to study meteorology and climate
in the operational centers, along with often incomplete databases. In addition,
inter-institutional collaboration in studying climate has been meager. A
potential solution for these problems is cooperation through this proposed
Regional Center for the study of El Ni=F1o Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and
Internal Climate Variability, as well as Ocean-Land-Atmosphere Interactions in
the Intertropical Americas. The following countries are participating in this
proposal: Costa Rica; Cuba; Mexico; Panama; and the United States. These
countries are Members States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate
cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
of the Americas . The U.S. National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government
agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***
--========================_13293532==_--