* 9529138
* Strongly Correlated and Disordered Fermi Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Gabriel Kotliar, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 12/31/2000
* USD 443,000.00

9529138 Kotliar This grant concerns those properties of a Fermi system that are
not present in the weakly interacting-clean substances but that arise as a
result of the strong interparticle interaction and/or lack of translational
invariance. These properties are present in experiments on metal-insulator
transitions. They are also critical to our understanding of heavy fermions,
doped semiconductors, amorphous alloys and high temperature superconductors.
Specifically, the project consists of three parts (a) Mott transition in
orbitally degenerate systems, (b) a large dimension analysis of the interplay
between localization and interaction and (c) Effect of quantum fluctuations in
the melting of a vortex lattice. %%% Typically, magnets are insulating (Iron
Cobalt and Nickel are very subtle exceptions) and superconductors are good
metals at high temperatures (when they are not superconducting). Recent
discoveries of high temperature superconductors show these materials to belong
to a special class, where the normal state of a superconductor is not a very
good metal and there is magnetism in similar compounds. The puzzling coexistence
of magnetism and dirty metallic character and superconductivity is a complex and
challenging theoretical problem. The present grant suggests a novel approach to
the solution of this problem and possible understanding of the phenomena of high
temperature superconductivity. ***