* 9529140
* Engineering Research Center for Innovation in Product       Development
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1997,12/31/2001
* Warren Seering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lynn Preston
* 12/31/2001
* USD 8,797,155.00

9529140 SEERING This award establishes a new Engineering Research Center, the
Center for Competitive Product Development at the Massachusetts Institute of
Technology. The award initiates a potential 11-year life span with a new five-
year cooperative agreement, renewable in the third and sixth years of the
center's operation. The vision of the Center is to develop methods, procedures,
and software tools to improve the product development process. The product
development process is the critical industrial procedure for bringing new and
innovative products to market. The challenge is to improve methods to guide the
complexity of product development. The process is performed by teams from an
array of organizational units, with participants having a diversity of skills
and perspectives. From the perspective of the marketplace and engineering, this
vision is very important. The success or failure of products into the
marketplace depends on the details of how engineers translate their
understanding of customer needs and desires and business practices into product
specifications. To provide a systems perspective, the research on the product
development process is organized into three thrusts: (1) customer/engineering
interface, (2) product family strategy, and (3) organization of the product
development process. The research output of the joint
industry/engineering/business teams will take the practical form of improved
product development methods, techniques, and tools. These will be developed from
research on challenging problems faced by their industrial partners. In
education, the Center will create a new educational experience for MIT
undergraduate and graduate students, first-hand involvement in the product
development. In addition, the Center intends to curricular material to improve
the training of engineering and management students for industry in order to
produce a new generation of engineers and managers, skilled efficient and co
mmercially successful product development and design. The ERC will help develop
a major in product development for the MBA degree offered by the Sloan School of
Management. In addition, the Center will help develop a new professional
engineering degree in product development, which the Engineering School will
offer. The ERC will collaborate with industrial partners in offering courses for
product development processes for their on-site training programs. In outreach,
the Center will provide biennial conferences for faculty in U.S. engineering and
business schools interested in product development. The ERC also will introduce
the principles and excitement of competition to minority high school students
through the MIT Minority Introduction to Engineering and Science Program.
Professor Woodie Flowers, a member of the ERC, will create an alliance for the
ERC with U.S. First, a nonprofit organization. This ERC is an interdisciplinary
partnership between the MIT's School of Engineering and the Sloan School of
Management. Dr. Warren Seering, a Professor of Mechanical Engineering will be
the Director of the Center. Dr. John Hauser, a Professor of Marketing in the
Sloan School of Management, will serve as Associate Director. The research team
is multidisciplinary, with strong collaboration between faculty in MIT's
engineering and business schools. The strong support of MIT for the Center is
demonstrated by active cooperation among deans and faculties of the engineering
and management schools. Product development is a central core of MIT's strategy
for the continued improvement of engineering and business education. MIT will
construct a new facility to house a state-of- the-art prototyping facility for
product development process research. ***