* 9529836
* IAI Workshop: Biogeochemical Consequences of Land Use Change in the Amazon Basin
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Jerry Melillo, Marine Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9529836 Melillo The first major research issue which will be addressed by these
workshops is the quantification of the areal extent of agricultural land in the
southwestern Amazon Basin, past and present, and the patterns of agricultural
use on large and small farms. The focus will be on what area the dominant
agricultural land-uses occupy (pasture, row crops and small farm slash and burn)
in the southwestern states of the Amazon Basin, how these areas vary on large
and small farms, and how these areas have changed over the past thirty years.
The second major issue is the quantification of the biogeochemical consequences
of the dominant land uses in the southwestern Amazon Basin. The focus will be on
how various agricultural land uses affect the cycling of carbon and nutrients in
the southwestern Amazon Basin, and what are the consequences of these effects of
soil fertility and the sustainability of agriculture, and for regional and
global biogeochemistry. To address the above mentioned issues and questions, the
PIs have established two tasks; Task 1 is a workshop; and Task 2 is a field trip
and a workshop. Task 1 will involve a total of thirteen scientists for the
workshop from the Brazilian and US scientific communities, and will emphasize
inviting scientists from the Amazon Basin region. These scientists are also the
participating scientists for Task 2. Task 2 will focus on the effects of the
dominant land cover and land use conversion on biogeochemical cycles. The
workshop structure is designed to enable individual subgroups to identify and
outline proposals to be submitted as an IAI Phase II proposal. %%% The two
workshops in this proposal will facilitate the preparation of proposals for
Phase II of the IAI Start-Up Grants program. The objective of the Phase II
proposal is that biogeochemical modification of cleared tropical forest lands
and their consequences that control soil fertility and the sustainability of
cropping or pasture systems. Because these areas affected are large, changes to
nutrient and organic matter cycles also have the potential to influence regional
and global element cycles. This proposal will be jointly administered by
scientists from the Ecosystems Center of the Marine Biological Laboratory (MBL)
in Woods Hole, Massachusetts and the Centro de Energia na Agricultura (CENA) of
the University of S o Paulo in Piracicaba, Brazil. This collaboration combines
the strengths of two very active institutions for research on the
biogeochemistry of global change in the United States and in Brazil. MBL and
CENA currently jointly conduct research that examines the effects of forest
clearing for pasture on carbon and nitrogen cycling in the State of Rond nia in
the southwestern Brazilian Amazon, and have collaborated in the sponsorship of
several workshops in Brazil. The MBL-CENA collaboration was formalized in 1992
with the adoption of a formal research agreement between the MBL and the
University of S o Paulo. In addition, this project will make significant
progress toward involving the scientific community inside the Amazon Basin in
studying patterns of land use change and their consequences for biogeochemistry
at the international level. This goal is important to the Inter-American
Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) science agenda, and both the United
States and Brazil are Member States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate
cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency
designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.