* 9529743
* SBIR Phase II:  Genetic Fingerprinting and Registry for     Psittacine Birds
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1996,12/31/1998
* John Patton, LGL ECOLOGICAL RESEARCH ASSOCIATES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/1998
* USD 264,746.00

*** 9529743 Patton This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop a prototype automated microsatellite genotyping system for commercial
applications. In Phase I of this project, nine microsatellite loci were isolated
from hyacinth macaws. These loci were used for DNA fingerprinting of individual
hyacinth macaws and pedigrees. These loci were also found to work in six other
macaw species. In Phase II of this project, the system will be expanded to
include six species from the other major groups of psittacine birds: cockatoos,
Old World Parrots, and New World Parrots. Using new molecular cloning methods,
developed in Phase I, 6-10 microsatellite loci in each of the six new species
will isolated and characterized. Protocols will be developed for multiplex
PCR(TM) reactions and analysis of multiple loci in a single lane of an
electrophoretic gel on an automated DNA sequencer. Genotype data will be linked
directly from the laboratory system to a computerized database. It is
anticipated that at the end of Phase II, a complete, efficient, and cost-
effective system will be available for producing a multilocus genotype suitable
for individual identity and pedigree analysis for most species of psittacines.
There is a large existing market for genotyping services in parrots and many
other species including livestock, pets, laboratory animals, and wild
populations. This market is expected to grow substantially for parrots as the
Wild Bird Conservation Act is enforced and positive identity of legally-owned
birds is required. As modern, cost-effective systems, such as that to be
developed in this research, become available it is anticipated that the market
for genotyping other species will grow rapidly. ***