* 9529393
* Structure and Impact of Spatiotemporal Catalytic Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Dan Luss, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/1999
* USD 220,638.00

Abstract - Luss - 9529393 Many industrial chemical reactions are carried out
using heterogeneous catalysts. The phenomena of bistability, oscillatory motion
and excitability, which induce a plethora of spatiotemporal motions in
homogeneous liquid-phase reactions, exist also in heterogeneous catalytic
reactions. Recent experimental results indicate that periodic temperature
patterns, such as rotating pulses, may be found on catalytic pellets during
exothermic reactions. The goal of this project is to explore and exploit such
oscillatory thermal phenomena to enhance the yield and selectivity of desired
products. The PI plans to conduct a combined experimental-theoretical study with
the goal of finding and classifying all the possible temperature patterns that
may exist on either full or hollow cylindrical catalytic pellets kept in a
continuously stirred tank reactor (CSTR) and in a radial-flow packed-bed
reactor. In the single-pellet experiments, the temperature patterns on the
surface and sides of the catalysts will be measured by an infrared thermal
imager. The test reactions will be the oxidation of hydrogen on a nickel-on-
alumina catalyst and the oxidation of carbon monoxide on a platinum-on-alumina
catalyst. The study will determine the conditions leading to the evolution of
different patterns; the influence of intra- and interparticle transport
limitations; the impact of the patterns on the performance of the catalyst; and
the influence of inherent nonuniform catalytic activity on the patterns. The
main dynamic features of each motion, such as characteristic length, period,
velocity, and shape, will be determined. These periodic temperature motions are
likely to stimulate attempts to benefit from them, especially when they induce
corresponding periodic changes in the catalyst activity.