* 9529259
* Clusters of Galaxies:  Insights into Large-Scale Structure  Formation and Galaxy Evolution
* MPS,AST
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Ann Zabludoff, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 02/28/1997
* USD 18,000.00

Zabludoff - Abstract Two of the fundamental questions in astronomy today are how
structures form in the galaxy distribution and to what extent environment
affects galaxy evolution. Surprising results from an on-going survey of five
nearby galaxy clusters (Zabludoff et al. 1995) underscore the power of observing
clusters of galaxies for data to understand these issues. The research will
consist of observations of three unique, carefully chosen samples of clusters of
galaxies and smaller groups of galaxies. The results from the observations will
be used to, 1) to place stringent constraints on how clusters of galaxies form
and on the cosmological mean mass density parameter Omega zero, 2) to isolate
the contribution of the cluster environment to galaxy evolution, 3) to determine
whether "E+A" galaxies, those strange objects with strong Balmer absorption
lines but no line emission, are a link in the chain that connects blue spirals
to "SO" galaxies, and 4) to uncover the shape of the faint-end galaxy luminosity
function in clusters. Additional results from the reduction and interpretation
of the data will include a better understanding of the causes of the Butcher-
Oemler effect and of the evolution of the intracluster medium. The results of
the observations of the three samples will be used to unravel the detailed
evolutionary history of clusters and their galaxies. The results will provide
invaluable baselines for future research, when compared with similarly extensive
surveys of higher redshift systems underway with the new generation of large
ground-based telescopes and NASA satellites . The results from the projects will
not only yield answers to the important questions discussed above, but will also
be the first and necessary step in the planning of the most extensive survey of
nearby clusters and their galaxies ever conceived. Warrick Couch (Ang lo-
Australian Observatory and Australia National University), Ian Smail (Carnegie
Observatories), and Ann Zabludoff (Carnegie Observatories) are planning to use
the Anglo- Australian Telescope's (AAT) 2DF multi-fiber spectrograph, with its
400 fibers, to observe 10,000-20,000 galaxies in approximately 50 rich clusters
in a well defined, volume-limited sample. The completion of the 2DF project in
the next five years is timed to match the completion of other major redshift
surveys of galaxies (Las Campanas, Sloan Digital Sky Survey, and AAT redshift
surveys). To understand how all types of galaxies evolve, large statistical
surveys like these, which sample comple mentary environments, are needed. The
2DF cluster survey will sample the far tail of the distribution of dense
environments, regions which are strongly dependent on the conditions in the
early universe and are thus powerful tests of cosmological models. The timing of
the 2DF project will also coincide with promising new N-body/hydrodynamic
simulations of large-scale structure formation (Evrard, Steinmetz, Lake, and
others), with enough dynamic range to include tens of clusters per universe,
while maintaining sufficient resolution to monitor the evolution of individual
galaxies. For the first time, it will be possible to compare the details of
cluster dynamics and cluster galaxy evolution directly with the predictions of
theoretical cosmological models. ***