* 9529726
* SBIR Phase II:  Object-Oriented Grammars for Syntactic and  Semantic Analysis of Natural Language
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1998
* Jonathan Slocum, Goodbyte Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 06/30/1998
* USD 299,185.00

*** Slocum 9529726 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
conducted by Goodbyte, Inc. seeks to adapt Object-Oriented Programming (OOP)
technology to the construction of computer systems that understand statements
and questions posed in natural human language, such as English or Japanese.
Previous Natural Language Processing (NLP) systems have suffered from a common
scaling problem: As the number of linguistic rules is increased to cover the
language more fully, interactions among rules become so complex that the systems
eventually collapse. This situation is similar to adding feature upon feature to
large software systems. The Phase I studies indicated that OOP concepts, which
have been of great aid in organizing conventional software, can be adapted to
linguistic rules as well, allowing them to be structured as independent objects
with inheritance, while the encapsulation of information within an object holds
the promise of extending rules without disrupting previous coverage. With the
basic methodology for Object-Oriented Grammars (OOG) now in place, the chief
objective for Phase II is to put OOG to the acid test by developing a prototype
system with substantive coverage. In the process, the equivalent of an OOP class
library will be developed, upon which new NLP applications can be based. It is
anticipated that such a class library will allow natural language interfaces to
be developed rapidly for a variety of applications, just as OOP and associated
visual programming tools have made it possible to rapidly develop graphical user
interfaces. Potential applications of a computer system that understands
statements and questions posed in natural language include conversational access
to information in databases, catalogs, almanacs, encyclopedias, and documents
distributed across networks such as the Internet; automatic translation of
documents from one language to another; document classification based on
content; and automated response to e-mail mes sages, including electronic
commerce. In combination with speech technology, the possibilities for machines
to converse with people are enormous. ***