* 9529457
* Dissertation Research:  Social and Political Implications of Raised Field Agriculture for Development in Bolivia
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1998
* Harry Sanabria, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Stuart Plattner
* 02/28/1998
* USD 8,785.00

This project supports the dissertation research of an anthropology student from
the University of Pittsburgh. The student will assess the cultural and economic
viability of a development project to reintroduce a prehispanic system of
agriculture, using raised fields, to the Lake Titicaca region of Bolivia. The
student's thesis is that today's raised field agricultural technology is a
creation of middle class development specialists who use it to advance their
ideal of prehispanic culture and obtain funds from international development
agencies, while the technology may not be the most appropriate development
strategy for the indigenous peasants it is being promoted to. Using techniques
of ethnographic participant observation and surveys of 80 households involved in
various types of raised field experiments (as well as a control group of
households not involve in raised field agriculture) the student will assess the
viability and impact of the raised fields for sustainable development. This
research is important because it will increase our expertise about this region
of the world, while at the same time providing an significant case study to
assess a development strategy. This general region is extremely poor, and the
advance in our understanding of viable development strategies will be valuable
for regional development planners. In addition this case study of the `invented
tradition` of raised field agriculture will be very useful to theorists of
economic development who try to understand why projects come into existence,
flourish or fail.