* 9529317
* Symposium on Applications of Ionizing Radiation in          Environmental Engineering Practice, December 17-22,         1995 in Honolulu, Hawaii
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1997
* William Cooper, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 02/28/1997
* USD 36,825.00

9529317 Cooper This is an award to support conduct of a symposium the objective
of which is to bring together investigators who are conducting research on the
applications of ionizing radiation in environmental engineering practice. The
sources of ionizing radiation to be considered will include gamma radiation for
radioactive substances but will concentrate on ionizing radiation produced by
electron beam accelerators. The applications include processing of solid, liquid
and gaseous wastes to reduce their pollutional impact on land, water and air
resources and to improve the efficiency of other physical, chemical and
biological processes used in waste treatment systems. This symposium will be
conducted in conjunction with the International Chemical Congress of Pacific
Basin Societies that will be held in Honolulu, Hawaii from December 17-22, 1995.
The Congress is sponsored jointly by the Canadian Society for Chemistry, the
Chemical Society of Japan, the American Chemical Society, the New Zealand
Institute of Chemistry and the Royal Australian Chemical Institute. Results of
this symposium are expected to provide guidance to the Environmental and Ocean
Systems Program in planning support of further research on applications of
ionizing radiation in processing of contaminated and infected liquids, solids
and gases to reduce their pollutional impacts on land, water and air.