* 9529348
* International Conference on Forensic Statistics,            June 30 to July 3, 1996  at the University of Edinburgh,    Scotland
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1997
* David Kaye, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Gentle
* 03/31/1997
* USD 25,000.00

: The International Conference on Forensic Statistics, scheduled for the
University of Edinburgh June 30-July 3, 1996, is the third in a series of tri-
annual conferences intended to provide a forum for the interaction of
researchers in the areas of law, forensic science, social sciences, and
statistics. Among the goals of this conference are (a) the fostering of
interaction among research specialists in different disciplines, (b) advances in
topics of current interest to the courts, and (c) the development of a firm
scientific basis for the use of statistical evidence in the courts.
Presentations scheduled include reports on the ethics of expert testimony, DNA
fingerprinting and its forensic uses, inferring causality, statistical evidence
of environmental harm, the use of econometric models in anti-trust litigation,
and the judicial reception of meta-analysis for combining statistical
information across scientific studies, especially those involving the harmful
effects of exposure to drugs and environmental hazards. This travel grant
supports the participation in the Conference by several leading American
statisticians, forensic scientists, and social scientists as well as several
promising young scientists who are currently beginning to pursue research in
this interdisciplinary field and have sought the opportunity to present their
work in an international context. Over the past four decades statistics and
statistical methods have played increasingly important roles in the evaluation
of forensic evidence and in the presentation of scientific evidence more broadly
in the courts. American scientist have played a prominent role in this
development and have led initiatives intended to improve the quality of
statistics as evidence as well as to improve the interaction between
statisticians and other scientists as they prepare materials for use in a legal
context. While expert testimony in the American legal system has unique
features, important aspects of the science associated with the expert testimony
transcend national boundaries. The Third International Conference on Forensic
Statistics, to be held on June 3 to July 3 1996, is a unique forum for the
interaction of researchers in the areas of law, forensic science, social
sciences, and statistics and this travel grant supports the participation of
several leading American researchers from these different fields of interest.
Among the topics of current federal strategic interest featured in the
conference presentations are biotechnology and its role in the manufacture of
drugs as well as the evaluation of forensic evidence, and the assessment of
harmful effects as a result of environmental exposure.