* 9529057
* RUI: A Wide-Angle H-alpha Survey of the Southern Hemisphere Sky
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* John Gaustad, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* J. P. Wright
* 04/30/1999
* USD 53,559.00

9529057 Gaustad A wide-angle imaging survey of the southern sky at the frequency
of the H-alpha emission line of Hydrogen at a wavelength of 656.3 nm will be
carried out. The angular resolution of the observations will be about one
arcminute, and to a sensitivity level of one Rayleigh, corresponding to an
emission measure of 2 cm-6 pc, and to a brightness temperature for microwave
free-free emission of 6 microKelvin at 30 Ghz. The system to be used to observe
the radiation will be a Charge- Coupled Device (CCD), a commercial camera lens,
and narrow-band interference filters, mounted on a robotic telescope. The
robotic telescope will be deployed at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American
Observatory in Chile. The project will require approximately one year of
observing time. The results from the survey will allow accurate measurements of
fluctuations in the Galactic free-free emission from Hydrogen at microwave
wavelengths (or provide proof that these emissions are negligible). This
emission must be subtracted from satellite or ground-based measurements of the
cosmic microwave background to obtain the true microwave cosmic background
fluctuations. The survey will produce detailed information on the structure of
the diffuse, warm, ionized component of the interstellar medium, information
which is necessary for understanding the physical properties of the interstellar
gas. Participation by several undergraduate students in the research project
will enhance their understanding of the nature of scientific research. ***