* 9529584
* Warm Water Entry and Transformation Within the Subpolar     North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/1996,10/31/2002
* Lynne Talley, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 10/31/2002
* USD 878,000.00

9529584 Talley In this project PIs from Woods Hole and Scripps will carry out
hydrographic cruises enclosing a large portion of the North Atlantic Sub Polar
Gyre (SPG) between Greenland and the Azores. The hydrography will form the base
of a much larger study of the circulation of the SPG, in which autonomous,
subsurface floats will monitor both subsurface currents and the upper layer
temperature and salinity structure over a two-year period. The first section
will be occupied during the fall of 1996, in which floats will be deployed, and
currents will be monitored using shipboard Acoustic Doppler Current Profilers.
The second section will be occupied in the Spring of 1997, and will include a
full suite of chemical tracers to assess the effects of winter time mixing. The
principal goals are to study the transformation of the thick upper layer of
relatively warm water over the course of the winter, to describe how that
transformation is embedded in the general circulation of the North Atlantic
Current and SPG, and to examine the branching of eastward flowing subtropical
water from the North Atlantic Current into the SPG. Attention will also be paid
to entrainment of upper and intermediate waters into deep overflows, the
recirculation of intermediate and deep waters in the subpolar North Atlantic and
the distribution of decadal changes throughout the subpolar region by comparison
with historic data.