* 9529904
* Managing External Linkages with Functional Departments to   Enhance the Effectiveness of Cross-Functional Teams in      Quality Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1999
* Carolyn Woo, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Mariann Jelinek
* 02/28/1999
* USD 231,327.00

The objective of this research project is to examine how the effectiveness of
cross functional teams (CFTs) can be influenced by their relationships to
organizational members outside of the team, and by relationships between these
outside organizational members. These external members fall into three
categories: 1) functional managers (e.g., marketing, manufacturing, engineering)
to whom team members normally report; 2) functional peers from the team members'
departments, and 3) the `principal in charge` who has ultimate responsibility
for the project and to whom the team leader reports. Despite the large body of
literature on team performance, the relationships among team members and their
immediate functional peers and supervisors have received little attention. Even
less well understood are the relationships between functional parties that are
outside of the team who may have an important influence on team performance. The
study is motivated by the central premise that the success of a team depends not
only on the effectiveness of the team members in dealing with each other, but
also on their ability to obtain collaboration from organizational members
outside of the team. These external relationships often are complicated by re-
definition of roles and decision-making authority, pre-existing structural
barriers to team functioning, differences in objectives, physical separation,
and change in career tracks and advancement potential which frequently accompany
the placement of individuals in highly visible CFT assignments. The aim of the
study is to better understand how the management of these external influences on
team members affect the support, conflict, and performance of CFTs. This study
also will assess the impact that the degree of technical complexity can have on
the nature and significance of the linkages described above. Technical
complexity often increases the number of activities to be undertaken,
uncertainty associated with tasks, the number of interfaces which need to be
managed, the likelihood of conflict, and the degree of interdependence between
subunits. The research effort will conduct surveys of at least one hundred CFTs.
A four-stage approach will be employed: 1) development of the survey; 2)
administration of the survey to members of CFTs and identification of relevant
functional department managers, peers and principals in charge who will then be
surveyed, 3) in-depth interviews with representative respondents associated with
approximately fifteen of the projects, and 4) data analysis and interpretation.
Cross-functional projects characterized by tasks of differing degrees of
technical complexity will be selected to understand the demands associated with
technology. In addition, arrangements that encompass varying degrees of
commitment of members to team assignments (100% or less) will be studied to
understand their impact on the establishment and management of key external
relationships for the team.