* 9530372
* Viscoelastic Behavior of Inorganic Glass-Formers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Sindee Simon, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/2000
* USD 286,214.00

9530372 Plazek Inorganic network compounds form an important class of glass-
formers whose viscoelastic behavior has not been well-studied compared to that
of organic polymers and small molecule liquids. The viscoelastic behavior of
selected inorganic glass-formers, including selenium, sulfur, boron trioxide,
arsenic selenide, arsenic telluride, arsenic sulfide, germanium dioxide, and
various compositions of germanium-arsenic- selenium will be examined both above
and below their glass transition temperatures (Tg). The establishment of a
characteristic variable for glass formation, based on the growing evidence of a
common molecular mobility at the glass transition temperature will be attempted.
This attempt will entail proper determination of the glass temperatures of these
materials during cooling using volume dilatometry and differential scanning
calorimetry in order to use the glass transition temperature(Tg)as a
corresponding state parameter. The viscoelastic measurements made above Tg are
also anticipated to resolve the issue of whether molecular networks are present
in some inorganic glasses, and will allow determination of whether molecular
moieties in these glasses are fixed or in dynamic equilibrium. The data obtained
will also be used to test the generality of the relationship which has been
found between the time and temperature dependencies of the viscoelastic behavior
of organic materials. Finally the viscoelastic data obtained below Tg, coupled
with dilatometry and calorimetric data, will be used to determine whether
decoupling of different irreversible processes occurs in inorganic glasses. %%%
This research will enhance the understanding of inorganic glass structure and
the correlation of structure with properties in an attempt to learn how to
control structures to obtain desired properties. Establishing the behavior of
these inorganic materials when compared to other glass formers in terms of
dynamic states above and below glass transition temperatures is an important
goal, and given the fact that the solid-state inorganic materials are similar to
silica, the potential impact on innovative technologies such as optical fibers
is high. ***