* 9530300
* Latitudinal Variations of Particle Fluxes in the Southern   Ocean: A Bottom Tethered Sediment Trap Array Experiment
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Susumu Honjo, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/2000
* USD 822,592.00

9530300 Honjo This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. This project will make direct measurements of the downward flux of
particulate matter through an array of bottom-mounted sediment traps. These
traps will be maintained for an eighteen month period, and have a sampling
resolution of seventeen days, with higher resolution during the intense summer
phytoplankton bloom. The total export fluxes of organic carbon, nitrogen,
biogenic silicates, and calcium carbonate that can be obtained from these
measurements represent the basic core variables of the JGOFS program. ***