* 9530785
* Distributed Manipulation Algorithms for Massively Parallel  Microfabricated Actuator Arrays
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Bruce Donald, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Howard Moraff
* 05/31/1998
* USD 247,673.00

This research investigates manipulation tasks with arrays of micro
electromechanical structures (MEMS). The PIs are developing a geometric model
for the mechanics of micro actuators and a theory of massively parallel
manipulation, and will develop efficient algorithms for their evaluation. They
have designed, built, and tested prototype microfabricated actuators, and will
demonstrate control strategies to manipulate small objects. In particular, the
research will develop and implement sensorless actuator array control strategies
to efficiently orient flat parts in the plane. The main objective of the
research concerns the development of a science base for micro-scale
manipulation. Manipulation strategies with reduced sensing have been highly
successful in industrial manufacturing, e.g. in vibratory bowl feeders, or in
systems such as the Sony APOS system. These strategies will be extended to the
micro scale. A dense array of devices can be modeled as a vector field. The flow
this field induces on a rigid body will be analyzed to develop, evaluate, and
extend a theory of manipulation with micro-actuator arrays. It will be shown how
simple actuator control strategies can be used to uniquely orient a part up to
symmetry without sensor feedback. The manipulation algorithms are based on a
theory of programmable vector fields, which is applicable to a wide range of
micro-actuator arrays. The algorithms will be impl emented on physical micro-
arrays to validate the theory. Strategies for orienting, sorting, and
singulating parts using micro-arrays will be designed, implemented, and tested.