* 9530684
* Meeasurements of CO2 During the Southern Ocean JGOFS
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,03/31/2001
* David Chipman, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 03/31/2001
* USD 1,020,000.00

9530684 Takahashi This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of
the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. Water
masses such as Antarctic Bottom Water and Antarctic Intermediate Water which
originate in the high latitude Southern Ocean areas spread through the interior
of the major ocean basins thus forming a major conduit for exchanges of heat and
dissolved gases such as carbon dioxide and oxygen between the atmosphere and the
interior of the oceans. Therefore, an improved understanding of the processes
governing the physical, and biogeochemical properties of the source waters in
the Southern Ocean is important not only for gaining quantitative knowledge of
the carbon-nutrient cycle in the global oceans, but also for predicting the
future course of atmospheric carbon dioxide and hence the climate of the earth.
This research program consists of the following three kinds of field
observations. Continuous underway measurements of the total carbon dioxide
concentration in surface waters will be made throughout the JGOFS cruises in
order to determine the seasonal and geographic variations and the causes of
oceanic carbon dioxide sink/source conditions. Measurements of the partial
pressure of gaseous carbon dioxide and total carbon dioxide in discrete seawater
samples will be conducted to observe depth profiles of the carbon chemistry
(especially in the upper 500 meters) at hydrographic stations located at various
latitudes during two seasonal cruises. High resolution measurements of the
hydrographic structure of the uppermost 250 meters and od nutrients will be
conducted in order to document the mesoscal e variability of biogeochemical
properties within the Antarctic Polar Front Zone. This will be done with a towed
pumping system, designated as SeaSoar, on one of the cruises to the APF. ***