* 9530230
* SBIR Phase II:  Implicit Massively Parallel Navier-Stokes   Solver for Hybrid Structured-Unstructured Grids
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1998
* Scott Imlay, Amtec Engineering Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1998
* USD 296,643.00

*** Imlay 9530230 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop an efficient Computational Fluid Dynamics (CFD) software package which
uses hybrid structured-unstructured grids to minimize the grid generation
effort, and massively parallel processing (MPP) computers to minimize run time.
The recent emergence of high performance MPP computers has theoretically reduced
the computer time required for the design and analysis of systems involving
fluid flow using CFD. However, in practice, algorithms used in MPP today were
developed for sequential computers and therefore do not harness the full power
of massively parallel processing. Also, MPP computers have not simplified the
structured grid generation process, which may take weeks for complex
configurations. During phase I, an efficient implicit finite-volume method was
developed for solving the 2D Navier-Stokes equations on MPP computers using
hybrid structured-unstructured grids and domain decompostion. The structured
grids are used to resolve boundary layers near walls and unstructured grids are
used to discretize the remainder of the flow field. During phase II, the
algorithm will be extended to 3D, the domain decompostion will be expanded and
improved, and quasi-dynamic load balancing will be added. Also, the potential
market will be broadened by adding incompressible flow capability, the ability
to run in parallel on networks of engineering workstations, and an interactive
MOTIF user interface which will make the parallelism nearly transparent to the
users. The proposed solution algorithm has the potential to dramatically reduce
the time required to perform a CFD analysis. The use of hybrid grids will
simplify the grid generation process for practical (complex) geometries and the
use of MPP computers will reduce the run time. The resulting analysis package
will be marketable to the aerospace industry and other industries. ***