* 9530827
* Glaciological Interpretation of Changes in Radar Reflection Characteristics from Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Charles Raymond, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/1998
* USD 37,540.00

The speed of glaciers and ice sheets can be affected by hydraulic conditions at
their beds. Examples are the dramatic fast-motion of ice streams and glacier
surges or the more modest seasonal variations in speed that are common in
temperate glaciers. The connection between glacier speed and hydraulic
conditions at the bed has been established through borehole and glacial
discharge observations. However, these observations yield only very limited
spatial coverage (in the case of boreholes) or resolution (in the case of stream
discharges). Radio echo-sounding (RES) has been used extensively to map the
thickness and structure of many glaciers and ice sheets. The Investigator
recently used RES to monitor the spatial and temporal reflection changes within
a temperate glacier (Black Rapids Glacier, Alaska) and across a relict ice
stream margin in Antarctica. Results from Black Rapids Glacier show distinct
temporal changes in RES return characteristics during the early part of the melt
season when the speed of the glacier increased significantly. Results from
Antarctica show a large spatial change in RES return characteristics; the
reflection strength of the bed changed by about 300% in a traverse across the
relict margin. Interpretation of the evolving physical conditions at the bed is
complicated because some of the observed changes in RES returns from the bed may
be caused by changes at the surface and/or within the interior of the ice. Here
the investigator proposes to determine the actual changes in reflection
characteristics of the bed by using multivariate analysis to remove the effects
of transmission through the surface and propagation within the ice. Models of
reflection from layered dielectric media will them be used to investigate
relationships between the changes in reflection coefficient and changes in basal
conditions such as the thickness and electrical conductivity of water at the
bed. Their main objective is to use the RES records to gain understanding about
physic al conditions at the bed of glaciers and ice sheets.