* 9530099
* IAI Workshop: Global Change Assessment in Temperate         Agricultural Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1997
* Carlos Scoppa, Centro De Investigaciones En Recursos Geolog
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/1997
* USD 49,989.00

9530099 Scoppa The purpose of the workshop is to create an international network
with research institutions from Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina to study the
effects of global change on Agriculture as a way to understand future social and
economic transformations. The objectives to be achieved include establishing a
research network among MERCOSUR participants in collaboration with North
American scientists attempting to solve questions related to the effects of
global change on temperate agricultural systems and its socioeconomic
consequences; to promote a common systems research methodology; to define the
capabilities of each country to develop the research program proposed; and to
propose an integrated project employing a systems approach for studying global
change and ENSO effects on temperate agricultural systems, for comparing these
effects across hemispheres in the light of management and climate contrasts, for
assessing the socioeconomic consequences and the feasibility of actions leading
to adaptation or mitigation, and to promote the capabilities of the MERCOSUR
Research Center to develop and/or generate models for solving regional issues.
To achieve the above mentioned objectives, the PI will hold two workshops and
two meetings in order to complete the proposal's final product of an IAI Phase
II proposal. The IAI Phase II proposal is to create a project on the adaptation
and mitigation of temperate agricultural systems to global change impacts within
the contact of creating an IAI research center (RC) within the IAI research
network. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Canada, United States, and Uruguay
will be involved in both Phase I and Phase II. This workshop will facilitate the
preparation of a proposal for the IAI Phase II proposal with the objective of
coordinating projects on the adaptation and mitigation of temperate agricultural
systems to global change impacts within the context of creating a research
center within the IAI network at the Instituto Nacional de Te cnolog a
Agopecuaria (INTA) and the National Research Center on Natural Resources (CIRN),
both of which are located in Argentina. INTA is an institution devoted to
research and extension of technologies addressed to the agricultural sector. The
CIRN's principal objective is the study of conservation, evolution and
transformation of natural resources. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Canada,
United States, and Uruguay will be involved for the workshop of this proposal
and for the project planned for the IAI Phase II. This cooperative effort
between North and South American scientists will allow improved insights into
the functioning of temperate agroecosystems and the impact upon them of global
change arising from comparative analyses. The use of common methodologies will
be promoted as well as exchange of soil, climate, experimental and satellite
data between the cooperative countries in the Phase II project. The results of
Phase II will be made available in reports for policy makers. The participating
countries, Argentina, Brazil, Canada, United States, and Uruguay, are Member
States of the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S.
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the
U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the
IAI. ***