* 9530289
* IAI Workshop: First Implementation Meeting of the           Large-Scale Biosphere-Atmosphere in Amazonia (LBA)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Carlos Nobre, Center for Weather Forecasting and Climate Studies
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9530289 Nobre The Center for Weather Forecasting and Climate Studies (CPTEC) of
the Instituto National de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) from Brazil proposes,
jointly with the Instituto National de Pesquisas de Amazonia (INPA), the
Universidade de S o Paulo, the Universidad Nacional Agraria La Molina (UNALM),
Lima, Peru, and the Universidad Mayor de San Andres (UMSA), La Paz, Bolivia, and
with the collaboration of scientific institutions from the Amazon countries
(Brazil, Peru, Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia, and Venezuela), a coordinated
participation of representatives of several research institutions, universities
and hydro meteorological services in the First Implementation Meeting of the
Large-Scale Biosphere- Atmosphere Experiment in Amazonia (LBA). LBA is a major
international, multi-institutional, interdisciplinary biosphere-atmosphere
experiment planned for 1997-2000 in Amazonia. Scientific Planning for LBA has
reached a critical stage in which there is currently a clear need for scientific
and research institutions of the Amazon countries to interact and propose
research activities on the framework of LBA, as well as to develop a long term
strategy to optimize research cooperation addressing the regional and global
effects of large scale and land surface conversions. During the proposed
meeting, the participants will review the Scientific Plan and work out many
unresolved scientific, institutional and logistics aspects. The proposed
workshop will enhance scientific collaboration among Amazonian research
institutions and will create a framework for training, and will define the
details of an IAI Phase II proposal. The overall objective of the Phase I
activities is to produce a Phase II proposal which actually will address
critical research aspects of the LBA Experiment itself. The experiment has the
international support of the World Climate Research Program, the International
Hydrology Programme of UNESCO, the International Geosphere-Biosphere Programme
(IGBP), US agencies and th e European Union (EU). Phase II activities will
result in an international regional cooperation between Amazon countries and
with other countries in the Americas, which would be strengthened by the
realization of Phase I (the proposed meeting). A comprehensive integrated
Science Plan for LBA has been produced by a core group of scientists. It will be
distributed by the end of October 1995. The final LBA Science Planning Meeting
scheduled for February 1996 in Brasilia will provide a forum for critical
appraisal, and revision of the LBA Science Plan. The proposed First
Implementation Meeting of LBA will bring a greatly enhanced regional component
to LBA. The Amazon countries are expected to provide facilities, scientific and
technical personnel and students to participate in the research activities,
along with the other research groups from North America and Europe. This meeting
should result in a comprehensive, broadly supported LBA Implementation Plan with
a strong regional component for the Science Plan for LBA. The LBA experiment
directly addresses two of the IAI's scientific research themes: Tropical
Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycles; and Ocean/Land/Atmosphere Interactions in
the Inter-Tropical Americas. Due to the common scientific goal of the IAI and
the LBA experiment, the IAI can facilitate the communications between scientists
participating in LBA, and can play an active role during the LBA's
implementation and execution phases. In addition, the development of the LBA
proposal can serve as an important facilitator for the establishment of IAI
research centers related to the IAI scientific research theme, Tropical
Ecosystems and Biogeochemical Cycles. The LBA plan currently has many elements
of an IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II proposal, and the Phase I workshop will
enhance the scientific collaboration among Amazonian research institutions. The
participating countries of Bolivia, Ecuador, Colombia, Peru, and Venezuela are
Member States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. In
addition to these participating countries, the proposed workshop will include
participants from the LBA Science Planning Committee and representatives of
agencies and national and international programs such as NASA; NOAA, NSF, ESA,
INPE, CNPq, IGAC, GCTE, and GEWEX (They will have funding from other sources to
participate.). The U.S. National Science Foundation is the Government agency
designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***