* 9530935
* Collaborative Studies of the High Latitude Ionosphere Using a Dynasonde Network in the Scandinavian Sector
* NONE,NONE
* 03/01/1997,02/28/2001
* Frank Berkey, Utah State University Research Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 02/28/2001
* USD 281,805.00

Using a network of digital ionospheric sounders (dynasondes) deployed in the
Norwegian Arctic, this proposal intends to study the physics of the high-
latitude ionosphere. This study, which is to be conducted in collaboration with
European researchers from the UK and Scandinavian countries, will utilize data
from three instruments that span the region from Northern Norway to Svalbard.
The dynasondes will be within the field of view of the incoherent scatter radars
and hence will benefit from detailed measurements over small ionospheric
volumes. A primary emphasis of this study will be to learn more about the
physics of the dayside ionospheric cusp region, where shocked solar wind reaches
the ionosphere, and to identify the ionospheric signature of various processes.
Vertical incidence ionospheric sounding measurements will be employed to address
various issues of contemporary scientific debate, such as the temporal
persistence of the dayside cusp, the behavior of transient features in the
dayside ionosphere, and the morphology of large scale density enhancements. An
educational opportunity for the exchange of students between Utah State
University and the University of Wales is feasible as the result of a program at
the latter institution. Student participation is also possible through a
recently established program of Arctic studies on Svalbard by a consortium of
the Norwegian Universities.