* 9530602
* Containerization-Origins and Consequences of a Twentieth- Century Revolution in Transportation
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Arthur Donovan, U S Merchant Marine Academy Foundation
* Fixed Price Award
* Bruce E. Seely
* 07/31/2002
* USD 80,000.00

Since the mid-1950's the technology of surface freight transportation has been
radically transformed by containerization. The technological innovation at the
heart of this transformation is the use of truck-sized containers as unit
packages for moving cargo from its point of origin, which is often a factory, to
its ultimate destination, which is commonly a retail outlet serving individual
customers. This innovation is notable not because it is an example of science-
based high technology, but because it enables carriers to radically reduce the
cost of handling and moving cargo, especially when multiple modes of
transportation are involved. Once introduced, containerization made possible
profound cost reductions and efficiency gains, and today containerization is an
accomplished fact in the transportation industry. Dr. Donovon is studying the
origins and consequences of the container revolution and will describe these
developments by using concepts and patterns of explanation currently employed by
historians of technology and business. The introduction of containerization was
in fact an act of entrepreneurial innovation that entailed confronting federal
regulation, recalcitrant longshoreman, maritime and teamster unions as well as
development of new technologies to create an intermodal transportation system.
Dr. Donovan will not only create a history of this revolution but will also
create an oral history archive by recording and preserving the recollections of
the business and labor leaders who played key roles in the container revolution.