* 9530819
* Does Copepod Grazing Control Large Phytoplankton in the     HNLC Region of the Southern Ocean?
* GEO,OPP
* 03/15/1997,08/31/2000
* Michael Dagg, Louisiana Universities Marine Corsortium
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2000
* USD 360,042.00

95-30819 DAGG This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1 ) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. Large
phytoplankton, especially diatoms, typically grow slowly in the permanently ice-
free regions of the Southern Ocean, including the Antarctic Polar Front Zone
(APFZ), because of micronutrient (Fe) limitation or light limitation or
limitation associated with deep mixing. It is hypothesized that under these
conditions the growth of large phytoplankton is approximately balanced by
grazing from the copepod community. When growth of large phytoplankton is
enhanced by Fe inputs or improved light conditions, it is hypothesized that the
additional growth is mostly absorbed by the functional response of the copepod
community. Larger enhancements of phytoplankton growth however, will saturate
the grazing on diatoms increases the Si:C ratio of sinking matter because
approximately 70% of ingested carbon is assimilated across the copepod gut wall
but Si is digestively inert. These relationships will be addressed by shipboard
experiments designed to measure the feeding rates of large copepods on large
phytoplankton of the APFZ, and by measurements of the ratio of carbon to
biogenic silica in copepod fecal pellets and in sediment trap materials.