* 9530378
* Marine Biogeochemistry of Dissolved DMSP and its Sulfur     Containing Degradation Products
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Ronald Kiene, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2000
* USD 308,721.00

9530378 Kiene This three year study will increase our fundamental understanding
of the role played by dissolved DMSP in the biogeochemistry of reduced sulfur in
surface seawater. The specific objectives of the project are 1) to test whether
the dissolved DMSP pool measured by conventional filtration techniques is truly
dissolved; 2) to measure the kinetics of uptake for dissolved DMSP by natural
microbial assemblages using 14C and 35S DMSP and to determine in situ turnover
rates for DMSP (d); 3) to measure the sulfur products formed during DMSP
degradation and to determine how the branching ratio between the lyase (DMS
forming) and demethylation (methanethiol forming) pathways vary in different
waters; 4) to determine mechanisms of methanethiol production in aerobic
seawater and finally, to determine the loss kinetics of MeSH in seawater and the
factors which affect these. The work will be carried out using primarily coastal
and shelf water samples from the Northern Gulf of Mexico, but 2 oceanographic
cruises are planned to provide complementary information from warm oligotrophic
and cool mesotrophic ocean waters. The resulting data should greatly advance our
knowledge of how DMSP is processed in the sea and how it impacts the chemistry
of surface waters through production of important reduced sulfur compounds like
DMS and methanethiol.