* 9530677
* Silica Cycling and the Role of Diatoms in the Biological    Pump of the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/1997,01/31/2000
* David Nelson, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 01/31/2000
* USD 190,000.00

This work is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern
Ocean Experiment of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study. The Southern Ocean
Experiment is a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through th e entire water column into the bottom sediment.
JGOFS itself is a decadal study of the processes controlling the time-varying
fluxes of carbon and associated biogenic elements in the ocean with the
objective of observing changes in ocean biogeochemical cycles in relation to
climatic change. The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. P almer
and the R/V Thompson. This component concerns the general topic of removal of
organic carbon from the surface layers of the ocean, and deals specifically with
diatoms, a form of siliceous phytoplankton, as a major component of the
biological pump of the Southern Ocean. Diatoms are known to be responsible for
the majority of primary production in the Polar Frontal Zone (PFZ) and along the
retreating ice edge in the Ross Sea. Strong correlations between the fluxes of
diatomaceous silica and organic carbon indicate that diatoms are also the
autotrophic source of much of the organic matter exported from the surface
waters of the Southern Ocean. The role of diatoms in the biological pump may be
especially important in the PFZ, since nearly all of the silica flux in the
Southern Ocean occurs beneath the PFZ with the result that this region and the
waters to the south comprise the largest area of modern siliceous sediment
accumulation in the world. Surprisingly, that immense opal accumulation is supp
orted by very low rates of primary production near the surface. Within the water
column and upper sediments the regional cycles of carbon and silica are
decoupled to a degree that does not occur elsewhere, with the result that opal
rich, but organic poor, sediments are forming throughout much of the abyssal
Southern Ocean. The observational program is designed to reveal the fate of the
silica produced and help constrain the contribution of diatoms to carbon
fixation and export in the region. Two newly developed tracer methods will be
used. The first involves the use of the newly available radioisotope of silicon,
32Si (half life 134 y), to measure silica production rates. The second is a new
method for measuring natural variations in silicon isotopes within diatoms and
seawater that may be useful as a proxy for level of paleo-silica production. The
insights gained regarding the magnitude, fate of biogenic silica, and the
factors controlling silica cycling and diatom productivity will help evaluate
the role of diatoms in the biogeochemical cycling of elements in the region and
explain the mechanisms producing high accumulation rates of diatom silica in the
Southern Ocean.