* 9530426
* Instrumented Borehole Seals for 1996 ODP Drilling on the    Juan de Fuca Ridge
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Keir Becker, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce T. Malfait
* 01/31/2001
* USD 305,639.00

9530426 Becker This project supports the fabrication of cable sensor systems and
their deployment at six sites in the northeastern Pacific Ocean to study the
hydrogeology of two regions of the Juan de Fuca Ridge. Dr. Keir Becker of
University of Miami (Florida) will collaborate in the instrument development and
integration with researchers from the Geologic Survey of Canada and engineers at
Texas A&amp;M University. The full sensor systems (supported herein) and data
recording packages (built by GSC) will be installed in seafloor holes drilled by
the drill ship JOIDES Resolution, operated by an international consortium led by
the National Science Foundation. Borehole seal systems will be fabricated by
engineers at Texas A&amp;M University, the subcontractor responsible for JOIDES
Resolution operations. The present study follows the successful development and
deployment of these subseafloor "observatories," designated "CORKs," for
hydrogeologic investigations in six previous holes in 1991-1994. It proposes
refurbishment of two existing sites and deployment at four new sites to be
drilled during summer 1996. The basic objective of the research is to define
hydrogeologic properties of the seafloor in two different regions, addressing
questions about rates of pore fluid flow within the ocean crust, and related
questions about the degree of fracturing, bulk permeability and fracture
heterogeneity, and the volume of mobile fluid in the rock "reservoir." This
research is closely related to research on submarine hydrothermal systems and
study of heat and chemical balances in the oceans, all of which must make
implicit or explicit assumptions about these properties. The work undertaken in
this project includes both passive monitoring of subsurface physical properties
for multi-year duration and active pressure pulse transmission between existing
drill holes to define intervening reservoir properties. Annual visits to the
deployment sites and continuous data logging will provide unique long term
record s of subcrustal processes. ***