* 9530716
* New and Regenerated Production in the Southern Ocean:       Ross Sea Study
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* William Cochlan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/1998
* USD 229,180.00

95-30716 Cochlan This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The broad
continental shelf of the Ross Sea is characterized by relatively high biomass
with large phytoplankton blooms in the austral spring-summer. This region has
been designated as an area for intensive process studies as part of the U.S.
JGOFS comprehensive investigative program of carbon and biogenic fluxes in the
Southern Ocean. As part of that effort, this study is designed to assess the
rates of new and regenerated production in the Ross Sea continental shelf regime
during the productive growing season in Antarctica (spring, summer, autumn). The
overall objectives of this study are to obtain accurate and quantitative
estimates of the nitrogenous nutrition of the planktonic assemblages in this
dynamic system, and to understand the factors which control the magnitude and
variability of primary production and the vertical flux of biogenic material
from the euphotic zone (i.e. export production). A suite of core measurements
will be made to estimate new and regenerated production over relevant spatial
and temporal scales. New production in the Ross Sea is hypothesized as a
function of the evolution of the ecosystems' development and thus regulated by:
the hydrodynamic properties of the water column (i.e. vertical stability from
ice melt), the interaction of macronutrients (ammonium and urea), and the
availability of the micronutrient iron. Core measurements include determining
the uptake rates of four nitrogen substrates (nitrate, nitrite, ammonium, and
urea) using the 15N-tracer technique; a t stations distributed along transects
from the ice-edge (marginal ice zone), across the shelf, slope, and into the
open ocean; with measurements at seven depths ranging from 100% to 1% of surface
irradiance; during morning, mid-day and night. The degree of isotopic dilution
will be quantified during nitrogen uptake experiments to more accurately
determine rates of uptake, and to estimate rates of microheterotrophic nitrogen
regeneration. In addition to the core measurements additional experiments will
answer specific questions about the system, and will refine our estimates of new
and regenerated production.