* 9530098
* IAI Workshop: Human Dimensions of Global Change and         Sustainable Forest Management
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1997
* Mohammed Dore, Brock University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,580.00

Author: pfilmer@nsf.gov (Paul E. Filmer) at NOTE Date: 5/29/96 2:56 PM Priority:
Normal TO: jmayi at nsf12 Subject: Dore Abstract (9530098)
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
--========================_13293532==_ Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-
ascii" --========================_13293532==_ Content-Type: text/plain;
name="AB30098.DOC"; charset="us-ascii" Content-Disposition: attachment;
filename="AB30098.DOC" 9530098 Dore The central objectives of this workshop are
to consider the value of forests to human society, and to investigate methods
for managing forest resources under the different valuations that are thereby
assigned. This workshop will produce a Phase II Start-Up Grant proposal to the
Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) that will consider the
ecology of forests, their role in the formation and change of the global
climate, how human activities influence forests, what social value might be
assigned to forests, and what policy changes would be necessary to manage the
forests as a 'sustainable' resource. The Phase II proposal will suggest the
construction of a dynamic optimization model for forest management that
incorporates the concept of forests as social capital assets. Many models either
have ignored social benefits as intangibles, or have simply considered the
forest's stumpage and amenity values. Remaining stock is often considered as
providing no benefits or as not being an asset (essentially, these models
consider forest resources to be infinite, because within the models, human
activity does not affect the remaining forest's value). In addition, most models
simply assume that the only decision to be made is how much to cut. This model
will attempt to assign an opportunity cost to the cutting. By including these
ecological and social costs, the model will hopefully lead to a better informed
decision on when to cut, how much to cut, and when to stop cutting. The workshop
will use a large set of existing data on boreal forests in Canada and the United
States, including those from the BOREAS program, to determine some of the
valuations described above. The Phase II proposal will attempt validation
exercises, and try to determine the valuations in the context of Costa Rican and
Brazilian forests. This proposal assembles a team of scientists from the
following countries: Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, and the United States. These
countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative
research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government
agency to carry out the United States' responsibilities within the IAI. %%% This
workshop will consider the value of forests to human society, and investigate
methods for better management of forest resources. This workshop will produce a
Phase II Start-Up Grant proposal to the Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) that will consider the ecology of forests, their role in
the formation and change of the global climate, how human activities influence
forests, what social value might be assigned to forests, and what policy changes
would be necessary to manage the forests as a 'sustainable' resource. The Phase
II proposal will suggest the construction of a model for forest management that
incorporates the concept of forests as capital assets which provide certain
benefits to society. Many models either have ignored social benefits as
intangibles, or have simply considered the forest's amenity value. Remaining
stock is often considered as providing no benefits or as not being an asset. In
addition, most models simply assume that the only decision to be made is 'how
much to cut.' This model will attempt to assign an cost to the cutting, because
the reduced amount of forest produces a reduced amount o f benefit - less
recreational space, less carbon absorbed, higher evaporative loss of fresh
water, greater contamination of reservoirs, etc. By including these ecological
and social costs, the model will hopefully lead to a better informed decision on
when to cut, how much to cut, and when to stop cutting. The workshop will use a
large set of existing data on boreal forests in Canada and the United States to
determine some of the valuations described above. The Phase II proposal will
attempt validation exercises, and then try to determine the valuations in the
context of Costa Rican and Brazilian forests. This proposalassembles a team of
scientists from the following countries: Brazil, Canada, Costa Rica, and the
United States. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated
U.S. Government agency to carry out the United States' responsibilities within
the IAI. *** --========================_13293532==_--