* 9530154
* IAI Workshop:  Planning of the Trade                        Convergence Climate Complex
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,09/30/1998
* David Enfield, CATHALAC
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/1998
* USD 54,194.00

Enfield This proposal will allow for the planning of a proposal for Phase II of
the IAI Start-Up Grant Program by institutions in the Caribbean and Pacific
Coasts of North, Central, and South America. These institutions have the common
goal of studying the interactions between the sea surface temperatures (SST) of
the Pacific and Caribbean and the overlying trade convergence regime of the
troposphere and the resulting anomalous excursions and intensity fluctuations of
rain-producing processes. The ultimate goal is to study the detail of these
processes, to examine the relationships to the details of climate anomalies in
the region and to develop useful ways of forecasting the resulting climate
fluctuations. The forecast activities will take into account the potential
social and economic impacts on human activities within the region so that the
relevant aspects of the climate can de identified and strongly targeted for
research. The workshop will enable the core group of institutions in Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and the United States to reach out to the other
institutions of the region to inform them of the goals of the project,
understand their needs and priorities, and coordinate with them to jointly plan
for the implementation of research and ultimately of useful forecasts. This
proposal assembles a diverse team of investigators from both academic and
governmental institutions in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and the
United States. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated
U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI.
This proposal will allow for the planning of a proposal for Phase II of the IAI
Start-Up Grant Program by institutions in the Caribbean and Pacific Coasts of
North, Central, and South Americ a. These institutions have the common goal of
studying interannual climate variability in the humid tropics in order to
produce climate forecasts that are useful to society. The workshop will enable
the core group of institutions in Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and the
United States to reach out to the other institutions of the region to inform
them of the goals of the project, understand their needs and priorities, and
coordinate with them to jointly plan for the implementation of research and
ultimately of useful forecasts. This proposal assembles a diverse team of
investigators from both academic and governmental institutions in Colombia,
Costa Rica, Ecuador, Panama, and the United States. These countries are Member
States of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global
change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National
Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the
U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***