* 9530070
* IAI Workshop: Planning for the Creation of a                Training and Education Center on Radar Remote Sensing       Science and Technology
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Antonio Mabres, Universadud de Piura
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 47,255.00

Author: pfilmer@nsf.gov (Paul E. Filmer) at NOTE Date: 5/22/96 4:47 PM Priority:
Normal TO: jmayi at nsf12 Subject: 95-30070 Abstract
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
--========================_13392216==_ Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-
ascii" --========================_13392216==_ Content-Type: text/plain;
name="AB30070.DOC"; charset="iso-8859-1" Content-Transfer-Encoding: quoted-
printable Content-Disposition: attachment; filename="AB30070.DOC" 9530070 Mabres
This proposal will allow the planning of an Inter-American training center for
radar remote sensing in Peru. The inter-institutional and multi-national
character of this proposed training center will benefit from the ongoing
participation of scientists from institutions throughout the world. This Phase I
proposal will focus on the necessary activities to design the "Training and
Education Center in Radar Science and Technologies" which will be the objective
of a Phase II proposal. The design activities will encompass 2 meetings to
determine the center's characteristics and its educational program, the level
and number of students, and the types of degrees or certificates to be
conferred. In addition, there will be discussion regarding professors and the
needs of other Latin American countries in the formation of their research teams
(current or planned). Radars are very powerful tools for remote sensing of the
atmosphere. Radar techniques may be essential for many of the observations
required in the study of the following Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) research themes: High Latitude Processes; El
Ni=F1o-Southern Oscillation and Interannual Climate Variability, and Ocean-Land
Atmospheric Interaction in the Intertropical Americas. Specifically, radar
techniques can assist in observations which address the ozone problem, ocean
surface currents, sea state, iceberg drifts at high lati tudes, the effects of
the El Ni=F1o-Southern Oscillation phenomenon, and other air-sea interactions.
This workshop will prepare a Phase II proposal to establish a center for
training and education in radar remote sensing science and technology so that
scientists in the region can better use radar observations. The training will be
at the post-graduate level and will involve professors and students in research
projects in the above mentioned topics. %%% This proposal will allow the
planning of an Inter-American training center for radar remote sensing in Peru,
using the world-class research infrastructure that already exists at Piura and
Jicamarca. The inter-institutional and multi-national character of this proposed
training center will benefit from the ongoing participation of scientists from
institutions throughout the world. This Phase I proposal will focus on the
necessary activities to design the "Training and Education Center in Radar
Science and Technologies" which will be the objective of a Phase II proposal.
The design activities will encompass 2 meetings to determine the center's
characteristics and its educational program, the level and number of students,
and the types of degrees or certificates to be conferred. In addition, there
will be discussion regarding professors and the needs of other Latin American
countries in the formation of their research teams (current or planned). This
proposal for the planning of a center for training and education in radar remote
sensing science and technology addresses the Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) cross-cutting theme of training and education. In
addition, this proposed center will provide training in radar techniques which
may be essential for may of the observations required in the study of the
following IAI priority research themes: High Latitude Processes; El
Ni=F1o-Southern Oscillation and Interannual Climate Variability, and Ocean-Land
Atmospheric I nteraction in the Intertropical Americas. The Jicamarca Radar
Observatory, the Peruvian Mesosphere-Stratosphere-Troposphere radar in
Antarctica, and the Piura Wind-Profiler Radar (all incorporated in this proposed
training center) will be available for scientists from the Americas to use. A
fundamental aim of the project is to use this center to transfer world-class
radar techniques to other research groups in order to increase the potential of
radars to achieve the goals of the IAI. The following countries are
participating in the organization of this proposal: Peru and the United States.
These countries are Member States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate
cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific institutions
of the Americas. The U.S. National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government
agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***
--========================_13392216==_--