* 9530334
* IAI Workshop:  Effects of UV-B Radiation on Various         Ecosystems at Different Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Suzanne Roy, University of Quebec
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 01/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

9530334 Demers This proposal requests support for two meetings on the effects of
UV-B radiation on aquatic ecosystems, both in high and low latitudes, and in
both fresh- and salt-water environments. The first workshop, to be held in late
1996 in Ensenada, Mexico, will have as its products the following: a state of
the art review, to be compiled and produced as a book, a discussion of the
principal research themes for the group, and the division of labor between
working groups for the production of a Phase II proposal to the Inter-American
Institute for Global Change Research (IAI). The second workshop, to be held in
early 1997 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, will consist of a smaller group that
meets to integrate the results of the working groups and draft the actual Phase
II proposal. The preliminary comprehensive objective for a Phase II project is a
latitudinal comparison of the effects of the variations in incident UV radiation
at the individual, population, community, and ecosystem levels. This goal will
be achieved through the following sub-objectives: the characterization of
subsurface UV spectral irradiance; the quantification of the impact of
environmental UV on biogeochemical processes with respect to spectral
composition, intensity and duration of exposure; the quantification of the
impact of UV-B radiation on the biology and bio-diversity of marine planktonic
ecosystems up to decadal exposure times, with emphasis on phytoplankton and
pelagic primary production, and measurements of possible UV-induced
photoinhibition; and finally the training of local personnel to carry out a
coordinated program of measurements and analysis. The proposed program would
identify key areas of study at different levels in the ecosystems; coordinate
efforts, sampling, and methods to be used for inter-site comparisons; and take
advantage of existing ecosystem study sites (e.g. the Palmer LTER site).
Facilities belonging to the following institution s might be used during Phase
II: Argentine Antarctic Institute; Austral Center for Scientific Research,
Argentina; Autonomous University of Baja California, Mexico; Bigelow Laboratory
for Ocean Sciences, Canada; Center for Scientific Research and Higher Education
of Ensenada, Mexico; National Autonomous University of Mexico in Yucat=E1n;
National Institute fo= r =46isheries Development, Chile; National Institute for
Fisheries Research an= d Development, Argentina; National Scientific Research
Institute of the University of Qu=E9bec, Canada; Oceanographic Institute,
University of Sao Paulo, Brazil; Scripps Institute of Oceanography, in the
United States; Smithsonian Institute (facilities in Belize, C.A., and Maryland);
and the University of San Francisco, USA. These institutions are all principally
located in countries that are members of the IAI, a United States initiative to
stimulate global change research among the scientific institutions of the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government
agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. %%% This proposal
requests support for two international scientific meetings on the effects of
ultra-violet radiation on aquatic ecosystems. The first workshop, to be held in
late 1996 in Ensenada, Mexico, will have as its products the following: a state
of the art review, to be compiled and produced as a book, a discussion of the
principal research themes for the group, and the division of labor between
working groups for the production of a Phase II proposal to the Inter-American
Institute for Global Change Research (IAI). The second workshop, to be held in
early 1997 in Buenos Aires, Argentina, will consist of a smaller group that
meets to integrate the results of the working groups and draft the actual Phase
II proposal. The preliminary comprehensive objective for a Phase II project is a
comparison of the effects of UV radiation on ecosystems at variou s levels. The
proposed program would identify key areas of study, coordinate methods to be
used for inter-site comparisons, and take advantage of existingecosyst em study
sites (e.g. the Long Term Ecological Research sites). Facilities belonging to
the following institutions might be used during Phase II: Argentine Antarctic
Institute; Austral Center for Scientific Research, Argentina; Autonomous
University of Baja California, Mexico; Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences,
Canada; Center for Scientific Research and Higher Education of Ensenada, Mexico;
National Autonomous University of Mexico in Yucat=E1n; National Institute for
Fisheries Development, Chile; National Institute for Fisheries Research and
Development, Argentina; National Scientific Research Institute of the University
of Qu=E9bec, Canada= ; Oceanographic Institute, University of Sao Paulo, Brazil;
Scripps Institute of Oceanography, in the United States; Smithsonian Institute
(facilities in Belize, C.A., and Maryland); and the University of San Francisco,
USA. These institutions are all principally located in countries that are
members of the IAI, a United States initiative to stimulate global change
research among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI. ***