* 9530957
* Simultaneous PIV and PLIF Studies of the Effect of Heat     Release upon Chemically Reacting Jet Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Mark Godfrey Mungal, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Farley Fisher
* 12/31/1999
* USD 240,000.00

Abstract Mungal CTS-9530957 The PI proposes to provide new experimental data on
the effects of heat release obtained on well defined co-flowing, nonpremixed,
turbulent jet flames. Simultaneous measurements using the laser-based techniques
of Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), and Planar Laser Induced Fluorescence
(PLIF) is proposed. From these measurements detailed information on the
instantaneous velocities and therefore the strain rate and vorticity fields, the
temperature distributions and a conserved scalar and its gradients will be
obtained as the degree of heat release is varied. The PI intends to use either
hydrogen or methane diluted with helium (and possibly nitrogen) as the fuel
mixture and to vary the heat release by changing the proportion of
hydrogen/methane in the fuel mixture. It is expected that fast chemistry will
prevail for most of the run conditions and Reynolds numbers will be varied in
the range of 2,000 to in excess of 20,000. The PI will also seek to maintain a
close relationship between the experiments and modeling requirements. To this
end the PI plans to use Dr. J. E. Broadwell as a consultant for the model
development and to help guide the direction of the experimental program. The
proposed research in addition to describing the changes to the flowfield
associated with heat release seeks alqo to provide modelers with the following
information: actual strain rates throughput the flame brush, residence times of
various fluid elements, scalar dissipation rates, entrainment and paths of air,
and scale distributions.