* 9530762
* Iron in Antarctic Polar Front Zones
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Kenneth Johnson, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 03/31/2000
* USD 1,142,276.00

9530762 Coale This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three- year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. This component concerns the effect of iron on the productivity of the
upper layers of the ocean. Dissolved iron concentrations in surface waters of
the open ocean are often extremely low, and have been shown to limit primary
production in high nitrate and low chlorophyll regions of the global ocean. As a
result of an earlier JGOFS study in the equatorial Pacific Ocean, models
describing the spatial and temporal variability in production and export now
include the role of iron as a limiting micronutrient. The observed patterns of
production in the equatorial Pacific were consistent with the supply and
distribution of iron in this region. However, there are very little data on iron
concentrations and distribution of iron in the Southern Ocean that could be used
for such interpretations. For example, we do not know if iron concentrations are
enhanced or depleted in Southern Ocean upwelled waters. Also, very little
information is known concerning the concentrations, distributions, or sources of
iron in the Southern Ocean and as a result, it is currently difficult to
correlate patterns of productio n in these waters with the distribution of iron.
Systematic measurements of trace metal distributions in the Ross Sea and in the
Antarctic Polar Front Zone with an emphasis on iron will be made as part of this
study, and will provide a data base that will allow the evaluation of Southern
Ocean biological processes in terms of a possible iron limitation. The results
of this work will be a significant contribution to our understanding of iron
biogeochemistry in the Southern Ocean, and to our understanding of factors which
control rates of new production in these regions. They will have a direct
bearing on our understanding of the global carbon cycle. ***