* 9530292
* Workshop Series on Evolution, Science, and Society, March   and October 1996 to be held in Chicago at the Field Museum
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2001
* Thomas Meagher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 01/31/2001
* USD 112,560.00

9530292 MEAGHER At the invitation of their respective Society Presidents,
representatives from the American Society of Naturalists, the Society for the
Study of Evolution, the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution, the
Ecological Society of America, the Society of Systematic Biologists, the
Genetics Society of America, the Animal Behavior Society, and the
Paleontological Society met in Indianapolis on April 22-23, 1995, to discuss the
preparation of a report defining the challenges and opportunities facing the
study of evolution. The representatives agreed to proceed toward the formulation
and dissemination of a document that would 1) describe the content and aims of
evolutionary biology; 2) document some of its accomplishments, including its
contributions to biological science in general and to social needs in areas such
as health science, agriculture, and environmental science; 3) outline important
future contributions of our science to the biological science and to social
needs; 4) identify areas of particular challenge and opportunity; and 5) suggest
mechanisms by which such challenges and opportunities may be pursued. This
document would inform science administrators and other representatives of
society of the role of evolutionary biology in the progress of basic biological
science and its applications to social needs, and would identify promising areas
of future work. A working group of eighteen (18) scientists representing major
disciplines in evolutionary biology has been established and will meet over the
next two years to draft a working document to be presented to the memberships of
their respective societies. The workshop series will include a meeting of the
working group to establish an outline for the document, a meeting of the working
group to revise a draft document, and a meeting of the working group to
incorporate input from the scientific societies. The workshop series will be
followed by publication and dissemination of the finished document.