* 9530225
* IAI Workshop: To Implement a Research and Training          Network for Plant-Soil Interactions in the Semi-Arid Tropics
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,09/30/1997
* Holm Tiessen, University of Saskatchewan
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/1997
* USD 46,780.00

9530225 Tiessen The network to be established concerns biogeochemical cycles in
semi-arid tropical ecosystems and derived agricultural systems. It aims at the
establishment of a research center for researah, training and education from
existing links between three research institutions in Canada, Brazil and
Venezuela, and an expansion of these links within Brazil and to Bolivia and
Mexico. The phase I proposal is for a workshop to bring together present and
future participants of the network, assemble present knowledge (and gaps) on the
interactions of biogeochemical cycles and vegetation; unify research and
training approaches, and prepare a Phase II proposal. The workshop will be a
short course on soil-vegetation interactions in the biogeochemical cycling of
important nutrient elements, and on the nutrient and climatic limitations to
plant production in the semiarid regions. The material presented is to be
collated in a form suitable for training and education material for participants
and their institutions. This will serve as an example of the capacity building
activities which will accompany the research of the IAI Phase II Proposal. In
addition, common research approaches will be formulated, and there will be
planning for an exchange of researchers and teachers establish the network to be
supported by Phase II. The longer term goal is for this network proposed for
Phase II to be extended to form an IAI Research Consortium. The network to be
established concerns biogeochemical cycles in semi-arid tropical ecosystems and
derived agricultural systems. The phase I proposal is for a workshop to bring
together present and future participants of the network, assemble present
knowledge (and gaps) on the interactions of biogeochemical cycles and
vegetation; unify research and training approaches, and prepare a Phase II
proposal. The goal of the Phase II proposal is the establishment of a research
network, with the aim of facilitating terrestrial ecosystems research with a
strong prac tical component, that may serve as a tool for planning and guidance
for sustainable land use related to agriculture and watershed management. In
addition, the PIs hope to create a network for training and education, improve
the research and teaching capacities of the institutions involved, and provide a
focus for investigations with importance to the envionmentally sound management
of large areas of the South American semi-arids. This proposal involves
researchers from three research institutions in Canada, Brazil and Venezuela,
and it plans an expansion of its links within Brazil and to Bolivia and Mexico.
The proposed collaboration will play a role in the provision of vital ecosystem
understanding. In addition, findings on the interaction of trees and soil
fertility will be examined with the aim to establish a data base on fertility-
biology interactions, with relevance for the use of indigenous species of
agroforestry. The above mentioned countries are Member States of the IAI, an
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the
designated U.S. Government Agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within
the IAI. ***