* 9530082
* IAI Workshop: Cooperative Pelagic Ecosystem Studies Between the Chilean and Hawaii Ocean Time-Series: Initial Phase
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Mark Abbott, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 09/30/1997
* USD 44,262.00

9530082 Abbott Hydrobiological time-series provide invaluable information to the
scientific community for the understanding of the role of oceans in climate
variability. They also provide background information from which
multidisciplinary process studies may be developed. Two Joint Global Flux Study
(JGOFS) sponsored programs, the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) and the Chilean
Time-series are actively working in the North and South Pacific, respectively.
These two programs present an ideal research platform for the ocean scientific
community from which to develop comparative and cooperative studies. However,
because both time-series were generated by local initiatives, no exchange of
information between these programs exists to date. The PIs of this proposal
propose to work actively toward the generation of a collaborative program by
organizing a 1 week meeting in which researchers that use these time-series as a
platform of research that will exchange results, methodologies, analyze the
necessity of intercalibration exercises, explore avenues of collaborative
research, and prepare a Phase II project proposal, based on common research
hypotheses. Both the Hawaii Ocean Time-series program and the Chilean Time-
series initiative are trying to address common issues measuring a similar set of
core parameters and utilizing similar techniques. They are both concerned with
interannual climate variability, with the response of the pelagic ecosystems to
climate change, and with the role of the ocean on global carbon cycle.
Furthermore, both programs have deployed bottom-moored sediment traps at the
Oceanic Stations that provide a continuous record of temporal variability in the
particulate downward fluxes. Long term plans for these stations are to deploy
automated instruments on a moored buoy to have continuous record of selected
climatological and water column parameters. These time-series programs provide
background information on the temporal variability of the pelagic ecosystems
structure from which comparative studies and testable hypotheses may be
developed. However, comparative studies will require the coordinated effort
between institutions participating in both time-series programs, and this is the
purpose of the workshop during which scientists will discuss the main scientific
issues and to formulate collaborative efforts for a Phase II proposal. %%%
Hydrobiological time-series provide invaluable information to the scientific
community for the understanding of the role of oceans in climate variability.
They also provide background information from which multidisciplinary process
studies may be developed. Two Joint Global Flux Study (JGOFS) sponsored
programs, the Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT) and the Chilean Time-series are
actively working in the North and South Pacific, respectively. These two
programs present an ideal research platform for the ocean scientific community
from which to develop comparative and cooperative studies. However, because both
time-series were generated by local initiatives, no exchange of information
between these programs exists to date. The PIs of this proposal propose to work
actively toward the generation of a collaborative program by organizing a 1 week
meeting in which researchers that use these time-series as a platform of
research that will exchange results, methodologies, analyze the necessity of
intercalibration exercises, explore avenues of collaborative research, and
prepare a Phase II project proposal, based on common research hypotheses. The
Chilean Time-series Stations are located in a region with marked temporal
interannual variability resulting from the effects of ENSO. The characterization
and understanding of this oscillation is a major concern for Chilean fisheries
and for the international community. For example, Chile has become the fourth
country in the world for total fish catch. In 1994 an export return of US$ 1.35B
was achieved and thus made fisheries one of the most important resources of the
Chilean economy . Results from the HOT program also suggest that ENSO events may
be import in enhancing primary production in oceanic subtropical gyres.
Comparative studies will require the coordinated effort between institutions
participating in both time-series programs and will require the development of
intercalibration exercises of key parameters and standardized protocols. To
achieve the goals of this proposal, a team of scientists from the following
countries will be assembled: Chile; the United States; Denmark; and Germany.
Chile and the United States are Member States of the Inter-American Institute
for Global Change Research (IAI), an initiative to stimulate cooperative
research on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government
agency to carry out the United StatesÄ± responsibilities within the IAI. ***