* 9530118
* IAI Workshop: Global Change Effects in the Southwestern     Atlantic
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Ricardo Matano, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 43,530.00

9530118 Matano Remote observations indicate that the most energetic regions of
the world's oceans are the offshore extensions of the Kuroshio Current, the Gulf
Stream, the Agulhas retroflection, and the Brazil/Malvinas Confluence. Of all
these regions, the Brazil/Malvinas Confluence is, by far, the least studied. The
Brazil/Malvinas Confluence is characterized by one of the strongest oceanic
temperature gradients and large seasonal latitudinal displacements (up to 5=B0)
along the continental slopes of Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina. Since the
Brazil/Malvinas Confluence influences the fisheries and agricultural development
of one of the most economically important areas of Latin America, it is of
regional interest to understand the physical and biochemical processes with
which it is associated. From a more general point of view, the Brazil/Malvinas
Confluence is important for a strong water mass ventilation that affects the
global thermohaline circulation and therefore is important in global climate
change. Previous studies on the circulation in this region have only emphasized
isolated aspects of the oceanic and atmospheric circulations without any attempt
to study them as a coupled system. Scientists from Argentina, Brazil, Mexico,
Uruguay, and the United States will meet to elaborate a research project to
investigate coupled models of the Brazil/Malvinas Confluence, resulting in a
Phase II Start-Up Grant proposal to the IAI. This proposal brings together
participants from member countries of the Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI), a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research on
global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The NSF
is the lead U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities
within the IAI. %%% This workshop will bring together scientists from Argentina,
Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay, and the United States to elaborate a research project
to investigate the Brazil/Malvinas Confluence, an ocean current that runs along
the continental slopes of Brazil, Uruguay, and Argentina. This current one of
the most energetic in the world, and strongly influences the fisheries and
agricultural development of one of the most economically important areas of
Latin America. The Brazil/Malvinas Confluence has a strong influence on the
turnover of the world's ocean water and therefore on global climate change. The
Brazil/Malvinas Confluence is also one of the least studied currents in the
world, in an area of the Atlantic that remains poorly understood by the
oceanographic community. The four countries involved in the project bring
together some of the most important research groups and computer modeling
facilities in the Americas to tackle this problem, and will propose a research
project to the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research (IAI), a U.S.
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the
lead U.S. Government agency designated to carry out U.S. responsibilities within
the IAI. *** --========================_15507136==_--