* 9530720
* Thorium Isotopes as Indicators of Export Flux and Particle  Dynamics in the Southern Ocean: Joint Global Ocean Flux     Study
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Michael Bacon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/2000
* USD 333,843.00

95-30720 Bacon This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson on six process cruises between Oct.-Nov., 1996, and March 1998. This
component focuses on the spatial and temporal variations in the distributions
and particulate fluxes of thorium isotopes (thorium-234 and thorium-228). These
isotopes serve as ocean tracers that yield fundamental information about the
rates of biogeochemical processes that govern the production and fate of
biogenic particles in the oceanic water column. Measurements of thorium-234 will
be made at sea by beta and gamma-counting; measurements of thorium-228 will be
made ashore by alpha- spectrometry. The data will be interpreted within the
context of biological rate measurements and other data to be collected during
the study and will be used to provide estimates of export fluxes of organic
matter, carbonate, and silica from the euphotic zone; to quantify transformation
processes such as aggregation and disaggregation in the water column; and to
test biogeochemical models. Thorium is a particularly useful tracer in this
context because its mode of production is well known; it is taken up quickly by
biogenic particles, and its concentration can be measured quite precisely. The
removal of thorium by falling particles can therefore be determined, and the
inverse problem of inferring the integrated mass of falling particles (the
particulate carbon flux) may be solved. *** .