* 9530949
* Dissertation Research:  Changing Patterns of Community      Structure and Organization:  The End of the Classic Period  at San Lorenzo, Cayo District, Belize
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Robert Sharer, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 11,800.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Sharer, Mr. Jason Yaeger will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct an archaeological study of San
Lorenzo, a prehistoric Mayan site located in Belize. The site itself is
interesting because it is intermediate in size between the large ritual centers
for which the Mayans are so well known and the small isolated mounds which are
common across the Mayan range. San Lorenzo is, in Mayan terms, a small community
and its inhabitants probably lived a life typical of most people at that time.
Mr. Yaeger and his colleagues have conducted prior excavation at the site and
with NSF support this work will be expanded to provide a representative sample
of dwellings. Areas within and adjacent to structures will be cleared and
additional test pits excavated. Abundant stone tools and ceramics as well as
floral and faunal remains will be collected. On this basis it will be possible
to reconstruct interrelationships among families as well as subsistence
practices. The Mayan civilization has long interested archaeologists not only
because of the impressive stone monuments which were constructed but also
because of the organizational and subsistence skills required to sustain large
populations in tropical environments which are sparsely populated today. While
excavations at ceremonial mounds have shed considerable light on ritual
organization and elite behaviors much less is known about how smaller
communities which constituted the backbone of Mayan society were organized. Mr.
Yaeger's research will provide relevant information. Mr. Yaeger notes that other
researchers have studied present-day Mayan villages and described a particular
form of social organization. Through his excavations he will test whether this
same model applied to the past. This research is important for several reasons.
It will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light
on how the Mayan civilization was organized and it will assist in the training
of a promising young scientist.