* 9530293
* SBIR Phase II:  Confusion to Precision:  Tools for          Assessing Expert Uncertainty
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Richard Sonnenblick, Lumina Decision Systems
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1999
* USD 299,939.00

9530293 Sonnenblick Quantitative models, virtually all of which are subject to
uncertainties and most of which must rely on expert opinion for estimating key
uncertain input quantities, are increasingly widely used to support the making
of key decisions in public and private sectors. This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project from Lumina Decision Systems, Inc. describes research
seeking to develop and evaluate an innovative decision support system software
tool to assist experts in expressing their uncertain knowledge in the form of
probability distributions. There is a growing recognition on the part of
builders and users of quantitative models of the need for a such a tool, but
heretofore usage has been constrained by the lack of availability of a tool that
is both easy to use and designed to overcome the difficulties people have
expressing uncertainty in meaningful and coherent ways. In Phase I, the
practicality of two innovative methods was developed and experimentally
established: (1) animated density functions and (2) verbal probability phrases,
such as probable or very seldom. In Phase II, a prototype tool for probability
assessment will be refined, providing these two and six other assessment methods
with associated calibration and debiasing techniques...These methods will be
evaluated experimentally to measure ease of learning and use, effort required,
confidence in results, and reliability and calibration of the resulting
distributions. These results will be used to guide users in choosing the most
cost-effective methods to suit their needs and skills. Methods to assess
multivariate distributions and multimedia courseware on probability assessment
will also be integrated into the package. The expression of expert judgment in
the form of subjective probability distributions is becoming accepted for risk
analysis in areas where uncertainty is critical, including finance, oil and gas
exploration, risks to the environment, medical diagnosis, and bidding decisions
. This project will contribute effective means of eliciting beliefs regarding
the likelihood of outcomes, and thus it will serve to enhance existing
capability of quantifying expected costs and benefits in a variety of contexts.