* 9530923
* Weighted Myriad Filters and Their Applications in           Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Neal Gallagher, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2000
* USD 305,041.00

Linear Filtering theory has been largely motivated by the characteristics of
Gaussian random processes. In the same manner, research in myriad filtering
theory is motivated by the statistical properties of alpha-stable processes
which describe an important class of processes, impulsive in nature, that obey a
Generalized Central Limit Theorem; thus these processes can arise in practice as
a result of physical principles. The foundation of myriad filtering algorithms
lies in the definition of the sample myriad as the location estimate of a class
of alpha-stable distributions. The main goals of this research are: (1) To study
the theoretical properties of the sample myriad and to exploit its geometrical
structure for the development of efficient computational algorithms. (2) To
solve the optimal "weighted myriad" filtering problem - the problem analogous to
the design of the optimal FIR (Wiener) filter and the optimal weighted median
filter. (3) To develop adaptive filtering algorithms for the simple design of
weighted myriad filters for applications where the statistical characteristics
of the underlying signals may be unknown or varying. (4) To extend the filter
formulation to the case where the signals are complex or multivariate, providing
us with the tools needed to develop robust CDMA multiple access detectors. This
work can have a significant impact on applications requiring robust estimation
and filtering. This is particularly the case in mobile and personal
communication systems, to be deployed in the near future, where the underlying
statistics of the noise and interferences closely follow the models used in this
research rather that the traditional models used in practice today. The results
of this research can also be applied to a wide range of problems including
remote sensing imaging of the environment and non-destructive evaluation of
materials.