* 9530102
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Discrimination and Juror   Comprehension in Capital Sentencing
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Craig Haney, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 01/31/1998
* USD 19,180.00

9530102 Haney This dissertation improvement project will expand upon the
preliminary work of the P.I.s on the problems in the quality and degree of
comprehension of jurors in interpreting capital penalty sentencing instructions.
The previous research established key areas of confusion surrounding
California's pattern instruction. The present research will explore the
influence of comprehension on racial bias and a bias favoring death verdicts in
capital sentencing. It will use an experimental design to explore the effects of
racial variables on the decision making processes of penalty jurors to test the
hypothesis that jurors' inability to comprehend and apply sentencing guidelines
contributes to the documented racial disparity in death sentence imposition. It
is hypothesized that what is interpreted by mock jurors as aggravating and
mitigating circumstances will be influenced by race of victim and defendant. It
is also hypothesized that comprehension problems will be worse for items related
to mitigation, and that this will create a bias in favor of a death verdict
among the subjects. %%%% This dissertation improvement project will expand upon
the preliminary work of the P.I.s on the problems in the quality and degree of
comprehension of jurors in interpreting capital penalty sentencing instructions.
The previous research established key areas of confusion surrounding
California's pattern instruction. The present research will explore the
influence of comprehension on racial bias and a bias favoring death verdicts in
capital sentencing. It will use an experimental design to explore the effects of
racial variables on the decision making processes of penalty jurors to test the
hypothesis that jurors' inability to comprehend and apply sentencing guidelines
contributes to the documented racial disparity in death sentence imposition. It
is hypothesized that what is interpreted by mock jurors as aggravating and
mitigating circumstances will be influenced by race of victim and defendant. It
is also hypothesized that comprehension problems will be worse for items related
to mitigation, and that this will create a bias in favor of a death verdict
among the subjects. ****