* 9530127
* IAI Workshop: Experimental and Time Series Approaches to    Global Change Research in the Americas:  Proposal for       Coordination and Action
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* R Hecky, University of Manitoba
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9530127 Hecky This proposal is for a workshop which is intended to overcome
major constraints on global change research on inland waters: the need for
international cooperation to achieve effective research planning and
collaboration on field experiments, the need to conduct thorough and
geographically extensive database analyses, and the need to formulate and
execute hypothesis-driven comparative studies. The workshop will be structured
in order to develop Phase II proposals to the Inter-American Institute for
Global Change Research (IAI) in the following themes: effects of hydrologic
regimes on biogeochemistry; greenhouse gas flux, mercury cycling and food web
performance, UV-dissolved organic carbon interactions and UV effects on aquatic
ecosystem structure and function; direct effects of atmospheric chemical changes
on aquatic ecosystem structure and function and food web performance; and
ecosystem effects of interannual climate variability and effects of El
Ni=F1o-Southern Oscillatio= n events. It is anticipated that the Phase II
proposals that result from this workshop will extend ongoing activities at the
sites to expand the research questions being addressed and to optimize training
and education opportunities for international graduate students and researchers,
endorse new global change experiments to be conducted at the Canadian sites or
elsewhere in the hemisphere, and identify and evaluate the utility of long-term
(2 or more ENSO events) data sets, including paleoclimatological data sets which
can be analyzed for insight into future ecosystem interactions. There is growing
consensus that significant changes are occurring in the earth's atmosphere and
that these changes if unabated would lead to significant changes in the earth's
ecosystems. The effects of these atmospheric changes in ecosystems are more
difficult to detect and can be buried in the complex dynamics that are
characteristic of even unstressed ecosystems. The c hallenge that this proposal
accepts is to predict the ecosystem and societal consequences of these
atmospheric changes and to detect ecosystem changes as early as possible by
using the most powerful research approaches available to ecosystem scientists.
These approaches are whole system experimentation and time series analysis of
ecosystems in relatively remote areas, where they are only responding to the
changing atmosphere. %%% This proposal is for a workshop which is intended to
overcome major constraints on global change research on inland waters: the need
for international cooperation to achieve effective research planning and
collaboration on field experiments, the need to conduct thorough and
geographically extensive database analyses, and the need to formulate and
execute hypothesis-driven comparative studies. The workshop will be structured
in order to develop Phase II proposals in the following themes: effects of
hydrologic regimes on biogeochemistry; greenhouse gas flux, mercury cycling and
food web performance, UV-dissolved organic carbon interactions and UV effects on
aquatic ecosystem structure and function; direct effects of atmospheric chemical
changes on aquatic ecosystem structure and function and food web performance;
and ecosystem effects of interannual climate variability and effects of ENSO
events. It is anticipated that the Phase II proposals that result from this
workshop will extend ongoing activities at the sites to expand the research
questions being addressed and to optimize training and education opportunities
for international graduate students and researchers, endorse new global change
experiments to be conducted at the Canadian sites or elsewhere in the
hemisphere, and identify and evaluate the utility of long-term (2 or more ENSO
events) data sets, including paleoclimatological data sets which can be analyzed
for insight into future ecosystem interactions. The workshop venues provide
ecologically stimulat ing and contrasting environments from both a natural and
scientific perspective. The Experimental Lake Area Research Station (ELA) near
Kenora, Ontario, is located along a drainage divide at a relatively high
elevation. The area abounds with exceptionally deep, extremely oligotrophic,
headwater lakes and scattered peatlands with some of the lowest dissolved
inorganic carbon concentrations recorded. The area is a wilderness which has
resisted settlement by humans and has therefore escaped most of the
environmental insults common to lakes and wetland worldwide. These
characteristic have made the lakes ideal experimental systems in service to
aquatic science as well as insuring that the natural lakes are responding only
to global atmospheric changes rather than local impacts. In addition, current
global circulation models and linked ecozone models forecast a future as dynamic
as the past with serious consequences for these well studied sites and
surrounding regions in Central Canada. The known meteorological and geological
records of the area indicate a strong positive correlation between air
temperature and increasing aridity, and the 25 year integrated ecosystem
monitoring at the ELA clearly established that the boreal ecosystems will
respond strongly to even short time climatic fluctuation. It has been
demonstrated that there is potential to gain from the ELA lakes positive
feedback interactions among concurrent changes in atmospheric acidity, UV, and
increasing aridity. The following countries are participating in the
coordination of this proposal: Canada and the United States. These countries are
Members States of the IAI, a U.S. initiative to stimulate cooperative research
on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The
U.S. National Science Foundation is the U.S. Government agency designated to
carry out U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***
--========================_13392204==_--