* 9530507
* Mesoscale Processes and Primary Productivity at the Polar   Front
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Mark Abbott, Oregon State University
* Continuing grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/2000
* USD 750,000.00

9530507 ABBOTT This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The
Antarctic Circumpolar Current (ACC) provides a pathway between the major basins
of the Pacific, Atlantic, and Indian Oceans. Therefore, it plays a critical role
in the global redistribution of salt, heat, and other ocean properties between
these basins. Although improved observations and more powerful numerical models
have identified many critical processes, it is still not possible to balance all
of the terms. The scarcity of direct observations has greatly hampered our
understanding of the physical environment, and the situation with regard to
ocean biogeochemistry is even worse. The challenge to understanding Southern
Ocean dynamics (both physics and biogeochemistry) is exacerbated by the strong
dynamical link between mesoscale processes and large-scale processes. The
dynamical scales approach the scales typical of energetic coastal systems. Yet
the size of the Southern Ocean and its impacts on global biogeochemistry and
climate make this an important region. This research starts with the hypothesis
that the ecosystem of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone (APFZ) behaves much like
a coastal upwelling system which is characterized by episodic diatom blooms.
These blooms result in high f-ratios, high preservation rates of biogenic silica
and relatively little vertical flux of particulate biogenic material. These
processes are consistent with observations of bottom sediments. The lack of
meridional barriers leads to a "recirculation" of diatoms associated with
frontal meanders. Phytoplankton wou ld alternately upwell and then downwell in
these meanders, creating a helical circulation path. Such bloom events may be
unimportant in the total productivity of the system but play a disproportionate
role in carbon fluxes. In this project a high-resolution sampling array of
moorings with bio-optical sensors and current meters will be deployed. The
moorings will rely on low-cost components so that the sampling scales will match
with the dynamical scales of the critical processes at the Polar Front.
Lagrangian drifters (some equipped with bio-optical sensors) will be deployed
during high-resolution surveys in order to characterize the temporal and spatial
scales of variability when coupled with the Eulerian observations from the
moorings. These data will be analyzed in conjunction with high-resolution
SeaSoar surveys and high temporal resolution sediment traps proposed by other
investigators to study the effects of mesoscale processes on productivity and
horizontal and vertical fluxes of biological properties.