* 9530718
* Regulation of Primary Productivity in the Southern Ocean:   Phytoplankton Photosynthesis Characteristics from           Individual Cell  Measurements
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Robert Olson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/2000
* USD 339,500.00

95-30718 OLSON This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. Central
to the mission of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux Study in the Southern Ocean is
an understanding of the composition of the planktonic food web, and the
efficiency with which it transports carbon to the deep ocean. One of the
specific questions being posed is the mechanism of regulation of phytoplankton
growth and productivity in this area; light limitation, micronutrient
availability and grazing pressure have all been proposed to explain the
persistence of high macronutrient concentrations and the relatively low
productivity often observed. To distinguish among these mechanisms, this
research examines photosynthetic characteristics of phytoplankton in natural
populations under a range of environmental conditions. specifically, it will
estimate, from chlorophyll fluorescence induction measurements of individual
cells, photochemical efficiency and absorption cross sections of photosystem
2(PS2) as well as relative pigment content per cell for different groups of
phytoplankton, which can be distinguished either microscopically or flow
cytometrically. These measurements, carried out on samples from depth profiles
and experimentally-manipulated assemblages of phytoplankton, should allow us to
distinguish among limiting factors for phytoplankton growth. For example,
limitation by micronutrients should result in low photochemical efficiency
(reflecting loss of functioning PS2 reaction centers), while low-light
limitation (due to deep mixing) would be indicated by high fluorescence (i.e.,
pigment content) in near-surface cells. Grazing control would be implied if
photosynthetic characteristics indicate no limitation of intrinsic growth rates
The individual cell nature of the proposed measurements will allow us to
evaluate the condition of different groups of phytoplankton (or different cells)
in a given water sample, and to examine unambiguously the effects of
environmental gradients or experimental treatments on given species. In
addition, in the course of the measurements, the composition of the
phytoplankton community will be characterized by microscopic and flow cytometric
analysis. Observations of the physiological state of cells in natural
assemblages and experiments, combined with information on community structure,
will allow us to evaluate the relative importance of light, iron, and grazing as
limiting factors for productivity in the Southern Ocean, and to better interpret
bulk measurements of phytoplankton properties, such as can be obtained in a high
resolution survey with FRR (fast repetition rate) fluorometry.