* 9530981
* Physics and Recycling Efficiency as Factors Controlling     New (Nitrate) Production in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/1997,01/31/2000
* Raymond Sambrotto, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 01/31/2000
* USD 397,747.00

9530981 Sambrotto This project is part of the U.S. Joint Global Ocean Flux Study
(U.S.JGOFS) Southern Ocean Process Study aimed at (1) a better understanding of
the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological, and biogeochemical factors and processes
regulating the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing these
fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. As the fourth
U.S.JGOFS study region, the Southern Ocean in potentially the most significant
yet examined by this interdisciplinary program. The Southern Ocean's vast size
together with its abundance of nutrients has led to extensive speculation about
its role in past and present-day exchanges of carbon with the atmosphere as well
as how this role may change in response to future climactic perturbation. Thus
project will measure nitrate uptake and the uptake and regeneration of nitrogen
from ammonium, area, and dissolved amino acid sources in surface water. The
light response of nitrate uptake will be measured and the size distribution
analyzed to determine how vertical mixing can affect the local rates of new
production. Although all of the major physiographic regions of the Southern
Ocean will be sampled during this project, the focus will be on the frontal
systems at the northern portion of the study area as well as the permanently
ice- free region immediately to the south. This extensive region encompasses the
largest, uninterrupted biogeochemical province in the world ocean. Thus, the
work addresses the JGOFS goal of identifying the factors that regulate the
magnitude and variability of biological production and its ultimate export from
surface water and will be critical to the success of future models that intend
to predict the response of the Southern Ocean to climate change.