* 9530649
* Theoretical Investigation of Optical &amp; Electronic Properties of Semiconductor Heterostructures
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2000
* Jacob Khurgin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2000
* USD 190,537.00

Proposal Number: ECS-9530649 Principal Investigator: Jacob Khurgin ABSTRACT
Theoretical investigations will be performed to develop a coherent pictureof the
optical, electronic and magnetic processes occurring in low dimensional
semiconductor heterostructures. The research can lead to families of novel
optical, electronic and magnetic devices. One major direction of the research is
in the area of mid-infrared (3 to 30 microns) light generation and detection.
Mid-infrared lasers have potentially important applications to atmospheric
remote sensing, pollution monitoringand laser radars due to the presence of an
atmospheric window in this range and the current lack of compact and powerful
laser sources there. The following studies will be performed (1) Engineering of
the transition rates, based on Coulombic scattering with application to
intersubband light sources and detectors; (2) Surface-emitting intersubband
lasers based on theinter-valence subband transitions utilizing "the effective
mass reversal effect" in the valence bands. This study will also ascertain the
feasibility of Si-based intersubband lasers and detectors. (3) Comparative
studies of intersubband lasers without inversion. In (3), the threshold and
slope efficiency of the inversion-less laser will be established and optimized
for the first time, using the balance equations. Comparison with similar
descriptions of more conventional intersubband lasers using real numberswill
allow a realistic determination of whether inversion-less semiconductor laser is
a viable alternative to the Quantum-Cascade or Optically Pumped semiconductor
laser as well as to the recently introduced by the PI "Stimulated Intersubband
Electronic Raman Oscillator (SIERO)". Another major direction is in engineering
of artificial ferro and ferri-magnetic materials. A detailed theoretical
investigation of the exchange and correlation interaction of the electrons (or
holes) placed in the periodic three dimensional arrays of quantum dots and anti-
dots will be performed. The purpose of this investigation is to specify the
exact set ofconditions that will lead to ferro- and ferri-magnetism and to
calculatethe most important properties of these materials such as the Curie
temperateand the critical magnetic field. The potential benefit is possibility
of integrating the magnetic elements on the same semiconductor chip with the
electronic and optical elements. The third direction of research is the
theoretical study of localization processes in semiconductor superlattices and
their applications to ultra-fast opto-electronic switches. The fourth area of
the research is an investigation of all-optical switching and frequency
conversion components and devices based on cascaded second-order nonlinearity.