* 9530824
* Physical and Biological Controls of CO2 Levels in the       Southern Ocean: A Multi-Tracer Approach
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Paul Quay, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 08/31/1999
* USD 200,000.00

9530824 Quay This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a threeyear effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of two ships, the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the
R/V Thompson. The Southern Ocean has been implicated, by ocean models, as an
important region of oceanic uptake of anthropogenically produced carbon dioxide.
There is however, little data to corroborate these model predictions. There are
three characteristics of the Southern Ocean that likely have a major impact on
the strength of this region as a carbon dioxide sink: deep waters upwell close
the surface, high wind speeds cause rapid air-sea exchange of heat and gases,
and biological productivity occurs both in the open ocean and at the ice edge.
The interplay between these three processes controls the surface carbon dioxide
concentrations and thus the direction and magnitude of air- sea gas exchange.
This project will use a combination of chemical measurements and a wind-driven
circulation model to determine how deep water upwelling in this region exchanges
carbon dioxide with the surface layer, and how air-sea exchange and biological
productivity offset the effects of upwelling on the surface carbon dioxide
levels. The measurement and modeling activities will yield a quantitative explan
ation of how the air-sea flux of carbon dioxide in the Southern Ocean is
affected by circulation, gas exchange and biological productivity. The model
results will be used to predict how the surface carbon dioxide levels and the
ratio of carbon isotopes in the dissolved inorganic carbon pool of the ocean
respond to changes in circulation rates and pathways caused by different
atmospheric conditions. These results will help reconstructions of past
conditions of CO2 levels in the Southern Ocean that are based on proxy
measurements in marine sediments and continental ice cores. ***