* 9530961
* The Distribution of Iron and Other Reactive Trace Metals    in Contrasting Productivity Zones of the Antarctic Polar    Front During the U.S. JGOFS Southern Oceans Process Study
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Christopher Measures, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Donald L. Rice
* 11/30/2000
* USD 324,994.00

9530961 Measures Antarctic waters are generally characterised by low standing
stocks of phytoplankton and low rates of primary production despite the
abundance of inorganic nutrients in the water column. Many researchers have
speculated on the deficiency of iron in these waters to explain this paradox but
no conclusive evidence of the importance of iron or its mechanisms in
stimulating productivity have been presented. The major goals of the JGOFS
Southern Ocean Process Study are, in part, to unravel the factors and processes
that regulate the magnitude and variability of primary productivity and use this
knowledge to determine the response of the Southern Ocean to naturally occurring
climate changes both in the past and in the future. In this study, the principal
investigation will measure iron and other reactive trace metals in the water
column of various productivity regimes of the Polar frontal region of the
Southern Ocean. These measurements will be used to further our understanding of
the supply and distribution of iron in Antarctic waters and, in concert with the
measurements of other P.I.'s its importance in affecting the structure of the
microbial food web and the dynamics of the various biogeochemical cycles in the
water column. As the complex role that iron plays in the magnitude and sequence
of biological processes becomes better understood, these measurements will grow
in importance in modelling the interaction of iron and its biological effects
and indirectly, its impact in global biogeochemical cycles.