* 9530917
* Global Controllability and Stabilization of Bilinear SystemsWith Applications To Large Power Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Ronald Mohler, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Marija Ilic
* 12/31/1999
* USD 171,473.00

9530917 Mohler The aim of this research is to develop a new global
controllability and stabilization methodology for multidimensional
nonhomogeneous time-invariant bilinear systems (BLS) with applications to large
power transmission networks, particularly Flexible AC Transmission Systems
(FACTS). A through understanding of the qualitative behavior of a dynamic system
is the foundation of all the methods for controllability and stabilization
studies. To this end, the basis for this proposal is formed by a new method
recently introduced by the proposers to study the global qualitative behavior of
BLS. Its core is a nonlinear decomposition technique converting the study into
the analysis of the qualitative behavior of a finite number of the corresponding
"basic" uncontrolled systems. The work assumes the unboundedness of (otherwise
finite) control. One of the goals of this proposal is to refine this technique
and to distinguish the conditions under which the goal controllability can be
achieved (in infinite time) by bounded finite controls (which is the main
practical requirement). The intent here is to focus on the 3-D case and to give
its complete solution in terms of eigenvectors and eigenfunctions of the
matrices involved. In turns out that the aforementioned qualitative method fits
quite nicely to the analysis of some multidimensional nonlinear dynamic systems
controlled via multipliers (coefficients), 9530917 including large power
transmission networks. The latter systems are of great practical importance and
were the subject of intensive studies for numerous researchers and practical
engineers from the turn of the century. On the other hand, in relation to the
topic of this proposal, mostly additive damping and local controllability were
considered. The emphasis of this proposed research is given to the global
aspects of reachability and controllability, and stabilization (these are
closely related) via multipliers/coefficients. This type of control structure is
motivated by numerous adaptive system applications such as FACTS, which play an
important role in enhancing dynamic performance of modern power systems and can
increase transient stability margins. To our knowledge, very little is known
about the questions which this proposal addresses. The research proposed here
can be split into two parts. We start, on the other hand, with the analysis
making use of unbounded controls as traditionally assumed unavoidable in general
global studies. On the other hand, taking into account that practical controls
are normally finite and may be even of a certain sign, we also introduce these
assumptions for the aforementioned unbounded controls. The idea of this approach
is that if a global controllability/reachability/stabilization result holds for
unbounded (but finite, say nonnegative) controls, then one can expect/show it to
be true in the local aspect (not necessarily small) for the real device of
restricted capability. Yet it is of particular interest, however, to
distinguish, based on the proposed methodology, the cases when the global result
can be achieved by bounded controls. ***