* 9530609
* Distribution, Sources and Sinks of Dissolved Organic        Matter in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Edward Peltzer, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/1999
* USD 342,538.00

9530609 Peltzer This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment of the Joint Global Ocean Flux Study. The Southern Ocean Experiment
is a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to track the
flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the air-ocean
interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment. The
experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V Thompson.
The five principal objectives of this component are (1) to determine via
shipboard measurement of both dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and total organic
carbon (TOC), and the spatial and temporal distribution of dissolved organic
matter (DOM) in the Southern Ocean; (2) to identify the sites of net DOM
production and export; (3) to estimate rates of net DOM production and export;
(4) to estimate rates of bacterial remineralization of DOM; and (5) to place
these rates in the context of the global carbon cycle. The net rates of DOM
production and consumption will be estimated by a combination of in situ
measurements and shipboard incubation experiments. Large scale rates will be
calculated from a combination of simple box and advection-diffusion models.
Routine sample collection will be accomplished via small water samples drawn
from 10 liter Niskin bottles on the CTD rosette. This work will have an emphasis
on making large- scale surveys and repeating these surveys on a seasonal basis,
and will be conducted in collabora tion with a complementary study that
emphasizes process-oriented measurements of bacterial remineralization rates.
The Southern Ocean is the only JGOFS study site where the vertical stability is
low, and where intermediate and deep water masses are being formed. This
situation allows the direct observation of the rate at which DOM is sequestered
in the deep ocean. ***