* 9530174
* Knowledge Pollution
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/1996,04/30/1999
* Thomas Nickles, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 04/30/1999
* USD 85,000.00

The fallibility of scientists and technologists and the fragility of their
results is attested by science studies experts. But how fragile are they? Can we
`break` or otherwise eliminate a piece of knowledge should we want to? Could we
eliminate some physical knowledge necessary to making the bomb, say, without
seriously disturbing the rest of modern physics and technology? If so, how? To
rephrase the question, can we imagine future scientific developments that would
undermine our present ability to make nuclear weapons or to make 133 MHz Pentium
processors? The difficulty of finding affirmative answers to such questions may
give us exactly the opposite impression, that such scientific and technical
knowledge is so firmly entrenched that we could not eliminate it even if we
wanted to. Here the progress of knowledge begins to resemble a ratchet wheel
that irreversibly locks each technical advance in place. Once achieved,
knowledge comes to seem indestructible, at least by epistemically interesting
means, and the progress of this sort of knowledge appears to be cumulative. Dr.
Nickles argues that `knowledge pollution` or, more prosaically, the organization
and control of knowledge, is a fruitful theme or tool with which to explore many
philosophical, historical, and sociological issues related to the growth of
modern science. It may be viewed as a probe by means of which to quasi-
experimentally study scientific research itself. But it also applies to problems
of knowing too much, that is, problems of knowledge or information management at
the frontiers of scientific and technological research. Difficulties at the
frontier are as much a matter of knowing too much as knowing too little. Dr.
Nickles' central claim is that the problem of inquiry cannot be solved without
simultaneously solving the problem of dis-inquiry. Traditionally, the question
has been how systematic `scientific` inquiry is possible at all, how to get from
zero knowledge to any knowledge at all; whereas in fact, researchers typically
are overwhelmed by potentially relevant `knowledge,` and the problem is to
eliminate, suppress, or filter out all but the most salient bits for the task at
hand. Even to formulate a good, doable problem requires such reduction. It is
perhaps trivial to say that every methodology, institutional arrangements, and
piece of research can be illuminated by looking at it in terms of knowledge
organization and control - how knowledge is accredited, stored, retrieved,
distributed, suppressed, etc. by individuals, communities, institutions and
technologies. The second central claim or hypothesis of this project is that the
`knowledge pollution` approach throws important new light on these issues. Dr.
Nickles is undertaking a series of critical studies from the knowledge-
management perspective, on various aspects of scientific research and their
treatment in previous methodological writings. His focus is on selected problems
at the frontier, e.g., problem formulation and heuristic appraisal, as well as
on related issues of the cumulativity of knowledge and the unity of science.