* 9530650
* Solution and Gas-Phase Photochemistry Involving Multiple    and Delocalized Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 01/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Harry Morrison, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 06/30/1999
* USD 327,000.00

Professor Harry Morrison of Purdue University will conduct a project with
funding from the Organic Dynamics Program of the Chemistry Division emphasizing
the study of the limitations and consequences of movement of electronic energy
through `photonic wires.` These are assemblies of chromophores pendant on or
incorporated into a passive framework, and in particular in the present case the
passive framework is the steroid ring system. The transfer of electronic
excitation absorbed by `antenna` chromophores to distal, formally unconjugated,
groups may produce chemistry or quenching, depending on the groups, and
Professor Morrison will be determining the ground rules for each. The study will
be complemented by parallel theoretical and experimental studies intended to
determine the role of through space mixing of orbitals in determining such
ground rules. These studies will be accomplished in part by cooperative studies
with senior collaborators at other institutions. An added effort will be made to
understand the role of the second excited singlet state in indene
photochemistry. The use of light in information transmission, storage, and
retrieval is changing modern society. This project will generate basic results
pertinent to the ability to use light in modulation of information transmission
on the scale of an organic molecule. It will also support experimental results
with theoretical calculations which allow a generalized picture to be developed.