* 9530057
* Ontogeny and Dynamics of Cnidarian-Algal Symbioses
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Mary Alice Coffroth, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 03/31/2000
* USD 314,763.00

9530057 Coffroth Symbioses between cnidarians and dinoflagellates in the genus
Symbiodinium are widespread in the marine environment. Their importance to reef-
building corals and reef nutrient cycles is well documented, but surprisingly
little is known about the ontogency of the symbiosis and the demographics of
zooxanthellae populations within their hosts. An understanding of these
processes is essential to understanding the symbiosis. Physiologic adaptations
to conditions such as temperature and light may in fact be mediated by the
demographics of the algal symbionts. The objective of this researech is to
determine the ontogeny of the symbiosis in a gorgonian coral that produces
azooxanthellate planulae larvae. Dr. Coffroth will examine initial
zooxanthellate infection in planulae larvae and characterized the population
structure of the zooxanthellae in established symbioses in adult colonies. These
data will determine whether the observed host-algal association are the result
of selection (mediated by the host or alga), stochastic process or simply
suitability of the host "habitat" to the alga. Understanding the population
dynamics of zooxanthellae communities has important ramifications for studying
the symbiosis and how the symbiosis responds to environmental changes. It is now
recognized that zooxanthellae are a diverse group. If this diversity is
widespread among single host colonies or if the association is in a state of
continual flux, then changes in functional and physiologic traits may reflect
changes in the algal community structure. In this case it will be critical to
examine each component of the symbiosis and consider the population dynamics and
ecological responses of both the coral and the algae to understand and preserve
reef ecosystems. The first step, however, is to quantify this diversity a nd
address how this diversity is established.