* 9530370
* Seabed Slope Processes in Deep Water Continental Margin,    Northwest Gulf of Mexico
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2002
* William Bryant, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Barbara Karn
* 08/31/2002
* USD 421,088.00

9530370 Dunlap Natural resources recovery, including offshore oil and gas is the
most important economic activity in the United States Exclusive Economic Zone.
Many technical constraints must be faced as the industry moves toward sites on
the continental slope and rise where seabed processes are complex. The objective
of this research project is to understand the fundamental linkages between
engineering properties of slope sediments, environmental forcing functions, and
downslope processes; and to develop the capability of predicting the range of
seabed processes. The program is theoretical as well as an integrated
combination of field, laboratory, and modeling efforts. A corridor 2000m wide by
100 nm long, of the seabed in the northwest Gulf of Mexico has been selected
extending from water depths of 1000 to 3000m. This corridor encompasses a wide
range of seabed processes including mass wasting and creep, faulting, diapirism,
sediment flows, and related processes such as fluid expulsion and depressions
(basins) associated with halokinesis. The field work during the first year
entails two research cruise expeditions: the first to obtain detailed acoustic
subbottom information and side-scan sonar seafloor images within the corridor
and the second to obtain large-diameter undisturbed core samples to depths of 25
to 30m subbottom and to conduct in situ geotechnical tests. The comprehensive
laboratory testing program focuses on determining the pertinent geotechnical
properties and parameters necessary for the analysis/modeling portion of the
research. Essentially all the instrumentation is available for the experimental
studies. The laboratory program will include determination of constitutive
models to characterize the engineering behavior of the various sediments from
very slow deformations (creep), static stress strain properties, and flow
properties. The material models and parameters will then be incorporated in
available computer models to chara cterize and study the full range of seabed
processes that are encountered within the corridor site. The expected result
will be the ability to predict the range of seabed processes at work on the
continental slope of the Gulf of Mexico. ***