* 9530885
* Dissertation Research:  An Archaeological Investigation of  the Social and Economic Organization of a State-Initiated   Town and Temple Complex in Second Millenium Egypt
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/1996,08/31/1997
* David O'Connor, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/1997
* USD 11,840.00

Under the direction of Dr. David O'Connor Mr. Josef Wegner will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He and his colleagues will analyze data collected
during his 1994 field season at the site of Abydos in Southern Egypt. During the
Middle Kingdom period, ca. 2040-1650 B.C. the site of Abydos, a large regional
center, underwent major change as it was incorporated in the kingdom of Egypt.
Local cult and religious institutions underwent significant alteration and Mr.
Wegner wishes to understand the nature of these changes. His fieldwork to date
has focused on a residential area which is associated with temples built during
this transition period and the material which he has collected will permit him
to examine how these religious structures were managed and integrated into the
broader community. Through the analysis of ceramics, seal impressions and other
materials such as stone tools and floral and faunal remains, Mr. Wegner will
address three issues: 1. community organization - the range of personnel and
activities centered on town and temple and the relationship between the two; 2.
the methods by which the settlement and temples sustained themselves and how
this changed over time; 3. the nature of royal and state interest in Abydos and
the degree of central control the central government exercised. Although the
immediate focus of this research is on religion, the underlying goals lie in the
realm of political science. Mr. Wegner wishes to understand how, in early
states, large and diverse subject populations are controlled and integrated into
the larger economic and political whole. Anthropologists have argued that
control and manipulation of pre-existing social and ideational structures such
as religions institutions can play a central role and it appears likely that
this occurred at Abydos. Through his analysis Mr. Wegner can examine one
particular case examine the mechanisms which governed this interaction and see
how they changed over time. This research is important for several reasons. It
will provide data of interest to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on
the mechanisms which led to the growth of early states and it will assist in the
training of a promising young scientist.