* 9530737
* Firn Properties and Processes at Shallow Coring Sites in    Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Mary Albert, Department of Army Cold Regions Research & Engineering Lab
* Interagency Agreement
* Jane V. Dionne
* 04/30/1998
* USD 67,272.00

The proposed project examines physical processes that affect the manner in
which heat, vapor, and chemical species in air are incorporated into snow and
polar firn. The processes include diffusion and advection, the transport of
heat, vapor, and chemical species by air flow within snow and firn. An
understanding of these processes is important because they control grain growth,
snow metamorphism, and the rate at which chemical species in the atmosphere
become incorporated into the snow and firn, and thus will affect interpretation
of polar ice core data. The objectives of the project are to define the
magnitude and extent, both in space and time, of these transfer processes, and
to develop a process-level understanding and modeling capability of the
phenomena within the snow and firn. The approach is to conduct field studies at
sites where shallow cores and meteorological data are being obtained on the
Greenland Ice Sheet to determine the spatial and temporal extent fro key
parameters, and boundary conditions needed to model the conduction and advection
of heat, mass and chemical species within the firn. An existing multidimensional
numerical model is being expanded to simulate the processes and serve as the
basis for ongoing and future work in transport and distribution of chemical
species. Currently interpretation of the polar ice core data assumes that
diffusion controls the rate at which chemical species are incorporated into the
firn. The proposed project will determine the site-specific extent of
ventilation in the firn, and will provide a model for multidimensional diffusion
and ventilation on grain growth, sublimation rates, and chemical species
transport.