* 9530379
* Proxies of Past Changes in Southern Ocean Productivity:     Modeling and Experimental Development
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2002
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/2002
* USD 532,000.00

9530379 Anderson This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three- year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. This component is a study of how naturally radioactive material in the
ocean sediment may be used to reconstruct the flux of biogenic material through
the water column to the sediment, and by inference, the productivity of the
surface layers. There is evidence that the current surface conditions of high
nutrient levels, but low chlorophyll levels do not extend back into colder
climatic epochs, and that an examination of radionuclides may allow the
reconstruction of rates of paleoproductivity. Two aspects of the biogeochemical
cycling and physical transport of radionuclide tracers in the modern ocean will
be investigated. In the first part, the concentration of a series of natural
radionuclide tracers (thorium-230, protactinium-231, and Beryllium-10) in the
Southern Ocean will be measured for their scavenging behavior both in the water
column and in particulate material collected by sediment traps. The goal is to
test the proposed use of radionuclide ratios as proxy variables for the export
flux. In the second part, the concentration values will be introduced into an
ocean general circulat ion model to evaluate the transport of radionuclides by
the ocean circulation on scales that are larger than the spatial gradients in
particle flux. These combined efforts will better define our ability to use
radionuclide ratios to evaluate past changes in ocean productivity, and improve
our understanding of the response of ocean productivity to climate variability.
***