* 9530155
* IAI Workshop: Hydroclimatology and Dynamics of the Rio dela Plata System and the Patos-Mirim Complex and their Influence on the Fluxes and Productivity of the Adjacent Shelf Waters
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1998
* Gustavo Nagy, Caruso Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 05/31/1998
* USD 49,524.00

9530155 Nagy The main objective of this proposal is the planning for the
development of a regional research program to improve our understanding of the
Rio de la Plata System and Patos-Mirim Complex. This program will be focused on
the inputs and fluxes in these systems, and on the influences of their outflow
on the productivity and salt budget of adjacent shelf waters. The research
program will also involve the design of an integrated system to monitor
hydrological, meteorological and oceanic variables, as well as a framework to
archive and disseminate data in a timely manner to scientists in the region and
elsewhere. Finally, the research program will involve the development,
adaptation and validation of various models that would provide not only insight
on the systems, but also a forecasting capability useful for resource management
or policy making. The basis of this proposal is an integrated approach, that
takes into account the physical relationships between the hydrology and
climatology in this region for the assessment of its response to the variability
of fluxes at different time and space scales. To accomplish this, three
principal themes have been identified that will constitute the axes of
discussion: modeling, monitoring, and process studies. The scientific objectives
will be related with one or more of these topics. The planning process involved
in this proposal will include a survey of ongoing research activities, plans,
interests, and capabilities in the region, so that activities can be
coordinated, and overlapping or redundant efforts avoided. In this effort, this
proposal will benefit from ongoing IAI activities. This proposal will involve
three workshop to facilitate the participation by a wide spectrum of regional
scientists in the preparation of an IAI Phase II proposal. This project proposes
the planning of an interdisciplinary and integrated research program, focused on
the study of fluxes of the Rio de la Plata system and the Patos-Mirim Complex, a
nd their influence on the hydrodynamics and biological processes of the adjacent
shelf waters. The scientific and technical support, the specific objectives and
the appropriate methodologies will be discussed in the context of an integrated
approach comprising the efforts of the countries involved: Uruguay, Brazil, and
Argentina. Extra-regional partners from the United States also participate in
this planning effort. At the end of the one-year period, an IAI Phase II
proposal will be completed. This proposal assembles a diverse team of
investigators from both academic and governmental institutions in Uruguay,
Argentina, Brazil, and the United States. These countries are Member States of
the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues
among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI. ***