* 9530826
* Hormone-Behavior Adaptations in Arctic Birds
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* John Wingfield, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/2000
* USD 504,236.00

Arctic breeding birds arrive on their nesting grounds at a time when weather
conditions may still be extreme (low temperature, snow). However, the brief
arctic summer requires that they begin nesting as early as possible to take
advantage of the ephemeral abundance of food to feed young. Failure to adhere to
this rigid schedule results in drastically reduced reproductive success.
Hormone-behavior adaptations that maximize survival and reproductive success
under the extreme conditions of the Arctic are the focus of this proposal. It
has been shown that the interrelationships between testosterone and territorial
aggression are diverse, especially as birds arrive on the arctic breeding
grounds. In some species territoriality is extremely brief, following which
birds apparently become refractory to the effects of testosterone. Others are
territorial throughout the breeding season, but the dependence of these
behaviors upon testosterone activation remains unclear. Aggressive behavior of
between four and seven arctic breeding passerines displaying different types of
territoriality will be compared. Temporal patterns of testosterone in relation
to patterns of aggressive behavior and the effects of manipulating testosterone
level will also be determined. Additionally, these species will be compared with
their closest relatives breeding at mid-latitudes (i.e. matched pairwise
comparisons to avoid confounding issues relating to phylogenetic relationships).
In this way it is possible to determine the ecological bases of different types
of territorial behavior and interrelationships with testosterone, as well as
indicate potential specializations of arctic breeding birds. The same spectra of
species in the Arctic and at mid-latitudes will be used to compare
adrenocortical responses to stress. Extensive data now indicate that arctic
birds modulate the secretion of corticosterone in response to a standardized
capture stress protocol as a function of latitude and stage in the breeding
cycle. This is thought to be an adaptation to allow onset of territorial
behavior and breeding in the face of potentially stressful conditions. Both
arctic and mid-latitude species will be compared. Behavioral and physiological
responses to corticosterone treatment will be determined within these species
comparisons to indicate how endocrine mechanisms may vary in relation to
latitude and other ecological factors. Finally, laboratory experiments will
assess the number and distribution of receptors for testosterone (and possible
metabolites) and corticosterone in the central nervous system. This unique
approach of field experiments to compare types of territorial behavior in arctic
and mid-latitude passerines, effects of hormones and stress, and ultimately the
related distribution of hormone receptors in the brain will not only pinpoint
specific adaptations for birds breeding in the Arctic, but will have
significance for the regulation of reproductive processes of vertebrates in
general.