* 9530857
* History of Quaternary Ice Sheets on Arctic Islands, Phase 1: Integrated Approach Using Dating of Terrestrial Glacial    Deposits, Glacially Abraded Bedrock and Marine Shorelines
* GEO,OPP
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2000
* Marek Zreda, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 06/30/2000
* USD 342,950.00

The extent of arctic ice sheets during the last glaciation is among the most
controversial issues in arctic glacial geology, paleoglaciology and
paleoclimatology. One of the main reasons is our inability to accurately date
terrestrial deposits that define ancient ice margins. The in situ accumulation
of cosmogenic nuclides can be used to approach this problem. In this study,
cosmogenic surface exposure dating methods will be used to reconstruct the
history of the last arctic ice sheets. The main goals of the proposed integrated
study are to provide clear evidence either for or against the existence of the
Innuitian Ice Sheet in the late Quaternary, to reconstruct the history of the
last ice sheets, from their birth until today, and to determine the duration of
ice-free period before the last glaciation started. The investigation will
obtain cosmogenic surface exposure ages for glacial deposits and polished
bedrock in northwestern Greenland, eastern Ellesmere Island and several small
islands between them, western Ellesmere and eastern Axel Heiberg islands, Devon,
Baffin, Cornwallis, Somerset, Bathurst, Prince Patrick and Ellef Ringness
islands. They will also obtain cosmogenic and radiocarbon ages for raised marine
shorelines in order to reconstruct the history of sea level changes at these
locations. The results will provide the much needed chronologic control for the
late Quaternary glaciations in arctic islands. The results will also have
important implications for paleoclimatologic studies because of a possibility to
establish whether or not there was a connection between the Arctic Ocean and
Baffin Bay during the last glaciation.