* 9530091
* Quantification of Urban Climate Perturbations Using Infrared Images of Surface Temperature
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1997
* Benedicte Dousset-Flament, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Thomas R. Leinbach
* 10/31/1997
* USD 22,999.00

This Research Planning Grant will be used to develop an algorithm to adapt
broad-coverage AVHRR (Advance Very High Resolution Radiometer) satellite data to
examine urban microclimatology, by connecting results from the more easily
correctable but less available ATSR (Along Track Scanning Radiometer) data from
the European Remote Sensing Satellite. The correction will make use of the
ATSR's dual-track viewing angle, which allows a correction of temperature
measurements by considering the absorption of infrared radiation by atmospheric
water vapor, even with the emissivity variations of land sites. By linking the
more frequently captured AVHRR data to the ATSR data, the PI will be able to
determine the proper algorithm needed to convert AVHRR data to surface
temperatures. This would allow the PI to propose a more accurate and wide-
ranging study of the physical processes that yield the urban heat-island effect.
The proposed correction will be difficult to achieve. If the PI can do it, this
should allow the widely available AVHRR data to be used in a greater range of
research applications. The future work proposed by the investigator is on energy
exchange in the atmosphere directly above urban areas. This is itself important
to the understanding of human-systems' influence on the physical environment as
a direct measurement and because it affects our interpretation of more macro-
scale measurements of temperature fluctuation.