* 9530140
* IAI Workshop:  Climate Variability in Southeastern South    America and Applications
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Moacir Berlato, Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,150.00

Author: pfilmer@nsf.gov (Paul E. Filmer) at NOTE Date: 7/22/96 4:14 PM Priority:
Normal TO: jmayi at nsf12 Subject: Abstract for Berlato (9530140)
------------------------------- Message Contents -------------------------------
--========================_12145620==_ Content-Type: text/plain; charset="us-
ascii" --========================_12145620==_ Content-Type: text/plain;
name="AB30140.DOC"; charset="us-ascii" Content-Disposition: attachment;
filename="AB30140.DOC" 9530140 Berlato This proposal requests support for a
series of workshops in order to organize a program of cooperation between
universities in Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay for the study of the climate of
Southeastern South America and the impact of interannual variability,
specifically the ENSO phenomenon, on the water resources and agriculture of the
region. The workshops will address the current understanding of the links
between sea surface temperature anomalies in the Pacific and climate forecasts
for the region; past experiences with applications of ENSO-related rain
forecasts through programs like the IRICP Pilot Program; identification of the
key sectors in agriculture and water resources that could benefit from the
forecasts; discussion of data availability and accessibility in the region;
training and education aspects; and the dissemination of results. This proposal
includes participants from Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay. Scientific advice
will be provided from experts at UCLA and Texas A&M University from the United
States. These countries are members of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate
global change research among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The
National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry
out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. %%% This proposal requests support
for a series of workshops in order to organize a program of cooperation between
universities in Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay for the study of the climate of
Southeastern South America and the impact of interannual variability,
specifically the ENSO phenomenon, on the water resources and agriculture of the
region. This proposal includes participants from Argentina, Brazil, and Uruguay.
Scientific advice will be provided from experts at UCLA and Texas A&M University
from the United States. These countries are members of the IAI, an initiative to
stimulate global change research among the scientific institutions of the
Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government
agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***
--========================_12145620==_--