* 9530662
* Numerical Modeling of Mesoscale Airflow Over Mountains
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1996,10/31/1999
* Dale Durran, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 10/31/1999
* USD 341,533.00

9530662 Durran Mountains exert a profound influence on the earth's weather and
climate. The Principal Investigator will investigate two types of terrain-
induced atmospheric phenomena through a series of numerical simulations. One
focus of this effort will be to investigate the three-dimensional response of
the cross-mountain flow to mountain wave generation and breakdown. The second
focus will be to determine the relative importance of gap winds and downslope
winds in the generation of strong orographically-forced surface winds.
Atmospheric scientists have long been aware that orographically generated
gravity waves may exert an important drag on the atmosphere. Early discussions
of this phenomena date back to the late 1950's. Continued interest in gravity
wave drag (GWD) has been fueled by experiments with high-resolution general
circulation models, which suggest that the inclusion of GWD parameterizations in
such models can significantly improve the simulated climatology of the zonally
averaged westerly winds and the surface pressure fields. GWD parameterizations
are now standard features in most high-resolution general circulation and
medium-range weather forecast models, yet the nature of the mesoscale
atmospheric response to GWD forcing remains largely unexplored. Recent results
obtained by the Principal Investigator under prior NSF support suggest that the
mean-flow deceleration that develops in response to gravity wave drag is spread
over a surprising large spatial domain upstream and downstream from the
mountain. These results also suggested that a different diagnostic variable, the
pseudomomentum, could provide a better description of the local response to
gravity wave drag. The Principal Investigator's previous results were obtained
using a high-resolution two-dimensional numerical model. These investigations
will be extended to three dimensions using a newly developed 3D nested-grid
model. As part of the proposed research, the Principal Investigator will also
derive expressions for the pseudomomentum in 3D compressible stratified flow
using Hamiltonian fluid dynamics. Strong surface winds can be generated by the
interaction of the synoptic-scale flow and topography through two different
mechanisms: gap winds and downslope winds. Gap winds are produced when air is
forced through a narrow break in a mountain barrier. Examples of this occur in
the Columbia River gorge and in the mistral, which blows through the Rhone
valley of France. Strong downslope winds may be generated when the air flows
across mountains without significant cross-mountain gaps; examples include the
Rocky Mountain Chinook and the Croatian Bora. In still other cases, such as the
strong easterly winds that blow from the Cascades toward the town of Enumclaw,
Washington, the distinction between gap winds and downslope winds is not so
clear. Previous research with a shallow-water model has suggested that the gap
wind mechanism is more effective on large spatial scales (very broad mountain
ranges pierced by a gap) whereas the downslope wind mechanism is most effective
on small spatial scales (narrow ridges). These early results will be extended to
three dimensions and to a variety of more realistic atmospheric configurations,
using the new 3D nested grid model. As before, the goal will be to characterize
the large-scale forcing with a minimal number of dynamical and terrain-shape
parameters and to systematically investigate the sensitivity of gap winds and
downslope winds to variations in these parameters. Possible synergetic
combinations of the two wind regimes will also be investigated. ***