* 9530069
* RUI:  Flux of Dissolved Organic Carbon in Coastal Rainwater
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Robert Kieber, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/1999
* USD 236,465.00

9530069 Willey The project investigates the chemical composition of rainwater
samples collected at a coastal location in Wilmington, NC, and relates
variations in the concentrations of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) to air mass
origin. The Wilmington site (UNCW) is suited for wet deposition research because
it receives precipitation from continental and maritime storms. The decade of
rainwater research conducted by the PI at the Wilmington site shows the chemical
composition of rain from the two storm types to differ with respect to pH,
inorganic ions, formic and acetic acids, and during cold seasons, hydrogen
peroxide concentrations. Results obtained from the project will help to quantify
levels of DOC that are removed from the atmosphere through wet deposition. This
information is relevant to processes affecting carbon accumulation in the
atmosphere. As a Research in Undergraduate Institutions (RUI) Activity, the
three-year project will support one graduate student full-time (masters level),
and six undergraduate students as summer research assistants. Student assistants
will be involved in sample collection, chemical analysis, and data
interpretation relating to precipitation events. The UNCW rainwater project has
been an effective mechanism for training undergraduates in an applied area of
analytical chemical research. The project will continue to make significant
contributions to the development of human resources in science. *** ATM-9530069