* 9530595
* Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Model Chemical      Reactions Under Variable Pressure and Temperature
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Dor Ben-Amotz, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 07/31/2000
* USD 309,000.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Ben-Amotz will study the influence of solute-solvent interactions on
chemical reactions using pressure- and temperature-dependent optical
spectroscopic studies as well as theoretical modeling. Dissociation,
isomerization, and ion-pairing model reactions will be studied, and changes in
the equilibrium constants for model reactions will be measured in organic
solvents as well as in supercritical argon, xenon, and water using high-pressure
Raman, FTIR, and UV/visible spectroscopies in diamond anvil supercritical fluid
pressure cells. The results will be used to test theoretical models derived from
liquid perturbation theory using both a first-principles approach as well as a
semi-empirical perturbed hard fluid (PHF) model. Predicted and experimental
results will be compared over a wide pressure and temperature range in both
liquid and supercritical fluid solvents. The value of using predictive models to
calculate properties of systems, especially those under extreme conditions of
temperature or pressure, has become widely recognized by engineers. These
studies will contribute to our ability to predict chemical reaction equilibria
under increasingly extreme and complex condensed phase conditions. The results
of this work are likely to be important to industrial chemical synthesis, waste
recovery, and separation technologies.