* 9530710
* RUI:  Radio Studies of the Interstellar Medium and Pulsars
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2001
* Joel Weisberg, Carleton College
* Continuing grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 05/31/2001
* USD 143,716.00

Weisberg AST-9530710 Radioastronomical studies of the interstellar medium and
pulsars will be carried out. Observations will be conducted at the Arecibo
Observatory in Puerto Rico, the Parkes radio telescope in Australia, the Green
Bank Telescope in West Virginia, and the Very Large Array in New Mexico. In
particular, the upgraded Arecibo Observatory telescope and the Green Bank
Telescope will be highly sensitive instruments that will enable one to make much
more sensitive observations than previously possible. The interstellar medium
studies are divided into three main categories: In the first, neutral hydrogen
line absorption spectra of distant pulsars will be obtained and measured and
kinematic distances will be determined from these spectra. The electron
densities along the pulsar-Earth lines of sight will then be derived from
distances and dispersion measures, and models of the Galactic distribution of
electrons will be compared with these results. In the second category, the
spatial structure and physical properties of interstellar hydrogen will be
studied with neutral hydrogen line absorption measurements of high- latitude and
nearby pulsars and recombination line observations in the directions of pulsars.
The third category consists of studies of the Galactic magnetic field through
Faraday rotation measurements of polarized pulsar signals. Temporal and small-
scale spatial variations will be studied in one experiment, while the broad
structure of the magnetic field will be investigated in another. There are also
three main categories of intrinsic pulsar investigations: First, full Stokes
parameter pulsar polarization profiles will be measured and calibrated, and
morphological classifications will be assigned on the basis of these and all
other published observations. Second, polarized profiles will be examined for
temporal variations that could indicate free precession or intrinsic beam
changes as well as the Galactic magnetic field variations di scussed above.
Third, the emission beam geometry will be studied via empirical/geometrical
analyses and fits of the rotating vector model to measured position angles.
Undergraduate students at Carleton College will be involved in the research
program.