* 9530746
* Oxygen Dynamics During the JGOFS Southern Ocean Process     Study
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2001
* Mary-Lynn Dickson, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 06/30/2001
* USD 434,240.00

95-30746 BENDER This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. One of
the primary goals of the JGOFS program in general, and of the Southern Ocean
initiative in particular, is to constrain the carbon flux in order to evaluate
whether this region is a net sink or source of carbon. Interest in this program
is directed towards gaining an understanding of the environmental factors that
affect rates of primary production and the extrapolation of these rates over
broad spatial and temporal scales. Research will focus on using oxygen to
constrain carbon fluxes on three scales; large, meso and local. 1) For the large
scale, air samples will be collected and the O2/N2 ratio will be measured.
Oxygen concentrations in the atmosphere vary on seasonal time scales due to
primary production in the spring and summer months and ventilation of the ocean
in the fall and winter. Thus knowledge of the amplitude of the O2/N2 signal will
provide a measure of the magnitude and timing of net production for the Southern
Ocean. Air samples will be collected daily from ships that will participate in
the JGOFS experiment to have high resolution records of zonal and temporal
variations of the atmospheric oxygen field over the Southern Ocean. 2)
Similarly, net primary productivity will be determined from the mesoscale oxygen
field in two ways: first by measurement of O2/Ar ratios and del 18O of O2 in
seawater collected from the mixed layer and second by continually measuring
subsurface oxygen concentrations along the cruise track. These two approaches,
together with the air sampling program, wi ll provide a temporally and spatially
integrated estimate of net production. 3) Carbon flow will be constrained by
undertaking daily measurements of gross and net oxygen production, and nitrate
assimilation. Gross oxygen production is calculated by spiking and incubating
seawater samples with 18O-labelled water and measuring the del 18O of the
photosynthetically produced oxygen. Net oxygen production is measured by
comparing the relative change in the oxygen concentration between initial and
incubated samples by automated high precision Winkler titrations. These
measurements will provide daily depth integrated gross and net production rates
in addition to respiration rates. Furthermore, photosynthesis-irradiance
experiments will measure gross and net production during cruises to extrapolate
local measurements up to meso and large scale using bio-optical data from
moorings and satellites.