* 9530619
* A Search for Extra-Solar-System Planets Using Multi-Color   Microlensing Detection Techniques
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Darren DePoy, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Vernon Pankonin
* 07/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

95-30619 DePoy Dr. DePoy and his Co-Principal Investigator, Dr. Andrew P. Gould,
will carry out a 3-year search for extra-solar planets. The search will be based
on a multi-color microlensing detection technique (see below). The instrument to
be used is the Ohio State Infrared Imager and Spectrometer, which was built with
previous NSF grants (AST 90-16112 to J. A. Frogel and AST 92-18449 to Dr. D. L.
DePoy). Observations will be carried out at the Cerro Tololo Inter-American
(CTIO) Observatory 1-meter telescope. "Microlensing" refers to the magnification
of a background star when it is occulted (or nearly occulted) by a less distant
star. For solar-mass stars, microlensing light curves have time scales of about
two months. If the nearby star has planets, their presence can be inferred by
searching for deviations from the standard microlensing light curve. Such
deviations are expected to reveal themselves in less than a day. Microlensing
searches require nightly photometry of millions of stars and sophisticated data
processing. The investigators will rely on notification from teams that are
already carrying out microlensing surveys in the attempt to detect dark matter
in the universe. Dr. Depoy and his coworkers have close ties to three such
microlensing/dark matter teams. Once a target has been identified, the
investigators will monitor it and look for deviations from the standard
microlensing light curve. Simultaneously, they will take images of the target in
two widely spaced wavelengths. This additional imaging information will allow
them to constrain the masses of both the star and planet, and to determine their
physical separation. They estimate that they may be able to detect 10-20
Jupiter-mass planets during two years of monitoring if all stars have planetary
systems similar to ours. There is a small probability of detecting planets with
masses as low as the earth's. A null-result would allow the investigators to
const rain the existence of planets. ***