* 9530040
* IAI Workshop: Application of Remote Sensing in Microbial    Ecology
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Anwarul Huq, University of Maryland Biotechnology Institute
* Standard Grant
* Paul E Filmer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 42,930.00

9530040 Colwell The association of Vibrio cholerae with plankton has been
demonstrated for geographical regions such as Bangladesh and Latin America, but
the link between plankton blooms and cholera outbreaks is less clear. This
proposal will bring together a team of investigators to compare cholera outbreak
data and satellite imagery of phytoplankton blooms. The satellite imagery will
be coupled with ground measurements of subsequent zooplankton blooms since
phytoplankton blooms almost always precede zooplankton bloom, as observed in
Bangladesh. Productivity of plankton, a part of the global oceanic food chain,
is dependent on temperature and other nutrients present in the environment. It
has been demonstrated that particular bacterial species which are autochthonous
members of marine and estuarine aquatic environments are uniquely associated
with zooplankton that feed on phytoplankton. By measuring the chlorophyll
content of water through remote sensing techniques, it is possible to assess the
phytoplankton population density and thereby estimate the concentration of
bacterial species with which they are associated. Investigators from North and
South America will visit several countries for discussions and carry out
preliminary investigations. All collaborating investigators will meet in
Maryland to make the final preparations for developing a full Phase II proposal
to be submitted to the Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
(IAI). The Phase II proposal will include a 2-3 year study during which an
inverse model will be developed based on the descriptive/quantitative model to
monitor microbial ecosystem from total pigment concentration data. The data will
be used as a tool to predict the emergence of a particular species, e.g. Vibrio
cholerae, in the aquatic environment. %%% The association of the bacterium
Vibrio cholerae with plankton has been demonstrated for geographical regions
such as Bangladesh and Latin America, but the link between plankton blooms and
cholera outbreaks is less clear. This proposal will bring together a team of
investigators to compare cholera outbreak data and satellite imagery of
phytoplankton blooms. The satellite imagery will be coupled with ground
measurements of subsequent zooplankton blooms since phytoplankton blooms almost
always precede zooplankton blooms, as observed in Bangladesh. The PIs will meet
with investigators in South American countries to obtain epidemiological data
for areas along the coasts of South America for evidence of either epidemics or
elevated Vibrio cholerae counts. All collaborating investigators will meet in
Maryland to make the final preparation to develop an Inter-American Institute
for Global Change Research (IAI) Start- Up Grant Phase II proposal. The group of
researchers makes up a strong collaboration among microbiologists, ecologists
and climatologists, and this collaboration will bring a better understanding of
biodiversity and the impact of climate change on cholera epidemiology. By
focusing on cholera epidemics, this collaboration of researchers is addressing a
public health problem affecting many parts of the world, in particular South
America. The researchers of this proposal are from Brazil, Chile, Ecuador,
Mexico, Peru, and the United States. These countries are members of the IAI, an
initiative to stimulate global change research among the scientific institutions
of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the designated U.S.
Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within the IAI. ***