* 9530768
* An Integrated Method for Simultaneous Recognition and       Segmentation of Deformable Objects
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* James Duncan, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 05/31/2000
* USD 245,000.00

This research is primarily aimed at robustly locating deformable
structures/objects of approximately known shape from natural images. The problem
of locating and recognizing underlying object structures in an image is of
importance in many image analysis and computer vision applications including
robot vision, pattern recognition and biomedical image processing. Algorithms
that can reliably perform these basis tasks are at the core of a variety of
systems that will permit humans to more effectively interact with pictorial data
for the purposes of visualization, analysis, control or, as in the case of image
database systems, retrieval of task-specific information within these
applications areas. The robust identification and measurement of such structure
is not always achievable using a single analysis technique that depends on a
single image derived source of information. This is especially true when one is
dealing with a wide range of images obtained under different conditions having
different image content. The approach in this research project utilizes two
different sources of image-derived information: 1.) gray-level gradients and
ii.) homogeneity of intensity or texture elements, etc., as well as model-based
information (i.e approximate object shape). Furthermore, two different
processing methods are combined in this approach, in order to integrate the
above-mentioned information sources: a) regionbased methods, which are primarily
based on homogeneity properties and b.) boundary methods which capitalize on
both gradient (imagederived) and shape (model based) properties. A game
theoretic framework will be used, where, unlike the global objective approach
which is widely used as an integration method in computer vision, the modularity
of the underlying objectives are retained. The integration problem is then
framed as a family of coupled and coex isting objectives whereby the output of
one module depends upon the previous outputs of the other modules. This effort
will build on initial work which has been able to locate structure in two
dimensional images. It will also extend the concept to analyzing three
dimensional image data. Both theoretical and experimental investigations will be
carried out regarding the applicability and the limits of the approach.