* 9530782
* Global Glacier Mass Balance Synthesis
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Richard Armstrong, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,435.00

A global synthesis of glacier mass balance data is proposed, which will include
an evaluation and digitization of measured mass balance data . The mass balance
data set will include three databases: I. annual specific mass balances of all
measured mountain and subpolar glaciers; II. annual accumulation (or winter
balance) and annual ablation (or summer balance); III. winter, summer and annual
mass balance gradients will altitude. These data will be analyzed in several
ways: statistical spatio-temporal analyses of individual glaciers, mountain
ranges and countries, both hemispheric and global; analyses of annual
fluctuations and determination of long-term mass-balance trends; and analyses of
mass balance gradient changes. The main tasks include: (1) Assemble and check
the annual specific mass balance data of all measured glaciers since 1945. (2)
Determine the contribution of glacier changes to sea level, e.g., how much do
different glacier regions contribute to sea-level change? (3) Estimate the
variability of winter and summer balances (or annual accumulation and ablation)
and their impact on annual mass balances in different geographical locations.
(4) Determine the main causes for mass balance changes in different mountain
regions. (5) Analyze mass balance gradients (activity indices) and their changes
in connection with climate change. The end products of this research will
include three mass balance data sets which will be produced at INSTAAR in a form
accessible by the community, and the data report, "Mass balance of mountain and
subpolar glaciers: data and syntheses" which will be published by World Data
Center A Glaciology, University of Colorado, Boulder.