* 9530383
* Collaborative Research: Scotia Arc GPS Project (SCARP)
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Michael Bevis, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Scott Borg
* 05/31/2000
* USD 189,108.00

Lawver and Dalziel OPP 9526687 Bevis OPP 9530383 Smalley OPP 9527529 Abstract
Antarctica is the Earth's most isolated continent. It is surrounded by actively
spreading ridges except in the South American sector. The motion of South
America with respect to Antarctica is latitudinal and left-lateral at
approximately 22 mm per year and is distributed along the boundaries of the
intervening Scotia plate. A prominent but discontinuous bathymetric high known
as the Scotia Ridge surrounds the Scotia plate on three sides. This feature
includes some continental material detached from the South American and
Antarctic continents, but its eastern closure is a volcanically and seismically
active group of islands, the South Sandwich arc, that is separated from the
Scotia plate by a vigorously spreading back- arc ridge. The entire east-closing,
locally emergent bathymetric feature joining the two continents, is known as the
Scotia arc. The D-shaped Sandwich plate and arc appear to be moving rapidly east
with respect to both South America and Antarctica, thereby for the first time
introducing a subduction system into the otherwise rift-bounded South Atlantic
Ocean basin. This motion may constitute the best evidence for mantle return flow
from the closing Pacific Ocean basin to the expanding Atlantic Ocean basin. The
Scotia arc is nonetheless one of the most poorly constrained of the major
tectonic systems on Earth, yet it is a critical and enigmatic link in global
plate-motion circuits. This SCotia ARc GPS Project (SCARP) will use the Global
Positioning System (GPS) to measure the plate motions between South America,
Antarctica, and Africa, and around the Scotia arc using a newly developed
geodetic strategy known as a multimodal occupation strategy (MOST). This
involves setting up permanent GPS receivers at a small number of sites in South
America and Antarctica, and using additional receivers to position numerous
stations relative to this continuously operat ing network. Two seasonally
occupied stations in the South Sandwich islands will be tied to permanent GPS
sites in South America, Antarctica, and Africa, and to intervening stations in
the Falkland, South Georgia, and South Orkney islands that will be occupied on
an occasional basis by British collaborators. During the initial three years the
South Sandwich arc motion will be easily resolved, and using roving stations in
the Antarctic Peninsula- South Shetland Islands area, it should be possible to
determine if extension is occurring across Bransfield Strait. This project will
also construct a relatively dense subnetwork in Patagonia/Tierra del Fuego, and
a moderately dense subnetwork in the Antarctic Peninsula. While achieving sub-
millimeter/year velocity resolution in the initial three year project with these
subnetworks is not expected, this project will establish the baseline necessary
for a follow-on suite of measurements in perhaps six to eight years. The follow-
on project will allow characterization of the slow motions and deformations that
occur across and within the boundaries of the Scotia plate. The objectives of
SCARP are to determine: 1. the relative motions of the Antarctic, South
American, Scotia and South Sandwich plates; 2. strain partitioning within the
South America-Scotia plate boundary zone, Tierra del Fuego; 3. the rate of
extension across the volcanically active Bransfield trough and the present rate
of uplift or subsidence of the extinct South Shetland Islands volcanic arc; 4.
and with our British colleagues, the rate of rollback of the South Sandwich
Trench in a South American-African framework; These objectives in turn will
allow: 1. An important contribution to a geodetic assessment of the elastic
displacement field associated with extension in Bransfield Strait and the
accumulation or loss of ice on the Antarctic continent; 2. Determination of why
there is transpression along the northern boundary of the Scotia plate and tra
nstension along its southern boundary; 3. Testing for motion between East and
West Antarctica postulated as a source of error in global plate circuits; and 4.
Evaluatation of what the South Sandwich trench rollback means in terms of mantle
flow and the potential for transforming a passive rifted ocean basin into a
subducting or disappearing ocean basin.