* 9530220
* Meridional Heat Flux and Thermal Anomalies in the North     Atlantic Ocean:  Diagnosis through Four-Dimensional Ocean   Data Assimilation
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/1996,01/31/2002
* James Carton, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Meacham
* 01/31/2002
* USD 550,000.00

9530220 Carton This project is a contribution to the modeling component to be
carried out as part of the Atlantic Circulation and Climate Experiment (ACCE)
under the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE). The focus will be on
upgrading existing isopycnal models, data assimilation, and integrating
different types of regional models. Comparisons will be made among different
modeling approaches in order to assess the strengths and weaknesses of each, and
to determine the best overall approach for including ocean variability in
climate modeling. Particular attention will be paid to assimilating, into the
models, data from the field phase of ACCE, as well as from historical data
bases. In this particular project, the PIs will use data assimilation techniques
to determine the domination balances in the upper ocean heat budget on searonal
to decadal time scales. They will assimilate historical hydrographic and drifter
data into the GFDL Modular Ocean Model (MOM) to give historical perspective on
the timescales related to the ACCE ecpseirment. GEOSAT and TOPEX altimeter data,
as well as velocity measurements would be added to previous historical analyses
caried out by the Pis. A completer analysis of the two years of ACCE data will
also be carried out, along with careful estimates of uncertainties, especially
those associated with air-sea fluxes.