* 9530223
* SBIR Phase II: Microwave Plasma Generation of Oxidative     Radicals for the Non-Thermal Destruction and Removal of     Hazardous Air Pollutants
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Bill Wofford, Rf Environmental Systems, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1998
* USD 299,305.00

9530223 Wofford Emissions of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) are an increasing
environmental concern because they are the major contributors to three of the
today's predominant environmental problems: global warming, ozone depletion, and
photochemical smog. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
proposes the development of an innovative air pollution control device for the
destruction and removal of hazardous chemical compounds emanating from
industrial semiconductor fabrication processes as well as from other sources of
air pollutants such as soil vapor extraction remediation systems. Currently, air
pollution control technologies are limited either by cost per pound of pollutant
destroyed (thermal oxidation) or by space requirements (catalytic oxidation).
The proposed process will very efficiently oxidize hazardous air pollutants to
such innocuous by-products as CO2 and H2O along with other easily scrubbed and
neutralized compounds such as HCl. These hazardous air pollutants will be
oxidized by reaction with oxidative free radicals which are generated by the
application of non-thermal microwave plasmas. Non-thermal plasma techniques are
a promising strategy for air pollution control and abatement. Phase II will
entail the development of a full-scale mobile system to demonstrate the
viability of these plasmas for two distinct applications. The first is the
development of an air control device for the destruction of thermally stable
compounds such as perfluorocompounds emanating from semiconductor etching tools.
The second application will involve the destruction and removal of hazardous air
pollutants such as benzene and trichloroethene emanating from soil vapor
extraction remediation systems. These experiments will provide critical data
such as plasma resonance times, reaction by-products, and destruction and
removal efficiencies which can be used to design a variety of commercial control
systems. Non-thermal plasma application will potentially be a very cost
effective, reliable, flexible, low maintenance, and extremely efficient control
technology for the removal of hard-to-incinerate gaseous air pollutants
emanating from non-combustion sources such as semiconductor etching equipment
and for the removal of hazardous air pollutants emanating from other sources
such as soil vapor extraction remediations.