* 9530891
* Organic Geochemical Studies in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Cindy Lee, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 07/31/2000
* USD 254,535.00

9530891 Lee This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three-year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. This component concerns a cooperative study of organic matter cycling
in the water column and in the surficial sediments of the Southern Ocean. The
main goals of the effort are: (1) to determine how the composition and fluxes of
organic material vary regionally and seasonally within the Southern Ocean, (2)
to relate these variations to biological processing of the punctuated organic
input and its siliceous matrix, (3) to follow the downward diagenetic fate of
planktonic remains through the water column and into the underlying sediments,
with special emphasis on biochemical trends reflecting substrate quality
(freshness), and (4) to holistically account for total organic matter at all
stages of degradation by carbon-13 analysis of bulk trap and sediment samples.
The shipboard work involves collecting suspended and raining particulate
material within the water column and from the underlying sediment at several
sites along the proposed study transect. Suspended particles will be collected
both by plankton net tows and high volume filtration of surface water. Sinking
particles will be collected with modular sediment traps deployed in arrays of
four. Individual traps will be designed to selectively collect sinking particles
and reject swimming zooplankton without loss of sample or biocide. Two of the
four traps on each array will be fitted with 12-tube subsampling carousels to
study shorter term variations. The collected trap and sediment core samples will
be analyzed for their basic biochemical building blocks, such as carbohydrates,
amino acids, lipids, lignins, and pigments. These make up the bulk of the
organic matter produced in the upper water column and are an important fraction
of the material buried in the sediment. At the molecular level they can provide
unequivocal information on the sources of organic matter and its decomposition
at depth, and on the pathways by which biogenic material is transferred to the
sediment. These data will be combined with information obtained during prior
JGOFS experiments to produce a global picture of the organic chemistry of
particulate matter in the ocean. This research project is part of the US Joint
Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better
understanding of the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the
Southern Ocean, (2) identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical
factors and processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of these
fluxes, and (3) placing these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global
carbon cycle.