* 9530403
* Statistical Mechanics of Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Karl Freed, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 02/29/2000
* USD 150,000.00

9530403 Freed Theoretical research will continue on developing theories for
calculating the thermodynamic properties of polymer melts, blends, block
copolymers, glasses and liquid crystals. A main and novel feature of this
theoretical approach involves the combined treatment of monomer molecular
structures, local correlations, and compressibility. The principal investigator
will continue this work by extending his lattice cluster theory to include
semiflexibility in order to describe polymer glasses and liquid crystals.
Another aspect of the proposed research will involve continued studies of the
influence of short chain branching (and semiflexibility) on the miscibility of
polymer blends (with special focus on polyolefin blends) and, if time permits,
on their interfacial properties. Other phenomena to be studied include the
pressure dependence of polymer blend miscibility and glass transition
temperatures. The accurate description of polymer blends and of polymer liquid
crystals with models containing complex monomer structures will require the
inclusion of contributions from long range correlations, contributions that only
can be evaluated with the aid of sophisticated computer-based combinatorial
algorithms which will be devised and applied to this project. %%% This
theoretical research involves both analytical and computational components. The
research will determine a variety of properties of polymers and their mixtures
using a formalism developed by the principal investigator. Modifications to this
formalism will be made in order to model more realistic situations. ***