* 9530973
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Control: Feedback          Stabilization and Cardiac Arrhythmia Control
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Henry Hermes, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/1998
* USD 21,373.00

ABSTRACT Proposal: DMS-9530973 PI: Hermes Hermes proposes to continue his
research program on the problem of existence and construction of asymptotically
stabilizing feedback control (ASFC) for affine control systems, in particular
via the use of high order, homogeneous, approximations. The dilations and local
coordinates relative to which the approximating systems are constructed can be
naturally obtained from the Lie algebra structure of the vector fields defining
the original system. Also, an ASFC of appropriate homogeneous order for the
approximating system is a local ASFC for the original system. The method will be
to extend the classical linear, quadratic, regulator technique to a nonlinear,
homogeneous regulator. A first goal is to classify homogeneous, affine, systems
which admit a smooth ASFC. Linear, controllable, approximating systems are
divided into equivalence classes via the action of the linear feedback group,
and canonical representatives of each equivalence class are well known. Hermes
proposes tho study the equivalence classes of small time, or large time, locally
controllable homogeneous approximations having known smooth ASFC, under the
action of a homogeneity preserving group of transformations, and to find
canonical representatives of the equivalence classes. The odd power integrators
provide an example of such. The above topics have implications to questions of
regularity conditions for viscosity solutions of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman
equations, another topic to be studied. Many mathematical systems, e.g., an
inverted compound pendulum, a robotic arm, a high performance aircraft, a
communications satellite, either are, or are designed to be, unstable in their
uncontrolled mode of operation. Stability of the system is achieved via the
introduction of external controls. In past decades, construction of stabilizing
controllers was achieved via the use of linear approximations, which had to be
"controllable" for the method to work. Many space age prob lems are basically
nonlinear, have uncontrollable linear approximations, and their analysis
requires high order approximations which retain relevant nonlinear behavior but
are still amenable to analysis. The high order, homogeneous approximations are
such. The goal of Hermes research is to use these for the construction of
stabilizing controls.