* 9530428
* Measurement of Combustion Effluent Aerosols from the        South Pole Station
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Anthony Hansen, Magee Scientific Company
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/1999
* USD 1,500.00

Abstract Anthropogenic activities in Antarctica have the potential of producing
both contemporaneous and long-term environmental impacts on pristine
surroundings. One of these impacts arises from the emission of "black" or
"elemental" carbonaceous aerosols from the exhaust of diesel-powered generators
and vehicles used to support Antarctic operations. When deposited on the snow
and ice cover, this pollutant may be preserved indefinitely. Its high optical
absorption will alter the surface albedo and the radiative properties of surface
cover. Its ability to catlytically promote certain chemical reactions may lead
to modifications of snow and ice chemistry. Its absorbed content of fuel-derived
organic species such as polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and other toxics may
have a deleterious effect on marginal biota and near coastal stations. Previous
work showed that extremely small, but detectable, concentrations of black carbon
aerosol are brought to the South Pole station in the background atmosphere in
amounts consistent with models of long- range transport; however, this program
terminated in 1990. A 1986 study of surface snow and ice showed a clear plume of
soot description downwind of the station. This project proposes to install more
modern equipment both upwind and downwind of the South Pole station to re-
establish the background aerosol measurements and to provide a direct assessment
of the station's emissions. The results of this work will contribute to the
determination of the station's environmental impact resulting from combustion-
derived emissions. This information may be used as input to mitigation and
abatement strategies. The upwind data will contribute to the global monitoring
record, and to assessments of the global circulation of anthropogenic emissions
capable of influencing atmospheric optics and chemistry.