* 9530809
* An Integrated Modeling and Experimental Study of the        Formation and Dynamics of Patterned Ground
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/1996,11/30/2000
* Bernard Hallet, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 11/30/2000
* USD 266,114.00

The emergence of order from disorder is observed in a wide range of complex
dynamical systems. Several geological features, including patterned ground,
constitute some of the clearest and most accessible examples of abiotic self-
organization in nature. It is proposed to investigate the spontaneous emergence
and dynamics of patterned ground through a coordinated program of field
measurement and computer simulation of discrete particle motion in soil
subjected to freeze/thaw activity. The close bending of these two approaches
promises to be synergistic, with the simulations guiding the investigations in
formulating novel and more precise questions in the filed and vice-versa. A new
and more fundamental view of patterned ground as a prime example of self-
organization will be obtained through the integration of the following specific
objectives: (1) to develop a three-dimensional computer simulation of discrete
particle motion in soil subjected to recurrent freezing and thawing, and use it
to investigate the development of patterns in frozen ground; (2) to measure
stone and soil displacements, document the formation of patterns and their
reaction to disturbances, and monitor with automated instrumentation soil
temperature, moisture and climate parameters in established study sites with
well developed sorted circles and stripes; (3) to construct a micro-mechanical
model of sorting in patterned ground through computer simulation and laboratory
experimentation; and (4) to develop a realistic heat and mass transfer model to
investigate factors critical in the formation of sorted circles: active layer
depth and three-dimensional geometry of propagating freezing and thawing fronts.
An important practical benefit of developing a realistic near-surface heat
transfer model for frozen ground is that it promises to contribute to a more
precise understanding of both the anticipated impacts of climate change
permafrost areas, and the record of recent climate change that is contained in
permafrost temperatures. The goal of the proposed research is to understand the
processes through which patterns such as these circles of stones in the Arctic
arise from a disordered initial state: in this case, a wave cut platform covered
with 1-2 m of assorted beach sediments.