* 9530443
* IAI Workshop:  Dendrochronological Studies in Tropical South America with Special Emphasis on Bolivian Forests
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/1996,12/31/1997
* Jose Boninsegna, Instituto De Nivologia Y Glaciologia
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/1997
* USD 47,135.00

9530443 Boninsegna This Phase I proposal will expand dendrochronological studies
to tropical and subtropical regions of South America with special emphasis on
the Bolivian forests. It will also provide technical support to Bolivian
researchers interested in dendrochronological studies. Most Bolivian trees are
also found in other Latin American countries, and consequently, the proposed
studies will be relevant to foresters and climatologists within all of the
tropical Americas. This Inter-American Institute for Global Change Research
(IAI) Start-Up Grants Phase I proposal has as it objective to conduct a survey
of the Bolivian woods to evaluate their dendrochronological potential as well as
training of scientists in tropical South America. The exploratory survey will
include the evaluation of tropical trees growing under different climatic
(seasonal versus non-seasonal) and topographic (upper Andes versus lower
Amazonian Basin) conditions in Bolivia in order to determine their
dendrochronological characteristics. In addition, under this Phase I proposal,
personnel from the Laboratorio de Dendrocronolog=EDa of Mendoza, Argentina, will
teach two 15-day seminars on dendrochronology at the Universidad Major de San
Sim=F3n at Cochabamba, Bolivia, and the Universidad de San Andr=E9s, La Paz,
Bolivia. Scientists from Bolivia and other Latin American countries will be
invited to work at the Laboratorio de Dendrocronolog=EDa in Mendoza as visiting
scholars. The seminars will focus on the following topics: wood anatomy;
dendrochronological sampling strategies; cross-dating; tree-ring chronology
development; and time-series analysis. The result of Phase I will be a Phase II
Proposal with the objective of developing a tree-ring chronology network in
western tropical South America. %%% This Inter-American Institute for Global
Change Research (IAI) Start-Up Grants Phase I proposal will expand
dendrochronological studies to tropical and subtropical regions of South America
with special emphasis o n the Bolivian forests. It will also provide technical
support to Bolivian researchers interested in dendrochronological studies. Most
Bolivian trees are also found in other Latin American countries, and
consequently, the proposed studies will be relevant to foresters and
climatologists within all of the tropical Americas. Much has been documented
about Northern hemisphere climatic variations, but comparatively little data is
available for the Southern hemisphere. A complete understanding of the climatic
behavior of one hemisphere is not possible without knowledge of behavior in the
other hemisphere. Meteorological records from instruments in the Southern
hemisphere reach back only a relatively short time, and are far more sparse than
those in the Northern hemisphere. When working with records that represent such
short time scales, trends lasting decades to centuries are difficult to evaluate
with statistical confidence. However, one may rely on indirect sources, or
"proxy data," in order to study climatic variations before the present century.
Tree-ring series can provide long and reliable recopds lasting from several
centuries to millennia with annual and in some cases seasonal resolution. The
fields of dendrochronology and dendroclimatology have been making striking
advances during he past twenty years, and their scientific bases are well
documented. This proposal will expand dendrochronological studies to tropical
and subtropical regions of South America with special emphasis on Bolivian
forests as well as the training of scientists in dendrochronological studies.
This proposal assembles a team of scientists from Argentina, Bolivia, and the
United States. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the scientific
institutions of the Americas. The National Science =46oundation is the
designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unite= s States
responsibilities within the IAI. ***