* 9530941
* Nature, History and the Natural Historical Sciences         in the Twentieth Century
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* James Collins, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Michael M. Sokal
* 01/31/1999
* USD 221,205.00

Under the direction of Dr. John Beatty of the University of Minnesota, Dr.
James Collins of Arizona State University, and Dr. Gregg Mitman of the
University of Oklahoma, this `Small Grant for Training and Research`(SGTR) will
provide a cohort of graduate students and a postdoctoral fellow with the
methodological and analytical skills to investigate particular historical,
philosophical and scientific issues related to the natural historical sciences
in the 20th century. The unifying issues of this SGTR center on the ways in
which the `natural historical sciences` have been distinguished as a group from
the rest of biology. The three PI's believe that despite changes in the way this
distinction has been drawn, there is considerable historical continuity to the
tradition of distinguishing the natural historical sciences from more
laboratory-based disciplines. They have organized their teaching and research
around two general respects in which the natural historical sciences have been
seen as distinct: 1) with respect to conceptions of nature and what is natural,
and 2) with respect to the importance of history. In order to give the students
a fuller understanding and appreciation of the natural historical sciences, they
are not relying on documents alone, but will also provide field natural
historical experience. Through this program, students will explore various
dimensions and unique aspects of natural history in the 20th century within a
cohort/community learning environment that draws upon the experience of an
ecologist (Collins), an historian of ecology (Mitman) and a
philosopher/historian of evolutionary biology (Beatty), each of whom is engaged
with these issues in their own research. The program is designed as a traveling
seminar. The cohort of five graduate students from Arizona State, Minnesota, and
Oklahoma universities, and a postdoctoral fellow will travel to each respective
institution for one semester where they will participate in a seminar led by the
faculty member of that institution and engage in field research. In the fourth
semester, the students will return to their home institution. The postdoc will
help the PI's in the development of the seminars, serve as liaison between
students and faculty and conduct his/her own research.