* 9530592
* Membrane Bioreactor for Control of Volatile Organic         Compound Air Emissions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Sarina Ergas, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 170,705.00

9530592 Ergas Biofiltration is a low cost and effective method for controlling
emissions of biodegradable volatile organic compounds (VOC's) from chemical and
process industries. Studies and field applications of these systems, however,
have been limited to inlet VOC concentrations of less than 1,000 ppmv. At high
inlet concentrations, microbial growth results in plugging of biofilter media
pore spaces. In addition, these systems are of limited use where degradation
results in the formation of acidic metabolites or where cosubstrates must be
added to induce enzymes required for cometabolism. To overcome the limitations
described above, biological treatment systems for VOC control must be developed
which: 1) incorporate mass transfer of VOCs across a media with high specific
surface area and low diffusion length, 2) incorporate high biomass
concentrations to maintain high biodegradation rates, 3) provide a method for
wasting biomass to prevent clogging, and 4) provide a method for addition of pH
buffers, nutrients, and/or co- substrates to support the microbial population
and neutralize acidic metabolites. A specially designed bioreactor is under
investigation which has the potential to meet these requirements and achieve
high VOC removal efficiencies in small reactor volumes. The reactor utilizes
hydrophobic microporous hollow fiber membranes for mass transfer. Gases
containing VOCs are passed through bundles of hollow fiber membranes. Soluble
compounds in the gas phase are transferred through the membranes to the
surrounding liquid nutrient media. Compounds in the liquid phase are then
available for biodegradation. The proposed project will further investigate the
use of microporous hydrophobic hollow fiber membrane systems for biological
treatment of gas phase VOCS. Specific objectives include: investigation of
factors controlling mass transfer and biodegradation; investigation of
conditions for use in cometabolism of the model chlorinated VOC, tr
ichloroethene; refinement and testing of mathematical models of mass transfer
and biodegradation.