* 9530861
* Seasonal and Spatial Variations in the Flux of Particulate  Organic Carbon Derived from Thorium-234 in the U.S. JGOFS   Southern Ocean Process Study
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Michael Bacon, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Bernhard Lettau
* 06/30/2000
* USD 521,950.00

9530861 Buessler This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This work
is one of forty-four projects that are collaborating in the Southern Ocean
Experiment, a three- year effort south of the Antarctic Polar Frontal Zone to
track the flow of carbon through its organic and inorganic pathways from the
air-ocean interface through the entire water column into the bottom sediment.
The experiment will make use of the RVIB Nathaniel B. Palmer and the R/V
Thompson. The objective of this component is to provide a quantitative estimate
of upper ocean export fluxes of particulate organic carbon on spatial and
temporal scales relevant to understanding biological and physical processes. The
approach is to measure the concentration of thorium-234, a particle reactive
tracer with a half-life of 24.1 days, and its ratio to particulate organic
carbon (POC) and particulate organic nitrogen (PON) in order to derive the
appropriate export data. The research activities include the collection of
thorium-234 and POC samples on cruises spanning the seasonal production cycle in
the Antarctic Polar Front Zone. The results will be used to constrain the upper
ocean sinking fluxes and to derive relationships between production and export
across physical gradients (i.e. fronts) during seasonal transitions between low
and high productivity. The sensitivity of these rate estimates to model
assumptions and data quality will also be examined. ***