* 9530310
* Mathematical Sciences:  Conference on Harmonic Analysis to  Honor Donald J. Newman; March 11-14, 1996; Philadelphia, PA.
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Leon Ehrenpreis, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 11/30/1996
* USD 12,000.00

9530310 Ehrenpreis This award provides support for a conference on applications
of harmonic analysis in number theory and approximation theory. The conference
is being held in honor of Donald J. Newman, and the emphasis is on areas of
mathematics that have been influenced by Newman's ideas. The conference will
create opportunities for cross-fertilization of ideas among workers in two
important areas of classical mathematics. Number theory has its historical roots
in the study of the whole numbers, addressing such questions as those dealing
with the divisibility of one whole number by another. It is among the oldest
branches of mathematics and was pursued for many centuries for purely aesthetic
reasons. However, within the last half century it has become an indispensable
tool in diverse applications in areas such as data transmission and processing,
and communication systems. Harmonic analysis combines those elements of
mathematics best exemplifying the ideas of synthesis. One seeks to decompose
complex problems into fundamental components. These components are then analyzed
for their basic characteristics. Finally, the solution is reconstructed through
a recombination of the components.The Fourier series and Fourier transform are
examples of tools used in this context; one discrete , the other representing a
continuous decomposition. Harmonic analysis is a surprisingly useful tool in
studying whole numbers.