* 9530915
* Integration of Planning and Control Using Multiple Models,  Switching, and Tuning
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* S Venkataraman, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Howard Moraff
* 08/31/1998
* USD 75,692.00

IRI-9530915 Venkataraman, Subramanian Yale University $75,692 - 12 mos This
research addressed the integration of planning and control in intelligent
systems from a systems theoretic viewpoint. In doing so, it investigates the
relevance of two ideas to integration of planning and control. First, it studies
the relationship between a plan element (or action or behavior) and the concept
of a reference model in control theory. This, in conjunction with the arsenal of
tools available in control theory for the synthesis and analysis of controllers
that guarantee reference model following, may then be used to formally specify
the control performance of each action. The second aspect of this research deals
with the existence of multiple actions in a plan, connected together through
some relationships, and having some ordering. To address this, the use of
multiple reference models (in a control system) and means to switch between them
in a stable fashion is investigated. By studying these problems, an integrated
view of certain elements of planning and control may be derived, where reference
models are related to actions, switching rules to the initiation and termination
of actions, switching sequences to the admissible output of plan executors in
deliberative systems, etc. In this manner, the planned work would complement
ongoing planning research in AI by providing the control oriented knowledge
necessary for robust design. The theoretical results developed in this effort
will be applied to quadruped locomotion (as an example problem), and a kernel of
gait controllers, and the set of admissible rules for gait switching and tuning
that guarantee stable locomotion will be formally derived.