* 9530179
* IAI Workshop: Climate Variability in the Americas           from High Elevation Ice Cores
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1997
* Raymond Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,937.00

9530179 Bradley The purpose of this workshop on Climate Variability in the
Americas from High Elevation Ice Cores is to develop plans for obtaining a set
of ice cores from sites distributed along the mountainous western axis of the
Americas, from Alaska/Yukon to the southern tip of South America. Although most
ice core research has been in polar regions, ice cores from high elevations in
the Americas have also provided unique and detailed insights into paleoclimates
of the past, and this workshop will build on the analysis which has been carried
out in the past. The workshop will bring together interested parties from
different research institutions in the region: Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil;
Canada; Chile; Ecuador; Peru; and the United States. The primary goal of the
workshop is to prepare a document outlining the opportunities that ice core
studies in the high mountains of the Americas can provide in understanding ENSO-
related interannual variability and cold region processes. The is goal will be
achieved by: identifying the principal scientific questions which can be
answered by ice core studies; determining which ice caps have the potential of
yielding high resolution paleoenvironmental records; prioritizing the most
important sites; planning preparatory glaciological and geophysical surveys to
determine in detail the optimum coring sites; establishing which research
institutions and individuals have the necessary technical and analytical skills
and the motivation to carry out the required work; determining what funding
would be required to carry out the proposed research and to establish a time-
frame for accomplishing the work; and developing a plan for inter-institutional
exchange of scientists and graduate students to ensure that the research program
is truly collaborative, international, and multidiscilplinary. These objectives
will contribute to the study of a IAI research priority which is to what extent
climate variability in the two hemispheres is synchronous. The workshop will
identify institutions and individuals and their relevant expertise to assign
areas of responsibility for subsequent research. A prioity list of sites where
research should be initiated will also be prepared in order to build on existing
knowledge or new areas for reconnaissance studies. Workshop participants will
discuss what mechanisms currently exist or will be required to ensure that the
proposed research will be carried out in the framework of full international
collaboration. %%% The purpose of this workshop on Climate Variability in the
Americas from High Elevation Ice Cores is to develop plans for obtaining a set
of ice cores from sites distributed along the mountainous western axis of the
Americas, from Alaska/Yukon to the southern tip of South America. Although most
ice core research has been in polar regions, ice cores from high elevations in
the Americas have also provided unique and detailed insights into paleoclimates
of the past. This workshop will build on the analysis which has been carried out
in the past. The primary goal of the workshop is to prepare a document outlining
the opportunities that ice core studies in the high mountains of the Americas
can provide in understanding ENSO-related interannual variability and cold
region processes. The workshop will bring together interested parties from
different research institutions in the region: Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil;
Canada; Chile; Ecuador; Peru; and the United States. Climatic variations of the
last 2000 years are of particular relevance to contemporary human endeavors.
Although climatic fluctuations over this time period were small in comparison
with those expected from a doubling of greenhouse gases, the last 2000 years
have witnessed the most extreme condition of the Holocene period. Furthermore,
there is abundant evidence that even such relatively small climatic anomalies
have had significant impacts on human societies such as prolonged droughts and
other climate-related disruptions. It is necessary to understand these
fluctuations and their causes and interactions between one region and another
because it is the background of natural variability that the anthropogenic
greenhouse effect is being impaired. Climate-related proxy records can provide
the longer time frame necessary to document the significance of underlying
trends, to analyze the nature of any periodicities in climate, and to address
the critical issues of abrupt climate change. A long-term, detailed record of
global climate is thus an essential pre-requisite of placing contemporary
climatic conditions in perspective, and this proposal will construct high
resolution proxy records from the Americas to construct a globally comprehensive
view of such climatic variations in the past. This proposal assembles a team of
scientists from the following countries: Argentina; Bolivia; Brazil; Canada;
Chile; Ecuador; Peru; and the United States. These countries are Member States
of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change
issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites
States responsibilities within the IAI. ***