* 9530338
* Doctoral Dissertation Reearch: Perceptions and Knowledge of Sanctions by Employees of Companies Subject to Hazardous    Waste Regulations
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1997
* Elin Waring, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 01/31/1997
* USD 6,000.00

9530338 Waring The laws and regulations governing activities that have the
potential to create risks of environmental harm have become both increasingly
punitive and complex. The past decade has seen an increase in the use of
criminal penalties for environmental violations. However, the effectiveness of
these sanctioning strategies at deterring potential environmental offenders is
not well understood. This research focuses specifically on the perceptions by
the population at risk of committing hazardous waste offenses of the formal and
informal sanctions used to enforce hazardous waste laws. The research is based
in the state of Florida. It uses a two-pronged approach. The primary focus will
be the analysis of 100 in-depth face-to-face interviews with employees of
companies subject to hazardous waste regulation. The second focus will be the
collection and analysis of contextual data on the past, present, and future
enforcement practices of the state of Florida. %%%% The laws and regulations
governing activities that have the potential to create risks of environmental
harm have become both increasingly punitive and complex. The past decade has
seen an increase in the use of criminal penalties for environmental violations.
However, the effectiveness of these sanctioning strategies at deterring
potential environmental offenders is not well understood. This research focuses
specifically on the perceptions by the population at risk of committing
hazardous waste offenses of the formal and informal sanctions used to enforce
hazardous waste laws. The research is based in the state of Florida. It uses a
two-pronged approach. The primary focus will be the analysis of 100 in-depth
face-to-face interviews with employees of companies subject to hazardous waste
regulation. The second focus will be the collection and analysis of contextual
data on the past, present, and future enforcement practices of the state of
Florida ****