* 9530255
* IAI Workshop:  The Impact of Solar Ultraviolet Radiation on Aquatic and Terrestrial Resources in Patagonia,             Argentina-Chile
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Osmund Holm-Hansen, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,925.00

9530255 Holm-Hansen This Phase I proposal focuses on the potential biological
impacts of increased solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) on both terrestrial and
aquatic ecosystems in the southern regions of Argentina and Chile. During three
workshops, this Phase I proposal has as its objective to work with research
personnel in Argentina and Chile to develop a framework of cooperation between
researchers from these countries and those from the United States in order to
plan a research program that will be both scientifically productive and also
meaningful to social interests in South America. It is recognized that a
meaningful biological study of the UV impacts related to ozone depletion should
involve expertise from many disciplines and backgrounds. In particular, it is
important to involve expertise related to measurement of ozone and spectral UVR,
experimental biologists with expertise in terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems,
personnel who are knowledgeable regarding important regional resources that
should be investigated in regard to UVR sensitivity, and modeling expertise to
integrate the physical-biological data resulting from the field research. This
proposal draws upon the scientific and environmental expertise from Argentina,
Chile, and the United States to develop a dynamic research program that gives
regional concerns a high priority. The research is organized in regions of
Argentina and Chile because incident UVR will increase with decreasing latitude,
but the maximum change in enhanced UV-B radiation will be at the higher
latitudes. The consequences of such opposite trends in incident radiation with
changes in latitude will thus impose very different radiation regimes in
different regions of Argentina and Chile. The regions mentioned above are
different in regard to the terrestrial and aquatic resources which are of
importance to the local inhabitants and to the economy of the countries. %%%
This Phase I proposal focuses on the potential biological impacts of increased
solar ultraviolet radiation (UVR) on both terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems in
the southern regions of Argentina and Chile. During three workshops, this Phase
I proposal has as its objective to work with research personnel in Argentina and
Chile to develop a framework of cooperation between researchers from these
countries and those from the United States in order to plan a research program
that will be both scientifically productive and also meaningful to social
interests in South America. This proposal focuses on the potential significance
of increased UV-B radiation in those regions of South America where the impact
will be of importance for social interests, which will include agricultural
crops, alterations in aquatic primary production with resultant effects of
harvestable aquatic resources, and other aspects of the terrestrial ecosystems
which may be of importance to the economies of the region. Although Antarctic
regions are experiencing the greatest change of solar regimes, the above social
concerns are not very relevant to the Antarctic continent. The southern portion
of South America, however, with its close proximity to the seasonal ozone hole
and its many inhabitants and abundant terrestrial and aquatic resources, would
appear to be the area of greatest potential harm by increasing depletion of
stratospheric ozone. It is for this reason that this proposal is mainly
concerned with the area of Patagonia, but research will also be conducted in
tropical areas so as to compare subantarctic and temperate species with tropical
species. As the research of this proposal will focus on components of the
terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems which represent important economic resources,
the findings will have direct relevance to regional and national interests and
economies. The incorporation of student education and training and international
cooperation will benefit both individuals and the institutional framework of
science in various Member States of the IAI participating in this program. This
proposal assembles a team of scientists from the following countries: Argentina,
Chile, and the United States. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an
initiative to stimulate cooperative research on global change issues among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the
designated U.S. Government agency to carry our the Unites States
responsibilities within the IAI. ***