* 9530356
* Conference: International Symposium on the Physics and      Chemistry of Ice, Hanover, NH, August 26 - 30, 1996
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/1997
* USD 10,000.00

9530356 Baker This award provides partial support for the 1996 International
Symposium on the Physics and Chemistry of Ice. The Symposium will be held at
Dartmouth College from August 26th to August 30th, 1996. This conference is the
largest (approximately 150 participants) international meeting on fundamental
research in ice. The previous meeting was held in Sapporo, Japan in 1991, and
the last meeting in the United States was held in 1982. The research topics at
the Symposium span a range of disciplines including such areas as physics,
chemistry, geophysics, geochemistry, and glaciology. The results of the
Symposium will be published and will be of immediate use in a range of
scientific and engineering fields. %%% This award provides partial support for
the 1996 International Symposium on the Physics and Chemistry of Ice. The
Symposium will be held at Dartmouth College from August 26th to August 30th,
1996. This conference is the largest (approximately 150 participants)
international meeting on fundamental research in ice. The previous meeting was
held in Sapporo, Japan in 1991, and the last meeting in the United States was
held in 1982. The research topics at the Symposium span a range of disciplines
including such areas as physics, chemistry, geophysics, geochemistry, and
glaciology. The results of the Symposium will be published and will be of
immediate use in a range of scientific and engineering fields. ***