* 9530224
* IAI Workshop: Comparative Studies of the Physical and       Biological Environments of Upwelling Temperate Areas
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Daniel Lluch-Cota, Centro de Investigaciones Del Noroeste
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9530427 Luckman Treelines are critical, climate-sensitive, ecotones in mountain
areas that have been the focus of many studies of environmental change.
Understanding the present and former dynamics of these environments is crucial
to the interpretation of these records. The adoption of PEP-I transect concept
for the Americas by IGBP-PAGES offers unparalleled opportunities for
collaborative studies by scientists working at or near treelines along the
length of the American Cordillera. This proposal requests IAI Start-Up Grant
Phase I funding to hold a workshop in Jasper, Alberta, Canada in late September-
early October 1996, to focus on treeline environments along the American
Cordillera. The meeting will bring together scientists from IAI member countries
who are experts in a wide range of fields: paleoecology, dendrochronology, and
climatology. This mix will allow the group to formulate a science plan for the
understanding of the dynamics of present treeline environments, and the
reconstruction of environmental and climate changes at treeline sites. The
participants will review the present information base on treeline environments
along the American Cordillera and discuss the formulation of collaborative,
comparative studies, that will evaluate and benchmark the climate signals found
at modern treeline sites and determine the response of this sensitive
environment to recent climate variation; develop a network of comparable high
resolution proxy climate series that show internal climate variation at treeline
over the last ca 1000 years for key localities; and utilize these data to
examine the local and regional patterns of internal and longer term climate
variability to develop data on key temporal and spatial patterns of forcing
functions. This meeting will lead to the development of a series of
collaborative, international, interdisciplinary research proposals for Phase II
of the IAI Start-Up Grants that implement this scientific agenda. %%% Treelines
are critical, climate-sensiti ve mountain areas that have been the focus of many
studies of environmental change. Understanding the present and former dynamics
of these environments is crucial to the interpretation of these records. The
adoption of the Pole-Equator-Pole (PEP-I) transect concept for the Americas by
the International Geosphere Biosphere Programme's "Past Global Changes Program"
(IGBP-PAGES) offers unparalleled opportunities for collaborative studies by
scientists working at or near treelines along the length of the American
Cordillera. This proposal requests IAI Start-Up Grant Phase I funding to hold a
meeting in Jasper, Alberta, Canada in late September- early October 1996 and to
be focused on treeline environments along the American Cordillera. The meeting
will bring together scientists from IAI member countries who are experts in a
wide range of fields: paleoecology, dendrochronology, and climatology. This mix
will allow the group to formulate a science plan for the understanding of the
dynamics of present treeline environments, and the reconstruction of
environmental and climate changes at treeline sites. This meeting is planned to
lead to the development of a series of collaborative, international,
interdisciplinary Phase II IAI Start-Up Grants research that implement this
scientific agenda. These proposals will promote and enhance the IAI scientific
goals by fostering collaborative studies by scientists and institutions in
several IAI member states that share common interests in mountain environments
and climate change. They will also bring together and provoke interaction among
a diverse group of scientific specialists in the earth, life and physical
sciences who focus on the same environment in quite different ways. An
additional outcome of the meeting will be a proceedings volume ("Treeline
Environments of the Americas") that will summarize the information and
discussion presented at the meeting. Participants of this proposal are from the
following IAI countries: Argentina; Bolivia; Canada ; Chile; the United States;
and Venezuela. These countries are Member States of the IAI, an initiative to
stimulate cooperative research on global change issues in the Americas. The
National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government to carry out U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI. ***