* 9530193
* IAI Workshop: Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea (ACCIS)
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/1996,11/30/1997
* Eileen Hofmann, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 11/30/1997
* USD 50,000.00

9530193 Atkinson For Phase I, the PIs of this proposal will facilitate the
development of an interdisciplinary, multi-institutional program focused on
ecological and socio-economic human health issues in temperate waters of the
Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea (ACCIS). The PIs propose to form a research
center of physical and biological oceanographers, fisheries scientists,
economists, sociologists, and public health researchers from Chilean and North
American institutions. These individuals will have the expertise necessary to
compare and contrast Chilean and analogous North American coastal systems. The
research center will develop predictive capabilities through hydrodynamics and
ecosystem models, and the ACCIS Research Center will explore human dimensions of
global change by focusing on objectives with socio-economic and human health
implications. The development of this program in the ACCIS is essential to gain
knowledge of an area of great ecological and economic importance that is under
increasing pressure from human activities. The program will facilitate
understanding of the ecology of the area, will protect human health and the
quality of life, and will ensure sustainable development by appropriate
management, use and protection of coastal resources. The following are the areas
of study of the proposed research program for a phase II proposal: describe the
regional climatology, including atmospheric forcing, oceanic variability,
process controlling climate, temporal and spatial scales of variability, and
links between semi-enclosed coastal bodies of water and the coastal ocean;
describe ecosystem variability, both in space and time; describe the ecosystem
problems related to harmful algae blooms and marine biotoxins; describe and
understand the influence of human impacts on coastal and inland sea ecosystems;
describe and understand the influence of ecosystems and changes in ecosystems on
human adaptations and activities; study the epidemiology of human diseases
caused by h armful marine phytoplankton; describe and study the interaction
between environmental variations and human health; train professionals; and
educate the general public. %%% For Phase I the PIs of this proposal will
facilitate the development of an interdisciplinary, multi-institutional program
focused on ecological and socio-economic human health issues in temperate waters
of the Austral Chilean Coast and Inland Sea (ACCIS). The PIs propose to form a
research center of physical and biological oceanographers, fisheries scientists,
economists, sociologists, and public health researchers from Chilean and North
American institutions. These individuals will have the expertise necessary to
compare and contrast Chilean and analogous North American coastal systems. The
research center will develop predictive capabilities through hydrodynamics and
ecosystem models, and the ACCIS Research Center will explore human dimensions of
global change by focusing on objectives with socio-economic and human health
implications. The results of variation and degradation of natural resources on
the economy, social structure, and human health of the Austral Chilean Coast and
Inland Sea are evident but have not been well studied. These topics can be
investigated by applying the knowledge of comparative systems in North America
to the ACCIS. The ACCIS is important for its high biological productivity that
supports diverse fisheries. The inclusion of studies on socio-economic and
epidemiological topics is relatively new, but essential. The ACCIS is a remote
area organized in small communities, many of which correspond to the poorest
social segments in Chile. To meet the challenges of understanding the
interactions between ecosystem variability and socio-economic-human health
impacts in ACCIS, and to met the organizational and scientific goal of the IAI,
a diverse group of professionals from Chile and the United States are
collaborating in this proposal to prepare a Phase II proposal. These countries
are Member S tates of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate cooperative research
on global change issues among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The
National Science Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry
our the Unites States responsibilities within the IAI. ***