* 9530398
* Management and Scientific Service in Support of the U.S.    JGOFS Southern Ocean Process Study: Hydrography, Coring and Site Survey
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1996,01/31/2003
* Robert Anderson, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 01/31/2003
* USD 2,075,188.00

95-30398 Anderson This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of
the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The
overall objectives of JGOFS are to determine and understand processes
controlling the time-varying fluxes of carbon and associated biogenic elements,
and to predict the response of marine biogeochemical processes to climate
change. The Southern Ocean is critical in the global carbon cycle, as judged by
its size and the physical processes which occur in it (e.g., deep and
intermediate water formation), but its present quantitative role is uncertain.
JGOFS objectives for the Southern Ocean study are as follows: 1) to constrain
the fluxes of carbon (organic and inorganic) and to place these fluxes in the
context of the contemporary carbon cycle; 2) to identify the factors and
processes which regulate the magnitude and variability of primary productivity
and the fate of biogenic matter; 3) to determine the response of the Southern
Ocean to natural climate perturbations; and 4) to predict the response of the
Southern Ocean to climate change. In order to successfully address these
objectives, a large field program has been designed to provide various
investigators the opportunity to test specific hypotheses which relate to these
broadly-defined objectives. We expect the field test to begin in September 1996,
and last through March 1998 using two ships, the R.V. Palmer, and the R.V.
Thompson. As most of the investigators will use hydrographic and nutrient data
from these cruises, this proposal requests funds for the support of the analysis
of nutrient concentrations during these thirteen crui ses. A team of
oceanographic experts from a variety of institutions has been assembled to
complete these analyses; furthermore, the data will be scrutinized for errors
and provided in a timely fashion to all PI's in the project, as well as to the
relevant oceanographic data storage facilities. The hydrography and coring
groups have been put together using the successful model for the Arabian Sea
JGOFS study, and in conjunction with the nutrient data (supported under a
separate proposal), will form a large portion of the Southern Ocean JGOFS
database which both field investigators and modelers will use to clarify the
role of the Southern Ocean in the global carbon cycle.