* 9530793
* Molecular Thermodynamics of Protein Interactions;           Applications to Protein Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/1996,06/30/2001
* John Prausnitz, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 06/30/2001
* USD 739,865.00

9530793 Blanch Recovery and purification of proteins is of vital importance in
biotechnology. Design and optimization of separation and purification processes
requires an understanding of the behavior of proteins in complex aqueous
solutions, where salts, polymers or other solutes may be dilute or concentrated.
The objective of this proposal is to develop a separation processes. We are
concerned in particular with protein precipitation by salts and with protein
crystallization; however, protein solution behavior is also important in
stability and formulation of therapeutic proteins, and in understanding
intermolecular reactions. This proposal is for continued support of a two-year
NSF project OThermodynamics of Protein Precipitation in Aqueous SolutionsO. The
approach is to describe protein solution behavior on a molecular level, in terms
of a two-body potential of mean force (PMF), which describes the overall
interactions between two protein molecules. The PMF is determined by the
physicochemical properties of the protein, the nature of the solution and
temperature. From the PMF, thermodynamic solution properties may be obtained for
predicting protein-precipitation phase-equilibrium properties. It is planned to
employ liquid-state integral-equation theory to develop new expressions for the
compressibility and Helmholtz energy of protein solutions; from these
expressions phase equilibria are obtained. This modeling approach is coupled
with an experimental program to determine the phase equilibria of a number of
model proteins with particular attention given to selective precipitation of a
target protein from a mixture. In addition, specific protein interactions will
be experimentally quantified. Low-angle laser-light scattering and membrane
osmometry will provide information on intermolecular forces and aggregation.
Specific protein-protein interactions will be examined by dynamic light
scattering. Electrostatic and hydrophobic contributions to the PMF will be
probed by sy stematically changing amino-acid residues on the model proteins.
Specific ion-protein interactions will be quantified using differential
refractometry Cl NMR and protein titrations. *** A further component of the
proposed research is to examine solution conditions which favor protein
crystallization. The hypothesis that a crystallizing solvent results in weak
attractive interactions between proteins, while strongly attractive conditions
favor amorphous precipitation, will be examined by determining the osmotic
second virial coefficients for a number of proteins in crystallizing solvents.
It is planned to investigate critically an idea supported by preliminary data,
viz. that crystallization is most likely when the osmotic second virial
coefficient of a protein is slightly, but not strongly, negative.