* 9530135
* IAI Workshop: Nunavut Environmental Assessment Transect     (NEAT)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Elliott Burden, Memorial Univ of Newfoundland
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 12/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9530135 Burden This project will assemble a team of senior researchers with
expertise in the areas of climate, hydrological cycles, biogechemical cycles,
geological processes, and human interventions. This team will outline in a
conference format, the state of our knowledge of Nunavut and similar high
latitude regions, and will then propose, in round table discussions the designs
for long term experiments aimed at identifying and measuring change in these
systems, and the collection and compilation of other data and observations of
change which will be the focus of the proposal to be submitted to IAI Start-Up
Grants Phase II. Phase I of the IAI Start-Up Grants will aim to produce a volume
of review papers on the environment of Nunavut. Invited delegates will be
obligated to produce summaries of the understanding of the land, sea, air, and
biology of Nunavut, and these summaries would be used to establish baseline data
and guidelines for future endeavors in Phase II of the IAI Start-Up Grants.
Logistically, platforms for this research may be centered on the National Park
reserves on Baffin, Bylot and Ellesmere islands. These three islands delineate a
transect from below the Arctic Circle to near the North Pole. This project will
assemble a team of senior researchers with expertise in the areas of climate,
hydrological cycles, biogechemical cycles, geological processes, and human
interventions. This team will outline the state of our knowledge of Nunavut and
similar high latitude regions, and to then propose, in round table discussions
the designs for long term experiments aimed at identifying and measuring change
in these systems, and the collection and compilation of other data and
observations of change which will be the focus of the proposal to be submitted
to IAI Start-Up Grants Phase II. The proposed workshop for Phase I of the IAI
Start-Up Grants will establish baseline data and guidelines for Phase II. The
application developed for Phase II will identify the relevance of this work to
regional and global interests. From a scientific perspective, understanding
environmental change is an important contribution towards understanding the
earth system. By predicting changes to Nunavut, government land-use policy can
be modified to accommodate future developments, and to contribute to increasing
the state of knowledge of similar high latitude regions of the Americas. It is
likely that the Phase II proposal will reopen the Arctic Research Establishment,
a field station in Pond Inlet, and its training component for local technicians
and university students. In addition, this proposal will link universities in
Canada and the United States with the IAI Network. These countries are members
of the IAI, an initiative to stimulate global change research among the
scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science Foundation is the
designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S. responsibilities within
the IAI. ***