* 9530691
* Relationships Between Climate and Glacier Variations in     Western North America
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2001
* David Battisti, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 04/30/2001
* USD 241,865.00

Abstract ATM-9530691 Conway, Howard University of Washington Title:
Relationships Between Climate and Glacier Variations in Western North America
This award will support a study designed to establish what climate information
can be extracted from the glacial record on the west coast of North America.
Glaciers contain a non-linear transformation of past meteorological conditions
and a systematic comparison of the behavior of these glaciers has potential to
reveal considerable new information about past climate in the region. The
Aleutian Low in the north Pacific has a steering effect on storm tracks such
that condition are dry in Washington and wet in Alaska during years when the
Pacific-North America index is positive; there is a negative correlation between
the mass balance of Alaskan and Washington glaciers. The intensity and frequency
of the Aleutian Low. This study will improve understanding of atmosphere-glacier
processes. Although many high resolution meteorological observations are needed
to accurately model atmosphere-glacier processes over short (annual) time
scales, two or three variables should be sufficient to explain behavior over
longer (decadal) time scales. Sensitivity studies will explore glacier response
to climate (both mass changes and subsequent dynamic response) through physical
models of decreasing complexity and establish the simplest workable model that
accurately simulates behavior over decadal time scales. The objective is to
reduce the dimensionality of the problem and build a realistic module that can
be linked to the output of a global model.