* 9530081
* Plasticity of Life History Traits in Arctic Charr:  Use of  Retrospective Data to Couple Migration Data with            Environmental Variation
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Richard Radtke, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/1999
* USD 180,721.00

The relationships between morphology and environmental history will be
investigated. The plan of research is aimed at 1) refining and advancing
promising, but nascent, techniques for extracting a record of the past life
history and environmental conditions encountered by individual fish from otolith
carbonate and archival tags, and 2) exploring a fresh approach to investigate
the influence of environmental conditions upon morphology and life history
plasticity by applying experimentally validated otolith techniques to
individuals from a multitude of natural conditions. The goals are to establish
retrospective and predictive relationships between the chemical structure of
otoliths and environmental factors: to understand interactions among
environmental factors that affect chemical structure; and to combine the
environmental information encoded in otoliths with field observations to
evaluate the importance of biotic and abiotic parameters to the establishment of
divergent life history patterns in Arctic charr. Daily growth increments, the
ratios of elements in the otolith and archival tag information will be used to
back-calculate environmental and somatic changes for individual fish. Techniques
will be applied to: 1) Assess life history data (i.e., growth rates, age
structure, hatch date distribution, timing of spawning, etc.) in terms of life
history strategies. 2) Establish the importance of critical life-history
transitions, conditions affecting their onset, and derive migrational schemes
(whether an individual is a migrant or a resident, age at first migration,
whether a former migrant individual will resume a resident life history
strategy, and the events leading and following migration) by investigating the
structural and elemental composition of fish otoliths. 3) Detect differences in
growth and life histories between different geographical areas as related to
hydrographic, trophic or habitat conditions. 4) Precisely time the occurrence of
several pivotal life history transitions and correlate them with environmental
variables. The results of the proposed research will provide a paradigm to the
study of fish life histories. Such knowledge is vital to our understanding of
the processes fundamental to adaptable life history patterns and would make it
possible to link growth and migration to environmental occurrences. This would
provide insight to the ecological process of interactions between a species and
its environment. In a general ecological sense such information is of great and
fundamental importance since it will allow to reconstruct the complex
environmental interactions that are integrated among individuals to provide for
both the short term stability and the long term evolution of families of
individuals, populations and species.