* 9530758
* Southern Ocean JGOFS: Mesoscale Physical and Biological     Processes at the Polar Front
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/1996,02/29/2000
* Timothy Cowles, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 02/29/2000
* USD 629,000.00

95-30758 COWLES This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The
Southern Ocean is recognized as an important , yet poorly resolved, region of
the world ocean. It is thought that this region plays a critical role in global
carbon dynamics, as well as strongly influencing the flux of heat and salt
between the Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian Oceans. Attempts to improve our
understanding of this region and its role in the global carbon budget depend on
our ability to adequately assess those processes which control or constrain the
rates of carbon fixation and air- sea exchange of CO2. Recent observations in
the Southern Ocean suggest that mesoscale variability in physical, chemical and
biological properties limits our ability to provide accurate large-scale
estimates of important rate processes. Our understanding of carbon flux in the
Southern Ocean thus depends upon resolution of connections between mesoscale and
large-scale processes. The mesoscale dynamics of the Polar Front region of the
Antarctic Circumpolar Current will be investigated using an instrumented towed
vehicle (SeaSoar) to resolve the physical and biological fields over horizontal
spatial scales of 1-150 km, with 2m vertical resolution within the upper 400m.
High resolution surveys of physical and biological properties will be made
during three cruises in the Polar Front (Oct `97, Dec-Jan `97/'98, Mar `98).
Towed instrumentation will document the physical and biological structure
associated with mixing and interleaving of mesoscale features. The high
resolution surveys of physical properties will allow the determination of the
relationship between lateral processes and local vertical mixing. Resolution of
these mesoscale circulation features will be critical for the evaluation of the
properties measured at discrete sampling stations, and will provide the regional
context for evaluation of carbon flux at given locations. Objectives are: 1)
determine the characteristics and spatial scales of the physical and biological
fields in the Polar Frontal region of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current system;
2) evaluate the role of mesoscale circulation in mixing heat, salt, and
biogeochemical properties into and out of the euphotic zone; 3) determine, using
bio-optical indices, the spatial scales of photoadaptation of the autorophic
assemblage in the Polar Front region; 4) incorporate mesoscale patterns of
physical and biological property distribution into a high resolution regional
ocean circulation model.