* 9530453
* Inorganic Monolayers Formed at Organic Templates
* NONE,NONE
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Daniel Talham, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 285,000.00

9530453 Talham This proposal outlines a continuation of a prior NSF research for
the development and characterization of new mixed organic/inorganic monolayer
and multilayer thin film materials formed using Langmuir-Blodgett (LB) methods.
The approach is to incorporate inorganic extended lattice structures into
organic monolayer assemblies thereby introducing into the films structural
features and cooperative phenomena which are inherent to many inorganic
lattices, while at the same time maintaining the monolayer control afforded by
the organic assembly. Layered solid- state structures will be used because they
offer the highest probability of success as the inorganic lattice energy clearly
favors forming layers. Specifically, the proposed research consists of three
efforts: 1) To expand on the protocol developed for preparing new LB materials
containing extended-lattice inorganic networks. 2) To chemically and
structurally characterize new materials and account for structural differences.
3) To investigate the magnetic properties of paramagnetic materials. %%% Several
classes of mixed organic/inorganic assemblies have received attention recently
as researchers have realized that through the combination of organic and
inorganic networks a vast array of new solid-state structures is possible often
with tunable bulk and interfacial properties. Examples include pillared clays,
organic/inorganic layered solids, zeolites with organic guests, self-assembled
organic films at inorganic surfaces, and inorganic mesostructures formed with
the aid of organic surfactants. In addition to the structural and chemical
diversity that these classes of materials promise, the combination of organic
and inorganic components into a "dual-network" assembly opens the possibility of
engineering into one material a composite of physical properties that are
normally only associated with one type of material or the other. An example of a
potentially interesting "dualnetwork" material would be one that combines a
magnetic inorganic lattice with a conducting organic network. Despite the
tremendous potential, detailed studies of these types of materials are still
quite young. The proposed research addresses three important questions. What
drives the solid-state structures and how can they be controlled? If composite
properties are desirable, how can this be achieved? How can coupling of the
networks be tuned to behave separately or in synergy?