* 9530808
* Real-Time Learning Controllers for Enhanced Autonomy and    Reliability of Space Robots
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/1996,10/31/1998
* Robert Sanner, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* C.S. George Lee
* 10/31/1998
* USD 59,328.00

This research explores methods for increasing the autonomy and reliability of
spacecraft and space robotic systems by using a new class of adaptive,
dynamically structured, neural networks. Similar to strategies observed in human
adaptive motor control, the networks are used to develop flexible, compact
models of the robot, its payload, and the environment in which they interact;
these adaptive models are then used to modify the low level motion control
program so as to ensure efficient, high performance operation. There are three
main objectives to the proposed research. The first is to extend neural control
designs for fixed-base robots to dynamically more complex space robotic systems.
The second is to systematically investigate methods for dynamically varying the
amount of computation performed by the network, attempting to simultaneously
achieve high performance with minimum complexity. By combining techniques from
wavelet analysis and nonparametric estimation with nonlinear dynamical stability
theory, it is hoped to develop a general methodology for designing network
structure adaptation mechanisms which achieve a prespecified
complexity/performance tradeoff. The final goal is to implement the resulting
controllers on prototype space robots operating in neutral buoyancy simulation,
and to evaluate their performance on baseline mission operations.