* 9530985
* Steerable Appearance Modeling of Three-Dimensional Scenes
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Charles Dyer, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jing Xiao
* 12/31/2000
* USD 275,883.00

The goal of this research is to develop appearance-based representations of
three-dimensional scenes that permit images corresponding to a continuous range
of views of the scene to be synthesized by adaptively combining a set of basis
images. These steerable appearance models analytically model the effects of a
moving camera on scene appearance. The approach is based on decomposing scene
appearance into three separate components: epipolar motion, visibility, and
photometric properties, which together determine how the scene will appear from
arbitrary viewpoints. Each component is represented and steered independently
before being combined to produce views of the scene. The components are directly
computable from the basis images under certain conditions, avoiding traditional
difficulties caused by ill-posed problems and complex 3-D scene recovery tasks.
The research centers around the dual problems of measurability and steerability,
which provide a formal basis for designing and evaluating the proposed models.
Measurability defines the conditions under which it is possible to recover a
representation from a set of basis images. Steerability specifies the range of
views that may be reconstructed as well as the mechanism for producing them.
Results should provide a better theoretical understanding of the dynamic effects
of viewpoint on scene appearance. Potential applications of steerable appearance
models will be investigated, such as three dimensional object recognition based
on viewpoint-dependent grayscale appearance, and visual map construction of
unknown three-dimensional environments by active exploration.