* 9530332
* IAI Workshop: Comparative Studies on Oceanic and Coastal    Processes in Temperate Zones of the Eastern Pacific
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Tim Baumgartner, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Paul Filmer
* 06/30/1998
* USD 50,000.00

9530332 Baumgartner This workshop will develop a science implementation plan for
research in Pacific Ocean margins along the western Americas, including their
distinctive upwelling and eastern boundary current ecosystems. The focus of the
proposal is on the coastal and oceanic regions of the Pacific margins in order
to focus on the biophysical interactions within a set of ecosystems that are
significantly different from their Atlantic and estuarine counterparts. The
research approach will use comparative studies of ecosystems, using the present
and past spatial and temporal variability to identify and quantify the most
important biophysical interactions and human impacts on those interactions. The
goal is to increase the ability to predict the response of the ecosystems to
natural and anthropogenic changes in environmental conditions using improved
ecosystems models. The unifying theme of this workshop and the research program
for Phase II will be the use of comparative and integrative studies of the
physical, chemical, and biological processes, as well as the human-induced
effects which drive the principal elements of the marine ecosystems. These
ecosystems extend from the intertidal zone onshore to the pelagic region about
200 km offshore. The underlying scientific question to be addressed by this
program is how to predict the response of these ecosystems and key populations
to the forces of global change resulting from direct and indirect human
intervention and from the stresses on natural systems which have been
accumulating over the past century. The workshop participants will design a
coherent and well-coordinated program to conduct comparative studies leading to
substantially improved understanding of the control and regulation of
population/ community structures and productivity of the ecosystems of interest.
The workshop will address priority areas identified in the Inter-American
Institute for Global Change Research (IAI) Science Agenda. The questions which
will be addressed in the formation of a Phase II proposal consider the natural,
intrinsic states and modes of variability in the large-scale biophysical systems
which regulate local physical and biological characteristics of the ecosystems.
The biophysical coupling which regulates abundance and distribution of
planktonic components and closure of complex life cycles in both pelagic and
benthic ecosystems is highlighted for particular attention. In addition,
questions which also relate the concern for effects of direct and indirect
intervention in the natural systems by human activities will be addressed.
Lastly, there will be the application of our understanding of the interaction of
natural processes and human activities to develop predictive models addressing
the pre-eminent question of predicting and ecosystem responses under various
global change scenarios. %%% This workshop will develop a science implementation
plan for research in Pacific Ocean margins along the western Americas, including
their distinctive upwelling and eastern boundary current ecosystems. The focus
of the proposal is on the coastal and oceanic regions of the Pacific margins in
order to focus the planning process on the biophysical interactions within a set
of important ecosystems that are significantly different from their Atlantic and
estuarine counterparts. The research approach will use comparative studies of
ecosystems, using the present and past spatial and temporal variability to
identify and quantify the most important biophysical interactions and the human
impacts on those interactions. The goal is to increase the ability to predict
the response of the ecosystems to natural and anthropogenic changes in
environmental conditions, using improved ecosystems models. The upwelling
regions off western North and South America are among the most biologically
productive in the world's oceans. There is a correspondingly great potential for
the commercial harvest of pelagic species like anchovies, sardines and mackerel,
as well as harvest of the wild and cultivated benthic invertebrates like
crustaceans, mollusks, and urchins. The economic importance of this ocean
productivity to Peru and Chile is difficult to overestimate. Of the
approximately 82 million metric tons (mmt) of marine fish landed in 1991
worldwide, Peru and Chile accounted for approximately 13 mmt (the U.S. west
coast accounted for approximately 1 mmt). The landings in Peru and Chile are an
order of magnitude greater than any other South American country and a factor of
5-6 times as great as the landings in other Pacific Eastern Boundary Current
areas, making them the fourth and fifth most productive nations in the world in
terms of fisheries landings. The economic impacts extend far beyond the direct
income from exports and in-country sales. For instance, although the amount of
fish landed off the west coast of the US was lower than Peru or Chile by a
factor of 5-10, the US Department of Commerce lists the direct, indirect or
induced impact of fisheries on the economies of California, Oregon and
Washington in 1992 as US$4 billion. Canada, Chile, Mexico, Peru, and the United
States will coordinate their research through the IAI Network of ecosystems of
the eastern boundary regions of North and South America. These countries are
members of the IAI, a United States initiative to stimulate global change
research among the scientific institutions of the Americas. The National Science
Foundation is the designated U.S. Government agency to carry out the U.S.
responsibilities within the IAI. ***