* 9531391
* SBIR Phase II: Novel Nonintrusive Combustion and Spray      Diagnostic
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/1999
* Peter DeBarber, MetroLaser, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 05/31/1999
* USD 299,824.00

DeBarber 9531391 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project builds
on the successful results of the Phase I research that demonstrated an optical
diagnostic technique capable of real-time measurement of species concentration
in complex, multi-phase, spray combustion environments. A significant
accomplishment of the Phase I work was to integrate photorefractive crystals
with the technique of Resonant Holographic Interferometry (RHI) to record and
reconstruct species specific holographic interferograms of combusting sprays at
video data rates. In this Phase II effort, research will conducted to develop a
compact, cost effective instrument that permits high speed acquisition and
automated reduction of RHI interferograms. The milestones of the research are to
develop and implement an automated data reduction method with photorefractive
crystals, integrate compact tunable laser diodes, and design and build a fiber
optic based prototype system. The Phase II research will culminate with a
demonstration of the prototype system in a practical combustion environment to
gain its acceptance into the scientific community and generate commercial
interest that will lead into Phase III commercialization. This diagnostic
instrument will lead to the improved development of a wide variety of combustion
and spray devices such as fuel injectors, spray atomizers, and high pressure
nozzles. Markets for this technology include automotive engineering, aircraft
engine development, hazardous waste incineration, combustion research, and spray
coatings. p:\sbir\yhashimi\9531391a.doc