* 9531719
* Development of New Analytical Techniques for Randomly       Nonlinear Structural Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Y.K. Lin, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 07/31/2000
* USD 189,062.00

9531719 Lin Engineering structures are often exposed to dynamic random
excitations which can only be described in terms of probability and statistics.
Examples of such excitations include seismic ground accelerations, turbulent
winds, ocean waves, and traffic loads. It has also been well recognized that
most structures need not be or should not be designed for eternal life;
otherwise, the required size may be too large to be practical, or the cost too
high. Thus the possibility of large deformation and failure must be considered
in the design. The choice must then be made for the optimal total cost within a
desired minimum service life of a structural system, including the costs of
initial construction, maintenance and repair, costs associated with interruption
of service, etc. The problem of a randomly excited structures undergoing large
deformation is a difficult one, since nonlinear behaviors of the structure must
be taken into account. For nonlinear structures, known exact analytical
solutions are, by an large restricted to the case of single degree of freedom
under white noise excitations. Extension to the case of multiple degrees of
freedom is successful only under additional severe restrictions. The PI plans to
develop new advanced analytical techniques to obtain the response statistics and
probability of failure for multi-degree-of-freedom nonlinear structural systems
under random dynamical excitations. Both geometrical and material nonlinearities
will be considered.