* 9531594
* Mathematical Sciences: Applications of Fourier Analysis to  Banach Space Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Alexander Koldobsky, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 64,577.00

DMS-9531594 Alex Koldobsky University of Texas @ San Antonio The study of
subspaces of classical Banach spaces remains one of the most important
directions of the Banach space theory. An approach based on the connection
between embedding of Banach spaces into Lp, positive definite functions and
stable measures was discovered by P. Levy in the 30's, and since then has been
under intensive development. The author's contributions to this direction
include a solution to the 1938 Schoenberg's problem on positive definite
functions, construction of common subspaces of Lp-spaces, a Fourier transform
criterion of isometric embedding into Lp contributing to the 1937 P. Levy's
problem, a solution to the isometric version of the 1969 Kwapien's problem on
Banach subspaces of Lp with p less than 1. All these results were obtained by
using methods of Fourier analysis. The project addresses open problems in this
direction. The problems include the description of positive definite norm
dependent function, the related question on the existence of isotropic measures
which are not mixtures of stable measures, characterization of subspaces of Lp
and zonoids, isomorphic versions of Kwapien's problem and the problem on common
subspaces, application of the Fourier transform to computing the Banach-Mazur
distance, connections between the Fourier transform of norms and duality of
Banach spaces, and between the Fourier transform and the volume of sections of
the unit ball. The problem of extending the Fourier transform technique to
certain infinite dimensional situations has applications to stochastic processes
and electrical engineering. The Fourier transform, as a method of decomposing a
signal into a combination of simple frequencies, has proved to be an important
tool in different areas of mathematics, physics, engineering and statistics. The
author has been working on applications of the Fourier transform to the Banach
space theory for more than ten years, and his contributions include a solution
to the Schoenberg problem on positive definite functions which had been open
since 1938, extension of the Fourier transform technique to infinite dimensional
situations, construction of common subspaces of Banach spaces and other results.
Work in this direction provides important connections between functional
analysis, harmonic analysis and probability theory. For example, calculating the
Fourier transform of a norm one can find the volume of sections of convex bodies
in spaces of arbitrary dimension, or construct random variables which are stable
under summation. Situations where one has to calculate the Fourier transform of
the norm (distance) of a Banach space occur in different applied areas. For
example, if it is impossible to measure a signal directly, and one only has the
information about the distance from the signal to fixed functions in the norm of
a certain Banach space, then one of the ways to identify the signal is to solve
a certain convolution equation involving the norm, which can usually be solved
using the Fourier transform technique. This happens when, because of noise, one
can only see the maximum of a signal (the supremum-norm), which often happens in
electrical engineering. In the study of the strength of fibers, it is important
to find the frequencies of the main defects while one can not measure the
strength at every point and only knows the weakest points of certain pieces of
the material. Finding the spectral function of the strength is an example of how
the Fourier transform of norms works for the study of materials.