* 9531693
* Optical Pumping Enhancement for NQR of Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/1996,10/31/1998
* Michael Raftery, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* joyce guest
* 10/31/1998
* USD 197,500.00

In this project in the Experimental Physical Chemistry Program of the Chemistry
Division, Raftery will develop a magnetic resonance technique to enhance surface
signals in catalyst materials. The technique, called Optical Pumping Enhancement
for NQR of Surfaces (OPENS), overcomes the usual limitations of sensitivity by
combining optical pumping with nuclear quadrupole resonance (NQR) detection in
zero magnetic field. Surface signal enhancements of five orders of magnitude are
expected compared with normal NQR detection. Polarization transfer from xenon
atoms to surface quadrupolar nuclei will be employed. Detection limits will be
investigated using an isotopic nitrogen-14 compound. Selective oxidative
catalysts are used in many chemical production processes world wide, translating
into billions of dollars of commerce annually. Industrial applications of
catalytic materials range from new routes for the synthesis of important
materials to elimination of harmful waste by-products. In these studies the
structure of catalytic materials will be studied using a new magnetic resonance
technique in order to learn how they function and to be able eventually to
improve their manufacture and use. Initial materials examined will be those from
catalytic systems of practical importance, copper oxide and titanium dioxide.