* 9531643
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)               Site in Sociology
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/1996,03/31/2000
* Lynn Weber, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 03/31/2000
* USD 214,361.00

This award provides support to the University of Memphis for an REU Site which
offers students research experiences in sociology. Twelve students each year,
over a three year period, will be selected for eight week sessions in the
summer. The thematic research experience examines the issue of
underrepresentation of women and African Americans in physical sciences and
engineering majors and science careers. Using both quantitative and qualitative
methods, teams of students will approach the issue from three angles: (1) the
process by which students commit to science majors, the factors in performance
and persistence, and the process by which students commit to graduate study and
careers in science; (2) the impact of a pilot curriculum transformation in the
introductory physics course for science and engineering students on performance,
persistence, and plans of women and African American students; and (3) science
faculty attitudes toward science students and the teaching of science. The
students will have access to research data generated by at least three ongoing
research and intervention projects funded by NSF and NIH. Activities of the Site
will include orientation seminars, research seminars, and graduate
education/career planning seminars. This award contributes to the Foundation's
continuing efforts to attract talented students into careers in science through
active undergraduate research experiences.