* 9531291
* SBIR Phsse II:  Development of a Standard Computer Access   Method for People with Disabilities
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1996,02/28/1998
* James Lynds, WESTEST ENGINEERING CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 02/28/1998
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9531291 Lynds This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from
WesTest Engineering Corporation will develop a standard method of providing
computer access to persons with physical disabilities. In recent years the use
of personal computers in education has increased dramatically. Because many
persons with physical disabilities are not able to use a keyboard or a mouse, it
is difficult to provide them with equal access to this education. A variety of
devices have been developed which provide an alternate means of controlling
computers, but their usefulness is seriously compromised by the lack of a
standard method of providing computer control. Since 1991 when the Personal
Computer Memory Card International Association introduced the PCMCIA bus, the
technology has enjoyed widespread application, but it remains technically
immature. To WesTest Engineering Corporation, the existence of the PCMCIA bus
technology, which uses credit-card-sized interface devices, represents an
opportunity to grapple with the challenging problems that must be solved in
order to use the bus for an important new purpose: To standardize computer
access for persons with disabilities and to allow individuals to choose one or
more modes of access according to what best suits their needs. This project will
develop software interfaces which will allow personal computers to be controlled
through the PCMCIA bus. A family of interface devices will also be developed.
Standard software drivers will be developed and documented in an open standard.
These drivers will be provided to both the computer industry and manufacturers
of assistive technology. This project will develop computer interface devices
which are smaller, more portable, less expensive and provide greater
functionality than any product currently available. These advantages over
currently available devices will assure the economic viability of the products.
Establishment of the proposed virtual software architecture for altern ate
access specification will set the standards for this type of device and will
enable the development of alternative input devices in general. ***