* 9531303
* STTR Phase II:  Direct Reading Quantitative Biosensors for  Adenosine Triphosphate (ATP) Dependent Processes
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Robert Scheer, Protein Solutions Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1999
* USD 349,430.00

*** 9531303 Scheer This NSF Phase II SBIR will produce an inexpensive, direct
reading sensor, capable of real time measurement of bacterial contamination in
sensitive areas, such as food and pharmaceutical facilities and water treatment
plants. During phase I of this project the proposer demonstrated the feasibility
of detecting ATP in quantities as small as 10-9 g (2x10-12 moles) both visually
and on photographic film. The technology employs the firefly luciferase
catalyzed light producing reaction between luciferin and ATP. By mediating the
ATP concentration with the "ATPase" apyrase, the proposer is able to produce a
spatial light pattern which indicates the concentration of ATP present in a
sample. In this project the proposer will focus on increasing the sensitivity of
our direct reading ATP sensor to levels more suited to bacterial detection
(10-12 to 10-13 g). This increase in sensitivity will be achieved by three
primary means: 1) increasing the intensity and/or duration of the luminescence
for a given quantity of ATP, 2) increasing the amount of light that reaches the
detector (film or otherwise), and 3) optimizing the non-instrumented detector
for the system. Each of these objectives should contribute at least one order of
magnitude increase in absolute ATP sensitivity. Rapid, simple, inexpensive and
reliable measurement of bacterial contamination will facilitate industrial
compliance with safe food and dairy practices. The sensors can also be applied
to a range of medical and pharmaceutical environments and products. Eventually,
marketing efforts will lead to consumer use in the home for the sanitary
monitoring of kitchen and bathroom surfaces. ***