* 9531797
* Mathematical Sciences: Pattern Formation Relevant to Turing and Morphological Instabilities: Comparison of Theory with  Experiment
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* David Wollkind, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9531797 Wollkind The development of one- and two-dimensional Turing patterns
characteristic of the chlorite-iodide-malonic acid/indicator reaction occurring
in an open gel continuously fed unstirred reactor is to be investigated by means
of various weakly nonlinear stability analyses applied to the appropriately
scaled govern- ing chlorine dioxide-iodine-malonic acid/indicator model system.
It is then proposed that the resulting theoretical predictions deduced from
these pattern formation studies be compared both with the recent experimental
evidence rele- vant to the diffusive instabilities under examination which
consist of stripes, rhombic arrays of rectangles, and hexagonal arrays of spots
or nets, and with similar equilibrium structures characteristic of a diffusion
system used to model interfacial morphologies observed during alloy
solidification. The ra- tionale for these comparisons is to explain more fully
the transition to such stationary symmetry breaking spatial Turing structures
when the malonic acid reservoir concentration varies in the first case and to
examine the unifying as well as divergent aspects of the model systems in the
second. Finally the nonequilibrium Turing and morphological instabilities of
chemical turbulence and cellular dendrites, respectively, are to be investigated
by application of a numerical bifurcation code to the amplitude equations of
nonlinear stability theory in the appropriate parameter ranges for these two
phenomena. The antici- pated results of this research have the potential to
contribute to the under- standing of pattern formation in a wide variety of
application areas. %%% The long-term goal of this project is to develop the
simplest reasonable natu- ral science models which preserve the essential
features of pattern formation while still being consistent with observation. The
candidates for such mathe- matical modeling are those structures generated
during chemical reactions in gels and during the solidif ication of two-
component mixtures, respectively. Quantification of that sort would allow an
experimentalist to obtain a desired outcome without wasting the time and money
caused by repeated unsuccessful trials. The relevant application areas for this
work range from combustion theory and other energy related interactions to
materials processing involving semi-conductor production and steel
manufacturing. ***