* 9531315
* SBIR Phase II:  Development of Artificial Pinning Center    Niobium Titanium Superconductors with Optimal Overall       Compositions
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/2000
* Terence Wong, Supercon Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

9531315 Wong This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
investigate the possibility of varying the composition of Niobium Titanium
(NbTi) superconductors by using a novel artificial pinning center approach. The
technical objective of the Phase II is to develop a process for producing
commercial scale billets via the Artificial Pinning Center (APC) process with
compositions optimized for a particular applications. Two different compositions
will be chosen, one for high field use, the other for low to intermediate field
use. In addition the process to produce monofilamentary material will also be
scale from R&amp;D to commercial sized billets. All conventionally produced NbTi
superconductors use a melted alloy of single composition, Nb47wt%Ti. Economic
and technical limitations have prevented the use of other alloy compositions.
The Supercon APC process uses pure Nb and Ti sheets as the starting material,
thus overall NbTi composition can be varied simply by changing the thickness of
the sheets. By varying composition, one should be able to optimized composition
for particular applications. For example, conductor that is used at high fields
(&gt;7T) must have the highest critical current densities at these fields. Thus
the composition that is most optimal would be one that optimizes the upper
critical field. For conductor that is used in low field applications, such as
MRI, peak fields do not exceed 5T. In addition, these applications are very
sensitive to conductor cost as measured by $/Kamp * M. In this case a higher Ti
content alloy would be attractive. It has been shown that higher Ti content
composites can achieve low field Jc's higher than the conventional melted alloy.
The use of higher Ti content reduces the raw material costs, as the Ti replace
Nb which is 2-4 times as expensive. This SBIR program will results in a highly
economical process for the fabrication on NbTi superconductors with excellent Jc
performance. Conventional NbTi alloy derived superconduc tors are the principle
competing product for this Supercon APC material. Optimizing filament
composition, elimination of the need for NbTi alloy and conventional
precipitation heat treatments, and good ductility should provide the necessary
cost advantage for APC material to compete successfully with conventional
material. Among the applications that can benefit from these improvements are
MRI, laboratory solenoids, magnetic ore separation, magneto-hydrodynamic
propulsion, magnetic levitation, fusion and high energy physics magnets, and
nuclear magnetic resonance.