* 9531479
* A Conference entitled 'The Third Scientific Discipline in   Behavioral Research:  Computational Modeling of Behavioral  Processes' to be held at Michigan State Univ. March, 1997
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Charles Hulin, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Leland
* 05/31/1997
* USD 67.00

The scientific study of human behavior in organizations relies exclusively on
the observation of behavior either under naturally occurring conditions or those
that are contrived, conditions that Cronbach labeled as the two disciplines of
scientific psychology (Cronbach, 1957; 1975). While these disciplines differ in
their assumptions about the interface between theory and data, they both require
that scientific knowledge relevant to human behavior must be based on the
observation of actual behaviors. Recently, the study of behavior has begun to
take advantage of knowledge gained from research based on computational or
mathematical models and computer simulations in which no actual behaviors of
people are involved. These models/simulations have been found to be quite useful
for advancing understanding of large macro-level systems, such as global climate
conditions or the nature of organizational structures and other behaviors of the
firm. They have also proved useful for advancing understanding of micro-level
systems, in particular, cognitive architectures of problem solving and thinking.
At the level of individuals' behaviors in organizations, the use of such models
for aiding understanding of behavior have been rare. Yet, there are many reasons
to believe that computational modeling, mathematical models and computer
simulations can be just as valuable at the individual level of behavior as they
have been at the more macro- and micro- levels. This support is for a conference
designed to stimulate work in computational models for advancing the
understanding of human behavior in work organizations. The stimulation of
interest will be accomplished by attracting high quality participants to the
conference, conducting the conference in a manner designed to stimulate the
creation of quality papers, and also by actively recruiting and supporting the
attendance of young scholars in the field. This conference is being jointly
funded with the American Psychological Association and the Office of Naval
Research. + _ Ûª▓ ÑOh ª' +'ª▒0 + + S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (
++++++++++++ / ▀ ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ++++++++++++ ] $ H l + ¢ ╗ D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT robin cantor robin cantor @ O¼S + @ -+Y+ª) @
ªa‗k7+ @ v(A Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ]ªe =- e i j j j j j j j ` ` ` ` ` ` n ` » 1 ╝
╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ f e e e   = ½ = ª ─ T = , » j ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ » ╝ j j ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ ╝ j ╝ j
╝ f + j j j j ╝ f ╝ ( ╝