* 9531388
* SBIR Phase II: Conformal Ion Implantations Development      for Surface Modification
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/1997,06/30/2000
* Richard Adler, North Star Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 06/30/2000
* USD 359,234.00

DMI-9531388 Adler Ion implantation can change the properties of a surface
without changing the underlying substrate. This technology has growing
applications in wear reduction and corrosion reduction of metal surfaces. Many
of these applications have been limited by the fact that implantation is usually
a "line of sight process. Plasma source ion implantation (PSII) has the
potential to overcome this limitation as long as the plasma can be made to
"conform" to the surface throughout the implant's duration. Limitations in
plasma density and power system drive conditions often limit the degree to which
the implant conforms to the surface. By increasing the plasma density and power
system peak power, those limitations can be overcome, leading to a significant
improvement in the uniformity of the implant and a subsequent increase in
implant utility as a surface modification technique. In phase I we demonstrated
through experiments that we could produce a system in which the plasma conformed
to the object being implanted to within 1-2 cm. This was accomplished through
improvements in the plasma source, and in the pulsed power system which powers
the implantation. In our proposed phase II program, we will upgrade existing
pulsed power equipment at NSRC and build a new high density plasma source in
order to perform conformal implants of this type at high power. The proposed
technology will make it possible to apply implantation to surfaces which are
"bumpy" such as dies and molds. This will increase the range of applications
over which this technique can be used and improve tool die lifetime.