* 9531482
* Study of Growth Front Roughening Using Diffraction and      Imaging Techniques
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Toh-Ming Lu, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 09/30/1999
* USD 309,917.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9531482 Wang This research will support the
investigation of the formation of interface roughness during growth/etching of
surfaces under conditions far from equilibrium. Interface roughness is a central
issue in thin film deposition and directly controls many physical and chemical
properties of the films. The goals are to grow amorphous films and test
unambiguously the validity of various proposed mechanisms based on noise induced
growth front roughening. Differentiation of various roughness mechanisms in a
molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) growth front will be carried out as will the
development of real time diffraction techniques, especially light scattering for
quantitative measurement of rough surface growth in a hostile deposition
environment. %%% This research will support the investigation of the formation
of interface roughness during growth/etching of surfaces under conditions far
from equilibrium. Interface roughness is a central issue in thin film deposition
and directly controls many physical and chemical properties of the films. The
goals are to grow amorphous films and test unambiguously the validity of various
proposed mechanisms based on noise induced growth front roughening. Various
growth techniques will be used and a light scattering technique for the in situ
monitoring of rough surface growth will be developed. ***