* 9531914
* Block Copolymer Self-Assembly: Morphologies, Thermo-mechanical Behaviors and Kinetic Pathways
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Zhen-Gang Wang, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2001
* USD 146,000.00

9531914 Wang Motivated by the high promise of block copolymers as materials for
nanotechnology, and by their intrinsic scientific interest as model systems for
self-assembling complex fluids, a systematic program of theoretical
investigations will be undertaken on a number of topics involving self-assembled
block copolymer nanostructures using statistical mechanical techniques. Some of
these topics deal with phenomenologies that are expected to apply to a large
class of amphiphilic systems, while others are unique to block copolymers. The
thermo-mechanical properties of ordered nanostructures of block copolymers will
be studied. By including mechanical stress or strain, a new dimension is added
to the study of self-assembling complex fluids. Focus will be on various thermo-
mechanical instabilities and phase transitions that occur when an ordered
nanostructure is subjected to anisotropic stress or strain. Some of these
instabilities and transitions are unique to ordered block copolymer
nanostructures and are manifestations of length- scale dependent ordering,i.e.,
fluid-like behavior on the monomer scale and solid-like on the polymer length-
scale. Also to be studied will be kinetic pathways of order- disorder and order-
order transitions in diblock copolymers using a time-dependent Ginzburg-Landau
approach. Focus will be on possible non-trivial intermediate states during the
various transitions after a sudden change in the system parameters. Of special
interest will be the existence of the so-called pseudo-stable states which
correspond to saddle points on the free energy surfaces. These states will be
explored both dynamically and in equilibrium. Finally, the phase behavior and
nanostructures of ABC triblock copolymers will be studied using self-consistent
field techniques. In contrast to the better studied AB diblocks, a fundamentally
new feature here is that the morphological structures and phase behaviors depend
not only on the fraction of ea ch block and the overall molecular weight, but
also crucially on the sequence of the blocks in the chain and on the relative
strengths of the interactions between the three unlike pairs of blocks. %%% This
new award is to support theoretical research on nanostructure and phase
transitions in block copolymers. The research particularly looks at the behavior
of this important class of polymers when subjected to mechanical forces. In
addition to providing insight into fundamental issues in polymer physics, the
results will also be useful in applications of this class of polymers for
practical use. ***