* 9531828
* Symbolic Computing and Dimensionally Reduced Models of      Fluid Flow
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Stanly Steinberg, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 05/31/2000
* USD 41,778.00

This project will develop new methods for numerically modelling incompressible
fluid flows of the type that appear in global environmental modelling problems.
The proposed models are hyperbolic and dispersive vertically-averaged models of
stratified incompressible flow which are derived from the Navier-Stokes
equations. These models reduce three-dimensional models to a system of complex
two-dimensional models, which promise greater numerical efficiency. However, the
averaged models are not well posed for some interesting ranges of their
parameters. Consequently, their instability and regularization must be
investigated. This analysis, along with the discretization of the continuum
equations, the accuracy and stability analysis of the discrete problems, and the
coding of the discrete equations are all algebraically complex, so the use of
computer algebra will play a critical role in this project. The results of the
project can be used for the global modelling of the ocean, the atmosphere, and
other complex environments. The current codes implementing detailed models of
such environments require computational resources that tax even the largest
computers. The goal of this project is to produce new models and numerical
methods for their solution which would represent a significant improvement in
efficiency and accuracy over existing models for some important applications.
***