* 9531728
* Symposium:  Conference on Hormones, Brain and Behavior:     Torino, Italy: August 25-30, 1996
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Rae Silver, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Kathie L. Olsen
* 01/31/1997
* USD 10,160.00

Sisk 9602169 Puberty is a well-defined developmental phase when reproductive
function and behaviors mature in animal species. The maturation process begins
in a poorly defined manner and is propagated further by changes in gonadal
steroid sensitivity. Unfortunately, a thorough understanding of the mechanisms
triggering puberty has been elusive. Dr. Sisk's investigations focus on how
androgenic steroid hormones, such as testosterone, influence brain function
differently in reproductively immature and adult males. Juvenile males are
relatively unresponsive to the effects of testosterone on behaviors related to
reproduction, and Dr. Sisk is identifying the neuronal elements of prepubertal
males responsible for the lack of responsivity and the underlying causes. In
addition, the idea of puberty as a developmental stage during which steroid
hormones can permanently shape brain organization and function are being
addressed. These investigations will provide important contributions to an
understanding of how brain processes change during puberty, and will also have
more general applicability to an understanding of hormonal influences on the
nervous system throughout the lifespan. These investigations contribute
significantly to our understanding of species survival in the natural setting
and the neurobiological basis for successful reproduction.