* 9531275
* SBIR Phase II:  Application of Induction Accelerators for   Electron Beam Radiolysis of Contaminated Water
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/1996,10/31/1999
* James Moran, Science Research Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1999
* USD 299,115.00

*** 9531275 Moran This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project deals
with toxic and infectious contaminants which are present in unacceptably high
concentrations in groundwater and in wastewater in many locations. While many
toxic contaminants in wastewater must be reduced to concentrations on the order
of parts per billion prior to disposal, a more modest reduction is appropriate
for industrial in-process water recycling. This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase II project from Science Research Laboratory will apply a compact,
low cost, all-solid-state induction accelerator technology to the destruction of
toxic organic contaminants in wastewater and to industrial process water so that
it is made suitable for in-process water recycling. In the first phase of this
research, Science Research Laboratory was able to demonstrate effective and
efficient destruction of benzene, and toluene with and without addition of
oxidizing enhancers, hydrogen peroxide and dissolved oxygen. Science Research
Laboratory is now in a position to lay the groundwork for rapid implementation
of an induction-accelerator-based water decontamination system based on electron
beam radiolysis on a pilot scale. Pilot scale is within the design parameters of
the current SNOMAD-IV accelerator at Science Research Laboratory. Cost studies
show this technology is superior to all competing remediation treatments,
especially at contaminant concentrations above 50 ppm. Advantages of solid state
circuitry, modularity, scalability, and compactness offer additional technical
advantages over conventional electron beam systems. Benzene destruction was
effective to three or four orders of magnitude. Efficiencies compare well to
those of conventional electrostatic electron accelerators. Peroxide addition
improves destruction efficiency by approximately 37%. There are important cost
reductions associated with these efficiency gains. This project has the
potential to provide a cost-effective treatmen t which will not only improve the
quality of effluent water but may also greatly reduce or eliminate wastewater
discharge to the environment by facilitating industrial in-process water
recycling and thereby removing a major source of pollution. EPA estimates 35
billion gallons of highly toxic wastewater was treated by U.S. industries in
1989 at a cost of $2 Billion. SRL's novel induction accelerator may capture 5%
or more of this market to provide annual gross revenues of $100 million. Since
the water intensive pulp and paper industry discharge even much larger volumes
of wastewater, 4.25 billion gallons daily, SRL will first target this industry
on a pilot scale. ***