* 9531582
* Acquisition and Development of a High-Resolution            Photoelectron Analyzer for Studies of Surfaces, Films, and  Multilayers of Metals, Semiconductors, & Magnetic Materi
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1999
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 08/31/1999
* USD 153,601.00

9531582 Chiang With this award, the Department of Physics at the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign will acquire a high resolution photoelectron
analyzer, which will be dedicated to support research in materials and physical
sciences. The equipment will be used for two research projects based on high
resolution photoelectron spectroscopy. In one, the atomic structure of surfaces
will be studied using the techniques of photoelectron diffraction, extended
photoemission fine structure spectroscopy, and photoelectron holography. These
techniques provide information about the symmetry and geometrical arrangement of
surface atoms, and are powerful tools for investigating the atomistics of
surface chemical reactions and film growth. In the other project, quantum layer
structures, including single and multiple quantum wells and superlattices, will
be studies. The goal is to understand the electronic effects associated with
quantum confinement, coupling, interface scattering and crystal potential
modulation. Spin polarization and magnetic effects in these quantum structures
will be investigated. This analyzer will be used in conjunction with the new
undulator sources that are under construction at the Synchrotron Radiation
Center (Stoughton, Wisconsin) and the Advanced Photon Source (Argonne National
Laboratory).