* 9531329
* REU Program in Forest Ecology at Harvard Forest
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* David Foster, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 02/28/1999
* USD 132,280.00

This award will support the participation of nine undergraduate students in the
12 week REU Sites program at Harvard Forest. Since 1985 the Harvard Forest has
conducted an exciting Summer Research program in Ecology dedicated to providing
undergraduate students with independent research experience and to promoting
career development in ecology. This very effective program consists of
advertisement and recruitment; selection of diverse and productive students;
advance preparation; individual mentorship within research groups comprised of
faculty, graduate students, and postdoctoral fellows; weekly seminars and
discussion groups on science, careers, graduate studies, and ethics; field trips
and recreational opportunities; an annual student symposium; program
questionnaire and discussion; and follow- up including publication, professional
presentation, and thesis development. The Harvard Forest is the base for an NSF-
Long term Ecological Research Program, DOE-National Institutes of Global Change
Program, and related studies involving 75 researchers. The central research
theme is the comparison of natural disturbance with recent direct (e.g. land-
use) and indirect (e.g. Chemical and climatic) human impacts, in terms of forest
structure and function. The Harvard Forest is exceptionally well-equipped with
field, laboratory, and housing facilities for an REU Sites program. Students are
supervised in their independent study by a mentor and the program is coordinated
by Harvard Forest staff, including the Director, Administrator, Forest Manager,
Museum Coordinator, Computer Manager, and Data Manager. Participants are
recruited with a strong emphasis on geographic coverage and participation of
women, minorities, and small colleges. This award will foster the continued
education and training of individuals who will be part of the next generation of
basic researchers in the forest ecology. It will also help to produce citizens
informed about various aspect s of environmental sciences and management and
decision making in environmental issues.