* 9531557
* SBIR Phase II: Improved NDE of Deep Inaccessible Flaws in   Metal Structures
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1997,09/30/1999
* Peter Czipott, Quantum Magnetics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1999
* USD 263,750.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is to develop an
improved non-destructive evaluation (NDE) system based on an ultrasensitive
room-temperature magnetic sensor. The research is for a magnetoresistive eddy
current instrument which will have unique capabilities including (1) low-
frequency inspection through thick layers of aluminum or steel, (2) broad-band
measurements from zero to several megahertz, and (3) large-area scanning-array
imaging with high scan rates and high spatial resolution. During Phase I, the
research instrument detected a small cavity on the back surface of an aluminum
plate 4.9mm thick. The signal-to-noise ratio indicated that a crack roughly 1mm
in diameter could be detected through 10mm of aluminum. During Phase II,
research will be conducted to further enhance the instrument by establishing its
sensitivity for detecting cracks and thickness loss, and by applying it to NDE
problems to illustrate the potential applications in both aviation and
maintenance of industrial infrastructure. This project activities will combine
the firm's expertise in sensitive magnetic measurements with Kodak's improved
sensor technology. In addition, Boeing and South West Research Institute will
contribute to NDE experiments and the design of a practical NDE system. If
successful, the improved NDE technology will reduce the cost and increase the
effectiveness of inspecting aircraft and aging infrastructure. Representative
applications include (1) detecting cracks and corrosion in thick and multilayer
aircraft structures, (2) inspection of steel tubes in power-plant heat
exchangers, (3) detecting corrosion under insulation, and (4) inspecting a
reactor pressure vessel through its stainless-steel cladding.