* 9531310
* Research Experience for Undergraduates in Grassland Ecology at Konza Prairie Research Natural Area
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/29/2000
* Walter Dodds, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 02/29/2000
* USD 148,054.00

This award will support the participation of ten undergraduate students each
year in independent research studies of tallgrass prairie ecology at the Konza
Prairie Research Natural Area (KPRNA)/ Long-Term Ecological Research Site of
Kansas State University. Long-term subjects of investigation at the site include
study of the impact of fire and grazing on native tallgrass prairie vegetation.
To facilitation investigation of these variables, all watersheds on Konza
Prairie have been assigned to different burn regimes and native and domestic
grazers have been introduced to some watersheds. The watershed level
manipulations on KPRNA offer a unique opportunity for the study of many aspects
of prairie ecology. Currently, 41 Kansas State University faculty, 32 visiting
scientists, 29 graduate students, and 15 undergraduate researchers are working
on 126 research projects on KPRNA. The REU Sites Program on KPRNA will feature
several components including an independent research project, a
seminar/discussion course in grassland ecology, a course in bioethics and
ecology, and a trip to a national scientific meeting. Each REU student will have
a faculty mentor as well as contact with resident graduate students and research
associates. KPNRA REU students will interact with other undergraduates who are
brought to campus each summer, at the invitation of other programs, to do
research in other scientific disciplines. At the conclusion of the summer,
students will make an oral presentation of the results of their research and
prepare the results for publication. There will be a yearly assessment of the
program by student and faculty participants in order to insure that the REU
program continues to provide a quality experience to all participants. This
award will foster the continued education and training of individuals who will
be part of the next generation of basic researchers in the ecology. It will also
serve to produce citizens informed about vari ous aspects of environmental
sciences and management and decision making in environmental issues.