* 9531642
* Mathematical Sciences: Absolute Continuity of Parabolic     Measure and Regularity of PDE's
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/1996,05/31/1999
* John Lewis, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/1999
* USD 65,837.00

Abstract Lewis 9531642 This research is concerned with mutual absolute
continuity of parabolic and Lebesgue measure as well as related Dirichlet-
Neumann problems. In certain time varying domains Lewis and Murray have shown
that parabolic measure for the heat equation is mutually absolutely continuous
with respect to a certain projective Lebesgue measure. This investigation will
begin with the study of a model pde whose prototype is the pullback pde obtained
from the heat equation by way of a certain mapping onto the above time varying
domain. Since the pullback pde has a parabolic measure that is mutually
absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure, the object of the
investigation will be to determine what properties of the model pde are actually
needed to guarantee mutual absolute continuity of the above measures. As for the
Dirichlet and Neumann problems they are now well understood for square
integrable functions defined on the boundary of the above time varying domains.
The next step is to consider the Neumann problem for p th power integrable
functions when p is between 1 and 2. Again the above pullback pde needs to be
analyzed closely. Many phyical processes can be analyzed using partial
differential equations. The most famous classical partial differential equations
are Laplace's equation, the heat equation, and the wave equation each of which
originated in the 18 th and 19 th centuries and found uses in the study of
gravity, electricity, fluid flow, electromagnetic waves, to mention only a few
topics. My research concerns problems of the following type : Given the
temperature on the walls of a room, find the temperature at any place in the
room at any later time ? This problem is called the Dirichlet problem for the
heat equation. The Neumann problem can be stated similarly in terms of the rate
at which heat is flowing out of the walls of the room. Mathematically if the
temperature on the walls of the room is fixed and nice enough (cont inuous),
then the Dirichlet problem can be shown to have a unique solution. Part of my
research has been concerned with whether this problem has a unique solution when
the walls of the room and temperature on the walls is allowed to vary. This
problem has now been essentially completely solved and the corresponding Neumann
problem is being studied. Possible applications of this research are to free
boundary problems where the size and temperature of an object are constantly
changing (ice melting, gases expanding, nuclear waste solidifying).