* 9531395
* SBIR Phase II: Roentgen: An Intelligent Radiotherapy Planner
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Robin Burke, Chicago Information Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1999
* USD 297,800.00

9531395 Burke This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is aimed
at the creation of clinically-viable case based Radiation Therapy Planning
Assistant, and a tool for constructing other case-based intelligent assistants
for medical tasks. The key innovations are the ability of the tool to reason
about medical images and to develop its initial case base from existing archives
of medical data, both textual and multimedia. The direct benefits of this
project would be to improve the quality and consistency of radiation therapy
planning. Because previous cases can be used as a guide, less-experienced
dosimetrists can profit from expert's experience directly. Further, the
development of a generalized tool based on ROENTGEN has the potential to extend
such benefits to other areas of medicine. There are other approaches to building
intelligent medical advisory systems, most notably, those approaches based on
expert-systems technology. However, these systems cannot take advantage of
existing medical archives as ROENTGEN does and have a significantly higher
development and maintenance cost. The project will proceed along two fronts.
First is the further development and clinical evaluation of the existing
ROENTGEN radiation therapy system. The second direction of development is to
generalize the techniques of ROENTGEN into a case-based reasoning shell. Such a
tool will facilitate creation of many other case-based assistants similar to
ROENTGEN for other medical domains,particularly those that require visual
reasoning. The commercial potential of ROENTGEN and related tools lies in their
ability to make intelligent use of data already being collected through hospital
information systems and medical imagery. These systems turn inert data into a
type of institutional memory that can contribute to new patient treatment.