* 9531880
* Collaborative Research:  Profiling ALACE Floats for the     Subpolar Gyre in Support of the Atlantic Circulation and    Climate Experiment (ACCE)
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/2000
* Russ Davis, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/2000
* USD 1,405,000.00

9531880 Davis In conjunction with a companion project by Dr. Brechner Owens of
the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 150 profiling ALACE (Autonomous
Lagrangian And Circulation Explorer) floats will measure the absolute velocity
and evolution of the temperature and salinity structure of the upper 1500 m in
the subpolar gyre as part of the Atlantic Circulation and Climate Experiment
(ACCE). Absolute velocities will be mapped at nominal depths of 400 and 1500
meters' depth using float arrays deployed uniformly over the basin. The velocity
data will address three major pathways of the meridional overturning circulation
(MOC) within the subpolar gyre: the shallow inflow of water into the regions of
water mass modification; the convection that forms new dense waters; and the
outflow of the resultant intermediate water from this source region. Temperature
and salinity profiling will describe time evolution of the upper 1500 m,
allowing quantification of the rates of water-mass modification in the warm-
water limb of the MOC that supplies water for formation of deep and intermediate
water. With 150 profiles observed roughly every ten days over two years, these
observations will describe evolution with a combined temporal and spatial
resolution greater than can be provided by all the other ACCE observations,
especially over the winter-time convection season when other observations are
extremely scarce. Analysis of these data will provide time series of three-
dimensional maps of the velocity, temperature, and salinity fields within the
upper 1500 m of the subpolar gyre over the duration of the ACCE field
experiment. Additionally, statistical analyses will provide spatial
distributions of mean circulation and quantities like eddy kinetic and potential
energies, eddy mixing, and fluxes of heat and freshwater. These gyre-wide
estimates will provide strong constraints for the future climate models that
must be developed to adequately include the physics of the subpolar gyre,
particularly convection. The absolute velocity measurements will also be used to
reference large-scale geostrophic shears obtained from hydrography in this
region where strong barotropic components are common.