* 9531717
* Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)               Site in Cognitive Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* John Batson, Furman University
* Continuing Grant
* Guy Van Orden
* 04/30/1999
* USD 101,100.00

This award provides support to Furman University for an REU Site which offers
students research experiences in psychology. Eight students each year, over a
three year period, will be selected for ten-week sessions in the summer. The
focus of the research program is information processing. Students will pursue
research in the areas of learning, memory, and cognition. Five faculty directors
representing distinct perspectives in psychology (biological, comparative,
cognitive, developmental, and social) will collaborate with the students. Each
student will be responsible for a specific, unique research project. Project
activities will insure that each student conducts meaningful research and learns
not just about his or her own project, but also about the integrated nature of
behavioral science. The interdisciplinary nature of research will be a focus of
the Site. Other activities will include instruction on computer skills and data
analysis, written and oral presentations, and weekly group meetings to present
issues and help students appreciate the interrelationship of the various
projects.. This award contributes to the Foundation's continuing efforts to
attract talented students into careers in science through active undergraduate
research experiences.