* 9531289
* SBIR Phase II:  Catalytic Oxidation of Chlorofluorocarbons  and Related Compounds for Pollution Abatement Applications
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1997,05/31/2000
* Joseph Rossin, GUILD ASSOCIATES INC
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 05/31/2000
* USD 395,583.00

9531289 This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project involves the
development of a monolithic oxidation catalyst to control the release of CFCs
(cholorofluorocarbons) and related compounds into the environment. The release
of CFCs and related compounds is believed to play a significant role in the
decline in the earth's ozone layer. Compounds intended to replace CFCs, which
include HFCs (hydrofluorocarbons) and HCFCs (hydrochlorofluorocarbons) also
possess ozone-depleting properties. As a result, the release of these compounds
must be controlled. Catalytic oxidation is a technology well suited for
controlling vapor phase emissions. However, catalysts capable of oxidizing CFCs
and related compounds have rapidly deactivated due to degradation of the
catalyst in the harsh acid gas environment. Under the Phase I effort, the
feasibility of using a Pt/m-ZrO2 catalyst was investigated. The catalyst was
highly reactive and was able to destroy 1,000 ppm of R22, R113 and R134a without
deactivation for over 100 hours of continuous operation. The objectives of the
Phase II proposal are to first modify the catalyst formulation in an effort to
maximize the reactivity and durability of the catalyst, then incorporate the
catalyst into the washcoat of a monolith and evaluate the reactivity and
durability of said material. To meet these objectives, key physical properties
of the catalyst will be systematically varied, with selected materials being
evaluated for reactivity and stability. Once optimized, monolithic catalysts
will be prepared and evaluated for reactivity and durability against selected
CFCs, HFCs and HCFCs over a wide range of process conditions. Based on results
obtained during the Phase I effort, it is anticipated that the monolithic
catalyst will possess sufficient reactivity and durability to be employed in
commercial pollution abatement applications. Technologies capable of
economically controlling the release of CFCs and related compounds are currently
unavailable. Should the n ovel catalyst developed in this Phase II effort prove
successful, economic pollution abatement systems may be designed around the
catalyst to meet the needs of a wide variety of applications which include
controlling plant fugitive emissions and fume abatement.