* 9531925
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlocal Models in the Mechanics of  Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* Roger Fosdick, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Hans Engler
* 07/31/2000
* USD 128,600.00

9531925 Fosdick This research program is concerned with fundamental issues of
material behavior that are produced from constitutive structures that sense the
nonlocal, long range particle-particle interactions within a body. It represents
an attempt to generalize and to place into perspective the somewhat limited
spatial gradient theories of local interaction. The investigation is theoretical
and is based on the idea of energy minimization. While the generic problems
contained in this work are nonconvex, and must address this level of difficulty,
to a large extent the interests and objectives lie in understanding the
"penalty" due to the global nonlocal structure. The project involves an
investigation of the regularity and existence of minimizers. It includes a
proposal to describe their detailed form, and a plan to understand how the
number of transition boundaries that a body can coincidentally support relates
to the degree of nonlocal influence and to the size of the body. The
identification of length scales and the application of scaling transformations
are suggested as avenues for understanding the way in which gradient theories
may be considered as approximations. The overall project is expected to lead to
a model for understanding the organization of material phase structures in
bodies at finite scales. The detailed investigations are expected to form a
bridge in the "regularity gap" that now exists between the purely local,
strongly irregular, theories commonly associated with the classical ideas of
Gibbs, and the relatively smooth gradient theories historically attributed to
van der Waals, Korteweg, Ginzburg and Landau, and Cahn and Hilliard. %%%
Understanding the behavior of materials which can change their internal
structure when loaded, heated, or placed in chemical or electrical environments,
is important to the development of advanced applications in materials science---
applications which impact many diverse areas of society, from energy conservati
on to micromachines for medical devices. The idea that nondestructive,
reversible phase changes can be used to obtain a desired sensible material
behavior is of great potential technological importance, and understanding how
to affect and control such processes is an essential step in the transfer of
this science into technology for the benefit of society. Electrorheological
fluids sense a small scale structure and stiffen and become solid-like in the
presence of an electric field, and the design of micro-switches in the area of
thin film technologies also depends upon a similar small scale phenomenon. There
is a need to improve our understanding and predictive capabilities of such
materials through the development of relevant mathematical models. The existence
of microscopic domains in ferromagnetic and ferroelastic materials, shear bands
in ductile solids, finely twinned microstructural laminates in martensite (shape
memory alloys, etc...), and recently discovered high transition temperature
superconductors all underscore the importance of internal, small scale
structures. Experimental observations have provided a wealth of evidence that
relates the gross response of a material body to its underlying microstructure.
This research program investigates the role that long range particle-particle
interactions play in the development of microstructure. It is based on the
global optimization of energy and the idea that the amount of energy that is
stored in each element of a body is influenced by not only the state of the
element, but also by the state of the other elements of the body, in a way
similar to what molecular theory might suggest. The theory is phenomenological
and, as such, is contained within the framework of nonlinear continuum
mechanics. The aim is to determine the significance of nonlocal theory in
describing the behavior of materials which support coexistent phase structures
---materials which depend upon the existence of these microstructures for their
novel responses. ***