* 9531977
* Collaborative Research:  Bacterial Production Uncoupled     from Primary Production:  Implications for DOM              Fluxes in the Southern Ocean (JGOFS)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2001
* David Kirchman, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 07/31/2001
* USD 263,552.00

95-31977 Kirchman This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean
Flux Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of
the fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. This
research will investigate the role and quantitative importance of bacteria in
the transformation of organic matter as part of the JGOFS Southern Ocean Process
Study. Researchers hypothesize that extreme seasonal and spatial variation in
the Southern Ocean leads to transient uncoupling between bacteria and primary
producers as mediated through the dissolved organic matter pool. The principal
goal of the research will be comprehensive spatial and temporal coverage of core
measurements (bacterial abundance, biomass, and production). This will allow an
integrated quantitative assessment of the fraction of primary production
consumed by bacteria. Equally important is the study of the mechanisms
controlling the rate and time frame in which primary production is processed by
bacteria. This is critical to complement the core measurements and address these
issues. Specifically, total bacteria counts will be complemented with counts of
nucleoid-containing cells and respiring cells to determine the fraction of the
bacterial assemblage that is active. Incubation experiments in collaboration
with other researchers will examine variation in DOM lability and the growth
yield of bacteria. This project will provide a quantitative and mechanistic
understanding of variability in a major pathway of carbon flow, the microbial
loop, in the Southern Ocean.