* 9531739
* ROW/RPG: Long-term Verbatim Memory for Complex Material when Retrieved by Verbal and Motoric Cues
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1997
* Helga Noice, Augustana College
* Standard Grant
* Michael McCloskey
* 08/31/1997
* USD 21,895.00

9531739 NOICE This research will investigate long-term retention of complex
verbal material and the contribution of accompanying movement to that retention.
Research during the last fifteen years that has determined some conditions under
which knowledge acquired in school endures for long periods of time has proved
useful to educators and curriculum designers. However, that research has
concentrated on memory for discrete items such as foreign language vocabulary,
and relatively little attention has been given to verbatim retention of complex
material. There has been some work examining long-term recall of passages
learned verbatim; this research has found that such passages were generally
acquired by chaining and, due to the shallow processing involved, when one link
in the chain was broken, the rest of the material became unavailable. However,
research into professional acting expertise has shown that actors' retention of
material is based on extremely deep processing which probes the text at a micro
level to extract information about character and motivation. Also, actors
necessarily "overlearn" material; this overlearning has been found to be one of
the important predictors of long-term storage found in earlier research.
Therefore, when material is learned in this manner, it should still be available
months after it has ceased being rehearsed or performed. In addition to looking
at long-term retention itself, this project will investigate the effects of
movement on such retention. A rich body of evidence has shown enhanced recall of
words and phrases through enactment, and it has frequently been suggested that
this facilitation is due to the existence of motoric codes. However, that
research has almost invariably been confined to short words or phrases rather
than connected discourse, and the movements involved were usually literal
enactments of the verbal material. In contrast, this research will examine the
influence of movement on the retenti on of lengthy, complex, verbal material
when the movement is not a literal enactment of that material. The prediction is
that, many months after the final performance of a role, actors (who will have
learned new roles in the interim) will retain a large majority of their lines
verbatim and will be able to demonstrate enhanced recall when reenacting the
movement patterns. Furthermore, the prediction is that the remembered text will
be in exact order, a type of recall that is crucial to many technologically-
oriented tasks, such as remembering the various steps essential for proper
software operation. ***