* 9531579
* Radar Array Supression of Englacial Coherent Noise in       Probing Temperate Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/1996,11/30/1998
* Roy Greenfield, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 11/30/1998
* USD 58,273.00

The ultimate scientific objective of this study is to investigate a new high
frequency radar array technology for characterizing temperate glaciers by
mapping bed topography, basal ice hydrologic features, the thickness and
distribution of saturated tills, and deep englacial drainage channels. It is
widely acknowledged that presently there are no effective direct, or remote
methods capable of delineating these structures. Radar methods fail because of
the intrinsic high noise properties of temperate glaciers. Modern radar
instruments have overcome random noise and antenna noise problems. The current
limitation on radar is noise resulting from subsurface water inclusions, which
impose a 10 MHz upper frequency limitation on conventional temperate glacier
surveying methods. A radar survey method utilizing array processing can
significantly suppress noise from water filled scattering inclusions. Numerical
models and time domain data processing algorithms will be developed to guide the
array design, performance analysis, and interpretation procedures. In addition,
a physical scale model of a temperate glacier will be used to collect radar data
in the millimeter wave frequency (30 GHz) range. The physical model results will
be used to verify numerical and theoretical array processing results and further
refine the approach. A field experiment will be carried out on the shallow (100
- 200m), readily accessible, Gulkana glacier, Alaska. This field experiment will
include conventional radar and radar array data collection methods with 100 MHz
antennas. In the field operations they will be specifically interested in
demonstrating the improved depth of penetration using the array method as
compared to the conventional technique. The immediate glaciologic benefits will
be an accurate picture of how near surface englacial and basal ice water
channels are interconnected and oriented on a small, but interesting temperate
glacier. The extended benefit will be the development of a practical method for
sounding much deeper temperate glaciers. For example, on very deep (1000 m)
temperate glaciers they believe the high frequency radar array could operate at
a center frequency around 30 MHz. In this band, multiple radar array stations,
or a towed array, would have the potential to define, characterize, and
spatially map meter scale englacial and basal ice hydrologic features as well as
ice bed topography.. This is particularly relevant since the depth and bottom
topography of almost all large subpolar ice fields are unknown. In addition, a
high resolution deep penetration radar capability applied to large ice masses
would help answer questions about steady flow and surge mechanisms, basal
freeze, and sediment transport. The radar array technique will also be
applicable to Antarctic glaciers.