* 9531267
* SBIR Phase II: An Intelligent Computer-Based Method for Health Monitoring of Engine and Transmission Systems
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1997,07/31/1999
* Vladimir Polyshchuk, B & C ENGINEERING ASSOCIATES
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1999
* USD 279,808.00

*** 9531267 Vladimir Polyshchuk This Phase II Small Business Innovation Research
project aims at the development and construction of a health monitoring system
for high speed rotating machinery. Phase II will be involved in the development
of the overall procedure, experimental verification and certification of the
developed system, and the construction of the prototype machine health
monitoring system for field application. The work will be carried out in three
simultaneous tasks: 1. The development of a comprehensive procedure for machine
health monitoring which includes (i) identification- to identify damage and
wear, (ii) quantification- to evaluate the level of damage, and (iii)
prognostication- to predict remaining life of the damaged component. 2. The
development of experimental studies for verification and certification of the
developed software package. Three major experimental developments will be
carried out consisting of (i) two fully instrumented rotating machinery teat
rigs set up by B&C EA, Inc., (ii) a fully instrumented bearing test rig
developed by the Timkin Bearing Company, and (iii) an industrial pump tested by
the Duririon Pump Company. 3. The development of hardware and software for the
data acquisition, data storage, and signal processing for field data by the
Quatech Company. Three different systems will be developed: (i) the Portable
Monitoring System- instrumented only with 'dumb sensors' for data acquisition ,
(ii) the Continuous Storage System- continuous scheduled monitoring, and (iii)
the SCAN (Smart Centralized Automated Networking) System- multi-channel wireless
networking with a receiving station. Two main commercial applications are: i) An
on-board machine health monitoring system that will enable automatic
control/shutdown of the machinery for event management (for safety measures and
prolongation of machine life), and ii) a plug-in type machine health monitoring
system for recording performance history during regular maintenance (for d
etermining operational safety without shutdown or disassembly of the machine)
e.g. in defense industries- jet engines, helicopters, and land vehicles and in
commercial industries- petrochemical, power generation. ***