* 9531428
* Chemical Monitoring Using Capillary Separations
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2002
* Robert Kennedy, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Hicks
* 04/30/2002
* USD 503,000.00

This work, directed by Assistant Professor Robert T. Kennedy of the University
of Florida, is centered on problems of qualitative and quantitative measurement
of chemicals associated with neurotransmission processes in the central nervous
system. Support is provided by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program in
the Chemistry Division. Miniaturized sampling systems coupled to capillary
separation techniques will be developed with the long range goal of high speed
in vivo measurements. Both microdialysis and push-pull perfusion will be
investigated as sampling systems. On-line chemical derivatization will yield
products suitable for laser induced fluorescence detection or electrochemical
detection. The latter uses the biuret reaction to form Cu(II) complexes with
peptide neurotransmitters. To enhance sensitivity, a dual electrode detector
arrangment will be used in which the complex recycles back and forth between the
anode and cathode. An understanding of the chemical basis of the functioning of
the nervous system would be of great benefit in the treatment of neurological
diseases. To achieve this, it is necessary to identify and quantify the
chemicals involved and to be able to follow their changes temporily and
spatially. The major objective of this project is to provide solutions to the
measurement problems presented by the small volumes, the low concentrations, the
presence of a large number of different chemicals and the short response time
that are encountered in such investigations.