* 9531299
* U.S.-Czech Engineering Research on Softening Damage,        Fracture and Size Effect in Concrete Structures Under       Dynamic and Cyclic Loads
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Zdenek Bazant, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 39,400.00

INT 9531299 Bazant This U.S.-Czech research project between Zdenek Bazant of
Northwestern University and three researchers from Czech Technical University,
Zdenek Bittnar, Milan Jirasek and Jan Vitek, will focus on inelastic hinges in
frames of buildings and bridges that undergo progressive damage and exhibit
softening resulting from dynamic or cyclic loading such as that caused by
earthquake, blast or impact. Such damage can remain distributed over many
inelastic hinges or it can localize in only some of them. Dr. Bazant and his
Czech partners note that localization is a dangerous phenomenon because it can
cause collapse to occur more rapidly. This project will involve a systematic,
theoretical and numerical study of the localization problem. The progressive
degradation and fracture of concrete in compression under lateral confinement
simulating the effect of reinforcement will also be studied, with analysis of
localization and fracture extended to the shear failure of beams. Particular
attention will be devoted to the size effect brought about by localization of
softening and by fractures in tension, shear and compression. Results are
expected to help make predictions of concrete structures' resistance to dynamic
and cyclic loading more realistic and subsequently contribute to safer designs.
This project in mechanics and materials engineering fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the United
States and Eastern Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence. ??