* 9531237
* Mathematical Sciences: Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges' Summer Mathematics Program
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Stephen Kennedy, Carleton College
* Continuing grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 03/31/1999
* USD 244,114.00

Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges Summer Mathematics Program Mathematics faculty
from Carleton and St. Olaf Colleges are engaged in an intensive four-week summer
mathematics program for talented undergraduate women. Forty-eight young women
will participate over the three years. The program is staffed by mathematicians
who are active professionals and outstanding teachers. The students immerse
themselves in mathematics, living and working in a supportive community of women
scholars (undergraduates, graduates, and post-graduates) who are passionate
about learning and doing mathematics. The program is intended to excite these
young women about mathematics and mathematical careers, to provide them with the
tools they will need to succeed in a mathematical career, and to connect them to
a network of fellow female mathematicians. Students attend a lecture course
which meets on Tuesday and Thursday mornings and a seminar which meets on
Monday, Wednesday, and Friday mornings. The seminar has a small-group work time,
led by a female teaching assistant, on Monday and Wednesday afternoons. In each
of the classes, the students are introduced to fields of mathematics beyond
calculus that students usually do not have the opportunity to study in a
standard undergraduate mathematics program. Possible topics for these courses
include algebraic coding theory, graph theory, combinatorics, game theory, and
number theory. Through these courses, and the homework assigned in them, the
students have an opportunity to improve their skills in conjecture and proof,
written and oral expression, mathematical modelling, and library research. Each
student will receive, at the close of the program, written evaluations of her
performance and accomplishments from her instructors. Recreational problem
solving is offered each Monday evening for those students who want to work on
solving interesting problems. Four afternoons are devoted to teaching a number
of computer applications, from the basics of everyday computer communication to
the latest in mathematical computation. Use of the computer for communication
and computation is a daily routine during the program. Each Tuesday afternoon
there is a discussion on a topic pertaining to the students' continued
scholarship: succeeding as a math major, career options, choosing and surviving
a graduate program, and being a woman scientist. Each Tuesday and Thursday there
is a colloquium on a stimulating area of mathematics. One Friday afternoon the
students take a field trip to the Geometry Center in Minneapolis.