* 9531307
* The California Academy of Sciences Summer Systematics       Institute as a REU Site
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* J. Patrick Kociolek, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 02/28/1999
* USD 99,750.00

This award will support the participation of nine undergraduate students each
year in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program offered by the
California Academy of Sciences' Summer Systematics Institute. The program is ten
weeks long and recruitment on a national level will give emphasis to women and
minority students in science. Each prospective intern would apply to work with
an Academy curator on a research project. Successful applicants would take part
in formal lectures in Systematic Biology, tours of each of the Academy's nine
research departments and research seminars in systematic biology by scientists
from outside the Academy. Students would work on directed programs circumscribed
so that an introduction to the problem and organisms to be studied, as well as
data collection, interpretation and dissemination can be accomplished. Each
student will produce a manuscript of the project's results in the form of a
scientific paper and will make an oral presentation of his/her results to peers.
Evaluations of interns and participating Academy staff will be conducted each
year to fine-tune/improve the program for subsequent years. This award will
foster the continued education and training of individuals who will be part of
the next generation of basic researchers in systematic biology. It will also
help to inform young citizens about issues related to biological diversity and
its preservation.