* 9531194
* Curriculum for Integraing Manufacturing Enterprise Decisions(CIMED) (Collaborative CRCD Project with OKlahoma State     University)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Adedeji Badiru, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Poats
* 09/30/2000
* USD 260,000.00

Abstract EEC-9531194, University of Oklahoma/Dr. S. Raman (collaborative project
with Oklahoma State University/Dr. David B. Pratt (EEC-9527493) This award
provides funding to the University of Oklahoma (OU) for support of a Combined
Research-Curriculum Development Program entitled, "Curriculum for Integrating
Manufacturing Enterprise Decisions (CIMED)". This is a joint collaborative
project with the Oklahoma State University. Support for the Oklahoma State
University portion of this project is provided under award (EEC-9531194). The
CRCD program emphasizes the need to incorporate exciting research advances in
important technology areas into the upper level undergraduate and graduate
engineering curricula and stimulates faculty researchers to place renewed, equal
value on quality education and curriculum development. This three year program
will develop a research/teaching environment to focus on integrated
manufacturing and enterprise modeling. Undergraduate curriculum enhancement will
be based on a joint University of Oklahoma/Oklahoma State University project on
integrated production management and the development of graduate courses will
build upon research results of an enterprise modeling research effort. OU will
have lead responsibility for the development of the integrated undergraduate
enhancements which will allow students to study the role of individual
activities and the effect of individual decisions with respect to a global
system's performance. OSU will have lead responsibility for the graduate
enhancements which will be directed toward contributing to the development of a
unified framework for conceptualizing, designing, modeling, and operating
advanced manufacturing systems. ***