* 9531387
* Mathematical Sciences: An Accelerated Research and Study    Program for Undergraduates in Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* John Mayer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 08/31/1999
* USD 48,481.00

The process of encouraging undergraduates to select or continue career choices
in the mathematical sciences must begin as early as possible. In our experience,
undergraduates usually choose to major in mathematics early, often at
matriculation, and, from that point on, the process is all-too-often one of
attrition. Our Fast-Track Program in Mathematics and Statistics is designed to
identify potentially outstanding mathematics students as (and before) they enter
university, and immerse them in a stimulating research-oriented environment over
a five-year period which will keep their interest in mathematics fresh as their
competence grows. The principal ingredients in the program are intensive
mentoring by faculty who are involved in mathematical research, an independent
research/study project each academic term for each student, a challenging
mathematics curriculum, seminars in mathematics and the ethics of mathematical
research which will emphasize student participant and interaction among
students, and small-group work projects. In the process, students will complete
the requirements for both a Bachelor's and a Master's degree in mathematics,
meting all the liberal arts course distribution requirements (core curriculum)
of UAB, and will be well-prepared for graduate work involving research in
mathematics. The UAB Mathematics Department and NSF share in the support of
student participants while they are undergraduates (at most four years).
Thereafter, support of the student is the responsibility of the UAB Mathematics
Department.