* 9531190
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Paper Families: Identity,  Immigration Administration and Chinese Exclusion
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Edward Laumann, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Harmon M. Hosch
* 02/28/1998
* USD 8,080.00

9531190 Laumann This research traces Immigration Service identification and
processing of Chinese immigrants and the immigrants reactions to the Service's
activities. It specifically focuses on the creation of "paper families" through
the sale and creation of fictive kinship ties to circumvent nearly ironclad
immigrations laws in the United States from 1882-1943. The project seeks to
demonstrate how Chinese personal identity developed through the interplay of
human actions and structural constraints. It also seeks to show how the nature
of immigration administration developed in part in reaction to these Chinese
immigrant methods of creating identity. It will advance understanding of a key
element of Chinese-American identity and culture. %%%% This research traces
Immigration Service identification and processing of Chinese immigrants and the
immigrants reactions to the Service's activities. It specifically focuses on the
creation of "paper families" through the sale and creation of fictive kinship
ties to circumvent nearly ironclad immigrations laws in the United States from
1882-1943. The project seeks to demonstrate how Chinese personal identity
developed through the interplay of human actions and structural constraints. It
also seeks to show how the nature of immigration administration developed in
part in reaction to these Chinese immigrant methods of creating identity. It
will advance understanding of a key element of Chinese-American identity and
culture. **** p:\lss\abstrf95\9531190.TXT