* 9531306
* SBIR Phase II: Predictions of Magnetic Activity Induced     Hazards to Ground and Space Assets
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Nelson Maynard, Mission Research Corporation (MRC)
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 01/31/1999
* USD 293,073.00

9531306 Maynard This Small Business Innovative Research Phase II award will
continue the development of an operational prototype system to forecast
ionospheric currents and related effects, such as enhancements in auroral oval
heating, density irregularities and geomagnetically induced currents at customer
specific locations. The Phase I effort designed and proved the feasibility of
the Space Weather Ionospheric Forecast Technologies (SWIFT) system which
provides the first predictive temporally- and spatially- variable capability for
determining ionospheric currents and resulting ground magnetic variations. These
forecasts will depend directly on real-time measurements of the solar wind
velocity, density, and interplanetary magnetic field. Application of this method
to space weather forecasting will provide, for the first time, one-hour
forecasts of impending geomagnetic storm and substorm activity which can be used
to improve ground-based operations such as power distribution, pipeline
management, and six-sigma manufacturing, and will positively impact the
functionality and reliability of communications, navigation, and space
operations. The product will provide customer specific forecasts for both
commercial and government space and ground-based applications. In Phase II, the
investigators will (1) add refinements to the code to improve accuracy, (2)
design a robust operational prototype that will operate efficiently without
significant operator intervention and, at the same time, provide a quality
control output, (3) quantify the market for these products, and (4) develop a
product tree that will provide customer specific outputs for space weather
effects mitigation. The product of this proposal will have broad commercial
applications. It will provide critical warning of Geomagnetically Induced
Currents that severely impact power line transmission, and can affect pipelines,
long communication lines and high-reliability "six sigma" manufacturing
processes. It will also benefit high-priority activities within the government,
and will augment forecast capabilities currently under development for SEC and
AFSFC. The potential savings are many millions of dollars per year.