* 9531543
* REU: Intelligent Structures Group Research Experiences for  Undergraduates Site
* CSE,EIA
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* W. Thomas Miller, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen Mahaney
* 04/30/1998
* USD 128,000.00

Psarris 9528330 In the past decade much progress has been made in developing
high performance large scale parallel architectures. The development of fast
restructuring compilers for the automatic parallelization of sequential programs
requires efficient data dependence analysis techniques in order to obtain exact
data dependence information. The proposed techniques in data dependence analysis
fall into two categories, either efficient and approximate tests or exact and
exponential. The proposed research will attempt to show, though, that exact data
dependence information can be computed efficiently in practice. The GCD test and
the Banerjee inequality are the two tests most widely used to detect data
dependencies between pairs of array references inside loop nests. These tests
are approximate in the sense that they are necessary but not sufficient
conditions for data dependence and, therefore, they may introduce artificial
dependences which limit parallelization. Their major advantages is their low
computation cost. A recent study provided necessary and sufficient conditions
for the accuracy of the GCD and Banerjee tests. This study has also led to the
development of the I (Interval) test, an improved dependence analysis test. The
I Test is more accurate than a combination of the GCD and Banerjee tests and is
able to provide exact data dependence information in practice, unlike the
classic tests, at no additional computation cost. The original work considered
only the case of loops with constant loop limits. In scientific applications
though, inner loop limits may be linear functions of the outer loop iteration
variables (these iteration spaces are termed trapezoidal regions). This project
develops an efficient and accurate dependence analyzer. The research has four
objectives. The first objective is to derive conditions for the accuracy of the
GCD and Banerjee tests in general trapezoidal regions and perform and empirical
stud y of how often these conditions occur in practice. The second objective is
to extend the I test to the general trapezoidal regions and to assess its
performance benefits on a suite of benchmark codes. The third objective is an
analytical and empirical comparison of the I test with all the other tests, such
as the Omega test, Power test, etc. An analytical and experimental evaluation of
all the data dependence analysis tests is essential to determining which tests
should be performed in practice. The fourth and principal objective is to
integrate the above research work and develop an improved dependence analyzer as
a part of the Paraphrase-2 parallelizing compiler. It is expected that the
completion of the proposed research will improve the understanding of data
dependence analysis, demonstrate the effectiveness and practical importance of
the proposed techniques, and significantly improve the state of the art in
parallelizing compilers. By providing efdicient and exact dependence analysis
techniques a number of compiler optimizations for high performance computer
architectures can be performed in practice. ***