* 9531834
* Mathematical Sciences: Nonlinear Evolution Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1999
* Gustavo Ponce, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/1999
* USD 60,716.00

Abstract Ponce The project is devoted to research into various aspect of
nonlinear evolution equations. They are at the intersection of partial
differential equations, classical harmonic analysis and mathematical physics.
The principal areas include the study of several dispersive systems arising as
approximate models in wave propagation problems. The emphasis is on the
development of arguments and techniques, mainly from Fourier analysis, which
provide a better description of the behavior of the solutions of such models.The
second part of the project is devoted to the study of problems related to
viscous flows. They include the long time behavior of solutions to the 2-D
density dependent Navier-Stokes equations. Also the system for compressible
ideal fluids under minimal regularity of the data is studied. In concrete
problems the validity of these models as a good approximation of the physical
phenomenon depends on specific properties of their solutions, mainly those
describing their long time behavior. Thus, the qualitative features of solutions
obtained through this research provide a benchmark against which numerical
approximation schemes can be tested. This applied analysis of nonlinear partial
differential equations is an equal partner with their numerical study and the
modelling of the physical phenomena, all of which interact to give a full
mathematical picture.