* 9531312
* REU: Natural History of a Tropical Fauna
* NONE,NONE
* 03/15/1996,02/28/1997
* Alicia Mathis, Missouri State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred Stollnitz
* 02/28/1997
* USD 49,975.00

This award will support the participation of 10 undergraduate students each year
in the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program offered by Southwestern
Missouri State University. This is an exciting program that offers opportunities
for research experience in tropical studies. Participants will learn and develop
research skills by interacting with faculty as they work on projects dealing
with tropical vertebrate communities in Mexico. To foster student development, a
three-phase program is planned: 1) Orientation - introducing students to
research methodology and ecological studies in Mexico; 2) Apprenticeship -
developing skills; and 3) Individual research - resulting in publication-quality
reports. Seminars on research and graduate studies are included to facilitate
applications of acquired knowledge and skills to participants' future academic
pursuits; presentations will be made by scientists in both the United States and
Mexico. Faculty mentors will "coach" students, instilling a vision of research
by explaining the rules of science and delivering a feeling of the excitement
that comes with addressing questions with conceptual orientations. The theme or
focus of the program is vertebrate communities. To capitalize on faculty
expertise, students will be encouraged to choose projects involving fishes,
amphibians, reptiles, or mammals, although studies of other organisms are
possible. Investigations may address aspects of niche dimensions, behavior,
parasitic infections, or systematics. Students may choose projects within these
topics or develop investigations of their own. This award will foster the
continued education and training of individuals who will be part of the next
generation of basic researchers in tropical ecology. With global attention
focused of the loss of biodiversity , especially in the tropics, this is an area
of critical concern for the sustained economic development and, in fact, the
cultural survival of many developing nations.