* 9531396
* SBIR Phase II: Channel Hopping for Increased Capacity on    Combined Cellular Voice and Packet Radio Networks
* TIP,TI
* 10/15/1996,09/30/1999
* Jay Jacobsmeyer, Pericle Communications Company
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1999
* USD 299,430.00

9531396 Jacobsmeyer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
investigates a channel hopping mobile data base station for use on cellular
radio networks. Because voice cellular radio systems must maintain low blocking
probabilities, more than 20% of cellular channel capacity is unused, even during
the busy hour. A packet radio system can capture this unused capacity by hopping
between idle voice channels, working independently of the voice base station and
the cellular telephone switch. To optimize performance, the mobile data base
station should select the idle channel with the least co-channel interference.
By doing so, the base station will maximize the carrier-to-interference ratio at
the mobile terminal and maximize throughput when automatic repeat-request
protocols are used. For example, if the offered voice traffic at an 18-channel
sector is 9 Erlangs, the data base station can achieve a throughput improvement
of 42% and a coverage area increase of 28%. This study extends the Phase I
research by collecting interference data from an actual cellular radio system
and testing new hopping algorithms against this data. The firm will also use the
data to develop better models of the cellular voice multiple access system and
co-channel interference. If successful, the project will result in a working
prototype of a smart channel hopping radio receiver and controller that will
substantially increase the throughput and geographical coverage of the Cellular
Digital Packet Data (CDPD) system. The principal commercial applications of this
research are wireless multiple access communication networks, including cellular
radio, mobile satellite, and wireless local area networks. The primary benefit
of the proposed research is more economical use of packet radio base stations,
resulting in more affordable mobile data service for the U.S. consumer.