* 9531248
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel Chemical Methods for Labeling Small   Peptides
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,12/31/1998
* Russell Hart, Assay Designs Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 12/31/1998
* USD 299,732.00

DMI-9531248 Hart This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
further develop ways to replace radioactivity for small peptide immunoassays
using chemiluminescence detection methods. The concentration of small peptides
in biological samples are normally measured using bioassays or by
radioimmunoassay methods. Bioassays tend to be inaccurate and cumbersome to
perform, while radioimmunoassays use '251 labeled peptides as a detection
method. The cost, handling, environmental, stability and sensitivity concerns of
using i25I for these assays makes alternative detection systems attractive. In
Phase I we demonstrated that chemiluminescence can be applied to measure a small
peptide, vasopressin, with speed and sensitivity. We managed to make stable
conjugates of vasopressin that demonstrated increased speed and sensitivity. The
chemical methods demonstrated in Phase I have to be further developed and
refined. The use of peptide analogs for use in raising antisera and also for
conjugation to chemiluminescent detection systems need to be further tested. We
were able, using analogs of vasopressin, to synthesize conjugates that have
better binding and sensitivity in the assay. We wish to explore the possibility
of raising antisera to immunogens using these and similar peptide analogs. We
believe that the use of these analogs, where the conjugation position has been
chosen to be chemically isolated from the native peptide, may yield antisera
with better specificity and reactivity. Assay designs is a company with a
proven, track record of developing, marketing and selling novel immunoassay test
kits using chemiluminescence. We advertise in national scientific magazines on a
regular basis and have distributors in Japan and in Austria, Germany and
Switzerland. The applications of chemiluminescence technology to the measurement
of analyses where the only sensitive, reproducible methods are radioactive have
tremendous potential. The concerns with the use and disposal of HI make
chemilumi nescence the method that can replace this RIA system and improve the
sensitivity and speed of these assays. One RLA manufacturer has 139 different
kits selling for up to $450 per kit. The market for non-radioactive kits with
the advantages of speed and sensitivity is substantial