* 9531908
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Representation Theory andAutomorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Nolan Wallach, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2000
* USD 238,185.00

Abstract Wallach DMS-9531908 This project will continue the principal
investigator's research in the representation theory of reductive groups and its
applications to number theory, geometry and physics. One of the main themes in
this project involves the study of (so called) singular unitary representations
using a technique we call transfer which "moves" unitary representations between
real forms of the same complexification. To implement this idea one must have
very detailed information on the restriction of representations to (generally
non-compact) symmetric subgroups. This analysis is of interest in its own right
and has led (and will lead) researchers (including the PI) to surprising
generalizations of Howe's theory of reductive dual pairs to exceptional groups.
It will also lead to confirmation of special cases of some remarkable
conjectures of B. Gross and D. Prasad. Another key direction of this research
involves the continued study of the module theory of the ring of invariant
polynomial differential operators on a reductive Lie algebra. This work has
already led to a new interpretation of the Springer correspondence. The new
direction here will involve some sort of "relative Springer correspondence".
This project also involves joint work with Matthew Clegg on the development of a
symbolic algebra package (to be called "Groebner") designed for large scale
computations using parallel supercomputers or distributed networks of work
stations. The solution to the problems described in this project would expand
our understanding of some of the most exciting developments in the interaction
of representation theory with apparently unrelated parts of mathematics and
physics. For example the detailed analysis of one singular representation (by
Kostant and his coworkers) has led to new solutions to Einstein's equations.
Representation theory of the type studied in this project is also an important
ingredient in the Langland's program of which one very small part due to Wiles
led to his (Wile's) proof of Fermat's Last Theorem.