* 9531427
* SBIR Phase II: Silicon Carbide Whisker Reinforced Alumina   Coatings on SiC-SiC Composites
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1997,06/30/1999
* Witold Kowbel, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 06/30/1999
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9531427 Kowbel This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
devoted to demonstrating the uniqueness of corrosion protection of silicon
carbide ceramics (SiC-SiC composites). The SiC-SiC composites used as the
substrate contain high temperature creep resistant chemical vapor reaction (CVR)
SiC fibers developed by the firm. These fibers are expected to greatly enhanced
market penetrations of chemical vapor infiltration (CVI) SiC-SiC composites in
energy-related markets by providing high benefit to cost ratios. However, the
use of these composites in corrosive environments at temperatures above 1200
degrees C calls for corrosion protection coatings. The alumina (SiCw - A12O3)
coatings produced in Phase I offer a great potential in this area. The
successful completion of Phase I demonstrated dense, adherent, crack-free,
thermal shock resistant coatings deposited on a SiC substrate. In the Phase II
this technology will be extended to include SiC-SiC tubular substrates with the
goal of achieving excellent corrosion protection at temperatures up to 1400
degrees C. In addition, efforts will be made to obtain high fracture toughness
SiCw-Al2O3 coatings on SiC substrates. The success of the Phase II effort will
ensure several commercial applications of this technology in energy-related,
cutting tools as well as other areas. The potential applications include heat
exchanger tubes, gas turbine engines, advanced aircraft engines, heat engine,
filter applications and cutting tools. ***