* 9531304
* SBIR Phase II:  Monte Carlo Simulation - A Design Tool for  Investment Casting
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/1997,08/31/1999
* Carl Jaske, CC Technologies Laboratories Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 08/31/1999
* USD 289,781.00

DMI-9531304 Jaske The proposed SBIR Phase II project will complete the
development of a software design tool that will be used to predict the grain
structure of metals and alloys in advanced materials processing. This software
will be a very important tool with broad commercial and technical value. Grain
structure is a primary factor in materials properties and must be carefully
considered in almost all materials processing applications. The advent of easy
access to advanced computing power has made it possible to use computer
simulation in engineering design. Results of the Phase I project showed that it
is feasible to simulate the solidification grain structure of cast materials
using high-end desktop computers. Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS) with a process
control parameter was successfully employed to model grain nucleation and growth
in fine-grain castings that are typical of superalloy investment castings. It
was found that heat flow can be incorporated directly into the model and that
MCS can be used to model most of the important features of cast grain
structures. The objective of the proposed Phase 11 research will be to develop a
robust model for simulation of cast grain structure nucleation and growth during
solidification. Six research tasks are planned to achieve this objective. In the
first task, the physical components of the MCS process control parameter will
defined. A numerical model for each of these components will be constructed and
mathematically formatted for the MCS computer code in the second task. In the
third task, thermophysical constants for these numerical models will be obtained
from the literature. The relative merits of using finite-difference versus
finite-element methods to model heat flow will be evaluated in the fourth task.
In the fifth task, the simulation results will be validated by means of
comparisons with experimental data on grain structures for representative
castings. Finally, a prototype software package for the MCS model will be
developed in the sixth task. The prototype software will provide the base for
commercializing the research results in Phase III. Successful commercialization
of the software will make US industry more productive and competitive in the
area of advanced materials processing. A representative of the advanced
materials processing industry, Howmet Corporation, will continue participating
in this project. Modeling Advanced Materials Processing, Improving the Quality
of Investment Castings, Controlling Grain Structure during Materials Processing,
Providing New Software for Application to the Processing of Advanced Materials,
Designing and Developing Materials Processing.