* 9531816
* Non-Invasive Process Monitoring and Real-Time Control for   Semiconducting Manufacturing
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Neil Ricker, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Olufemi Olowolafe
* 08/31/2000
* USD 440,000.00

9531816 Pearsall The goal of this project is to achieve new fundamental
understanding of thin film deposition from the gas phase through non-invasive
monitoring and to determine how this information can improve real-time control
of chemistry in gas-phase semiconductor processing. Nearly all semiconductor
manufacturing involves etching or deposition of thin films via gasphase
chemistry. There is wide agreement that in-situ, non-invasive process monitoring
and real-time control will improve manufacturing yield and throughput, and that
more research is needed to develop suitable methods. For example, in recent
(8/94) review the editor of Semiconductor International remarked, "Real-time
monitoring remains a highly desirable, but somewhat distant goal". The key is a
robust, quantitative technique that tracks the chemical reactions occurring at
or near the surface of a semiconductor wafer. A method based on ultra-violet
(UV) spectroscopy is focus of the proposed work. Simultaneous tests of control
strategies will determine whether the measurements have enough information to be
of practical use. The experimental environment will be an existing chemical beam
expitaxy reactor with calibrated flow, pressure, and wafer temperature
monitoring. It supports processing conditions from ultra-high vacuum (10-10
Torr) to 10-4 Torr pressure. A co-located chemical vapor deposition reactor
allows additional experiments in the pressure range 10-4 Torr to atmospheric
pressure. Experiments will determine whether UV spectroscopy can provide
positive identification and quantitation of multiple chemical components at
realistic operating conditions. This method has sufficient sensitivity to be
used in ultra-high vacuum deposition conditions where the gas density is lowest.
Quantitation depends on an accurate baseline for the optical signal, so a new
nonclouding window will be used in combination with techniques that compensate
for drift in source intensity and optical transparency. Mechanis tic modeling
will provide the basis for estimation of unmeasured parameters and for feedback
control. Linear and non-linear model-based control methods will be used. Initial
work will test the system's ability to track time-varying setpoints for
compositions of 1 to 3 dilute reactants in an excess of another, and to provide
uniform temperature across the wafer surface. The system will then be used to
control deposition of compounds of GaAs with Al and In. Experiments will
determine where the UV beam should be located (relative to the wafer surface) in
order to optimize the information content. The efficacy of the control strategy
will be measured by independent (off-line) chemical analysis of the deposited
film. ***