* 9531566
* Mathematical Sciences:  Analytical and Combinatorial        Aspects of Subfactors
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Dietmar Bisch, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/1999
* USD 89,730.00

9531566 Bisch This is a project for mathematical research in the theory of
operator algebras that deals, in particular, with analytical and combinatorial
aspects of the Jones theory of subfactors. New hierarchies of finite-dimensional
algebras, generalizing the Temperley-Lieb algebras in a natural way, will be
used to study the structure of subfactors. These algebras capture, for instance,
the symmetry coming from an intermediate subfactor and can be viewed as a
certain minimal product of the standard invariant associated to two subfactors.
A variety of new and interesting combinatorial structures appears naturally in
this process. The technique of studying a subfactor through its intermediate
subfactors is very natural, since it is on the classical level (i.e., the group
level) just the analysis of a given group through its subgroups. It is planned
to extend and refine the available intermediate subfactors techniques by
studying the finite-dimensional algebras canonically associated to these
subfactors. Popa systems, a certain natural system of inclusions of finite-
dimensional algebras of symmetries, will play a key role in this analysis.
Computational aspects of these symmetries will be examined, and it is planned to
construct and analyze explicit examples of subfactors and commuting squares.
Possible new interrelations of the theory of subfactors with mathematical
physics and low-dimensional topology will be investigated. John von Neumann
introduced his algebras of operators on a Hilbert space to study a variety of
mathematical structures, some of which arise naturally in theoretical physics.
In the early 80's, Vaughan Jones initiated a Galois theory for inclusions of
certain von Neumann algebras and discovered that these inclusions are extremely
rigid. They turn out to have a surprising braid group symmetry, which led Jones
to the discovery of his famous knot invariant, the Jones polynomial. Besides
these profound connections of the theory of subfactors to knot theory and low-
dimensional topology, there are also deep relations to statistical mechanics,
conformal field theory, and algebraic quantum field theory that have been
beneficial to the understanding of naturally occurring structures in these
areas. ***