* 9531182
* Dynamic Interactions of a Pipe System With a Seafloor Miner for Deep-Ocean Hardrock Mining
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Jin Chung, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* A. Frederick Thompson
* 08/31/2000
* USD 199,597.00

9531182 Chung Present theory is based on incorporating a new concept of vertical
pipe connecting to a miner and application of external (control) force on the
pipe for the control of pipe- miner motions. Modeling of an entire pipe-miner
system pin-joins a horizontal pipe to the long, near-vertical pipe system and to
a self-propelling seafloor miner. The elastic joints along the pipe can be made
effective in changing the axial, as well as, bending characteristics. To apply
external (control) forces to the joints for the control of the lateral motion of
the pipe, the flexible joints will be modeled by finite element (FEM), as well
as combined (rigid body) element (RBE). The accuracy and advantages of the two
methods will be compared. The pin joint leads the entire system to zero
eigenvalue and rigid mode, and the weight, as the inner axial force of the
vertical pipe, further influences the eigenvalues of the entire system. A shift
technique will solve this problem. The proposed 3-D nonlinear coupled responses
with nonlinear axial dampers installed at the joints will reduce the axial
stress and also influence the bending and torsion, as well. Soil (sediment)
resistance for the miner will be modeled by both DEM (discrete elements) and
FEM. The DEM modeling will use a mass of discrete particles of general geometry.
Preliminary modeling of soil particles indicates that DEM modeling is very
promising to examine micromechanical details of the soil particles. ***