* 9531260
* Mathematical Sciences: The MSRI Multi-Cast Backbone Project
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/1996,05/31/1999
* David Hoffman, Mathematical Sciences Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Alvin I. Thaler
* 05/31/1999
* USD 334,000.00

The Multicast Backbone is a new technology that makes possible efficient video,
audio and written communication over the Internet. Mbone is a robust technology
currently used by the networking community. It has allowed the Internet
Engineering Task Force to replace frequent meetings by virtual conferences whose
participants remain at their home sites. However, the use of this medium within
traditional academic disciplines has been sparse. We are in a critical period
when patterns of usage of the Mbone will be formed. The Mathematical Sciences
Research Institute is in a strong position to play a key role in establishing a
constructive and valuable pattern for the use of the Mbone in the mathematical
sciences. Participating sites in this project are the mathematics departments of
Indiana University Stanford University, The Ohio State University, University of
British Columbia, several campuses of the University of California, the
Universities of Southern California, Utah and Washington, and Washington State
University. Participating Institutes include MSRI, LBL, the Geometric Center,
and the Fields Institute. We intend to allow up to 20 additional mathematical
sites to become project participants. This will be done on a first-come, first
-served basis, provided the sites meet specific minimum requirements for
technical expertise and equipment. Important meetings at MSRI will be multicast
so that anyone able to receive Mbone broadcasts will be able to attend. In
addition, we plan to develop and regularly multicast a series of special events
adapted to the new medium and a broader audience. Sponsoring institutions will
have the necessary equipment and software support to receive and to join in
Mbone multicasts. Participants in this proposal will be given the necessary
software support to conduct whiteboard and talk sessions with other sites having
Mbone capability. A goal of this project is to assemble a critical mass of
mathematical sites using this technology for mathematical commu nication. We
believe that once the utility is demonstrated, there will be a rapid spread of
its use in the mathematical sciences community. MSRI has about 1000 visitors in
a typical year, who stay for periods ranging from one week (workshops) to one
year. Collaborations are initiated or continued during these periods. Where
appropriate, we will help departing researchers to install whiteboard
collaboration software on their home machines and to be permitted access to the
Multicast Backbone. This will allow continued collaboration via this medium and,
at the same time, further spread the capability to use the MBone into the
mathematical community.