* 9531809
* Metallic and Magnetic Quantum Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Tai Chiang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 08/31/2000
* USD 270,000.00

w:\awards\awards96\*.doc 9531809 Chiang The structure, growth behaviors, and
properties of selected metal surfaces, interfaces, quantum wells, and
superlattices are being investigated. The purpose is to obtain a fundamental
understanding of the scientific principles that govern the crystalline form,
chemical composition, and electronic properties of metal epitaxial systems and
quantum structures. The experimental techniques include angle-resolved
synchrotron photoemission, Auger spectroscopy, electron diffraction, and
scanning tunneling microscopy. The work will include investigations of (1) the
bulk and surface band structure, coherence and scattering lengths, and spatial
distributions of electronic states, (2) the physics and chemistry of film
growth, (3) the structure-property relationships for various quantum
configurations, (4) Kondo effects in two dimensional surface alloys, and (5)
spin effects in systems containing magnetic materials. %%% Artificial structures
made of stacks of thin layers can exhibit interesting and potentially useful
electronic properties. Using state-of-the-art techniques of materials synthesis,
it is now possible to fabricate layer configurations with atomic layer
precision. Electrons in such systems can become trapped, reflected, or refracted
by the boundaries between layers, resulting in new properties, which offer
opportunities for various electronic applications. This research project will
employ a variety of experimental techniques to investigate the basic physics and
chemistry of atomic layer formation, and to determine the relationships between
the atomic structure and the electronic properties. Part of the work will be
carried out at the Synchrotron Radiation Center, a national facility funded by
the National Science Foundation. ***