* 9531878
* Collaborative Research:  A Study of the Extension of the    North Atlantic Current and Pathways of Exchange
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1996,12/31/1999
* H. Thomas Rossby, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 12/31/1999
* USD 1,456,207.00

9531878 Rossby As a contribution to the Atlantic Circulation and Climate
Experiment (ACCE) of the World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE), the Pis in
this project will seek to identify the pathways of the warm-water North Atlantic
Current (NAC) and the sites and mechanisms of frontal exchange across it using
approximately 80 isopycnal RAFOS floats to be launched at various locations in
the vicinity of the NAC. Specific objectives include: (1) exploring the
structure of the front which separates the cold, fresh subpolar water to the
north and the warm, saline subtropical water to the south, and (2) attempting to
quantify the mechanisms and rates of exchange between the two gyres. In
conjunction with the field program of Drs. Bower and Richardson of the Woods
Hole Oceanographic Institution, they will also expand the study of the
bifurcation of the NAC as it enters the eastern North Atlantic. The North
Atlantic Current (NAC) is recognized as a crucial element of the meridional
overturning cell, both as the primary northward-penetrating upper-ocean current
and as a region where thermodynamic exchange occurs between the subtropical and
subpolar gyre. Its character changes from an intense, topographically controlled
jet in the western boundary, to a less- defined, perhaps filamented eastward
flow after veering east north of the Flemish Cap. It is not clear whether the
NAC is a discrete front that translates north and south, a collection of fronts,
or simply a broad swath of eastward flow, nor is its fate fully understood.
Although most of the flow is to the north and towards Europe, some recirculation
occurs as well, and this partitioning of pathways is important in attempting to
understand and quantify the controlling factors of the overturning cell.