* 9531845
* Mathematical Sciences: Research in Nonlinear Problems       Arising in Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Marshall Slemrod, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 01/31/1999
* USD 35,210.00

9531845 Slemrod The project entails investigation into kinetic models and
macroscopic hydrodynamics of "gas like" systems which exhibits changes of phase.
The investigation will yield understanding of fundamental principles of liquid-
vapor phase transitions, computational methods for analysis of liquid-vapor
interface dynamics, and with respect to "gas like" modeling of granular
materials. The tools used in the investigation will be mathematical ideas in the
kinetic theory of dense gases, asymptotic analysis, and fundamental ideas in the
theory of one complex variable (as needed for the Yang-Lee theory of phase
transitions). The project will then use these tools to develop the relevant
macroscopic flow equations for liquid-vapor systems including metastable states
and analyze such flows. In addition, in the study of the granular flows the
project will develop the asymptotic ideas necessary to understand the issues of
shear band formation and elastic collapse in rapid granular flow. %%% The
project will provide knowledge in several technologically important fields. For
example, modeling of rapid flow of granular materials is important in the
transfer of bulk materials (coal, cereals, pharmaceuticals). New results in
dynamics of liquid-vapor phase transitions will provide new mathematical and
computation techniques for the studying the behavior aerosols, underwater
detonations, and two phase fluid flow in nuclear reactors. Another possible
benefit is that ideas obtained in studying liquid-vapor flow may be carried over
to phase transitions in solids as well, e.g. modeling of modern "shape memory"
materials. ***