* 9531696
* Development of a "Process Simulator" for Plastic Relaxation in Strained Layer Semiconductor Epitaxy
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/1996,12/31/1999
* Robert Hull, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 12/31/1999
* USD 278,263.00

9531696 Hull This research project aims, through combined experimental and
theoretical work, for development of a process simulator for energetic, kinetic
and electronic descriptions of misfit dislocations in strained layer
semiconductor epitaxy. The primary goals of the program are to: provide a
coherent framework and a repository for experimental data relati ng to misfit
dislocations in strained layer epitaxy; incorporate mechanistic understanding of
the different processes involved in plastic relaxation in strained layer
epitaxy, and to combine this with experimental descriptions of these processes
to enable predictive simulation of the extent of plastic relaxation as a
function of thermal history du ring growth, annealing and materials processing;
and to define quantitative relationships between the structure/density of misfit
dislocation arrays and their electronic properties, and incorporate these
relationships into the process simulator to allow modeling of device
ramifications of plastic relaxation. The approach to these goals includes: a
ddressing shortcomings in experimental descriptions of kinetic processes in
plastic relaxation, especially the dislocation nucleation process; to
quantitatively determine the effects of critical materials processing steps--
implantation and activation/metallization/oxidation) upon plastic relaxation; to
correlate misfit dislocation structure and densities with their effect on
electronic properties of the host structure, and, to investigate the effects of
device operation on the dislocation microstructure, and appropriate software
development. The intent is to develop this concept such that at the conclusion
of the program, the simulator will be available for general distribution within
the scientific community. %%% The research will contribute basic materials
science knowledge at the fundamental atomic level of technological relevance to
several aspects of advanced microelectronic devices and integrated circuitry.
Additional ly, the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the perfor mance of
advanced devices and circuits used in computing, information processing, and
telecommunications by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials. An important feature of the program
is the integration of research and education through the training of students in
a fundamentally and techno logically significant area. *** _