* 9531536
* Dissertation Research:  Bases of Social Hierarchy in a      Central Village of the Northeastern Highlands of Columbia
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* Robert Drennan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/1998
* USD 11,975.00

Under the direction of Dr. Robert Drennan, MS Ana Maria Boada will collect data
for her doctoral dissertation.She will conduct archaeological excavations at the
site of El Venado which is located in the Valle de Samaca of Columbia. The site
is important because it documents a crucial period between 300 and 1600 AD and
thus can shed light on the development of complex hierarchically organized
societies. She will conduct a systematic surface collection over the entire 16
hectare settlement area, excavate approximately 100 test pits in residential
areas of the site which, based on the surface indications, represent different
periods of time. She will expand a number of pits which detect the presence of
subsurface features. The five major categories of artifacts which will result -
ceramics, lithics, faunal, floral and skeletal remains will be analyzed by
appropriate experts. The goal of the research is to test competing ideas about
how complex hierarchically organized societies arise. In particular MS Boada
wishes to understand the process which leads to the development of chiefdoms.
One group of anthropologists have argued that early social differentiation is
based primarily of factors which enhance prestige but do not involve control of
important economic goods. They believe that social and ideological causes are
primary. Others would point to economics and direct control of essential
resources such as food. MS Boada's work should allow her to distinguish between
these two causes. The site is well chosen for several reasons. It is rich in
material remains and covers the appropriate period of time. Because there is a
good ethnohistoric material, written early Spanish records provide an endpoint
from which to work backwards. This research will provide information of interest
to many archaeologists. It will shed new light on the origins of social
complexity and contribute to the training of a promising young scientist.