* 9531208
* Processing of Oxide Superconducting Electronic Devices by   the Inhibition Technique
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/1996,06/30/1999
* Edward Yang, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/1999
* USD 225,000.00

9531208 Ma This research project aims to advance materials processing of high
temperature superconducting oxides. The objectives are threefold: 1)To
characterize the electrical and magnetic properties of high temperature
superconductor (HTS) oxides which are systematically implanted with impurity
ions of different reactivity. These results are used to determine optimum
implantation conditions for inhibition of superconductivity. 2)To study the
structural properties of inhibited materials. Fundamental effects of ion
diffusion, gettering, and channeling on inhibition will be investigated. 3)To
realize a reliable fabrication process for single layer and multilayer HTS
devices and circuits based on the ion inhibition technique. Three different
approaches to planar multilayer fabrication will be pursued. Important process
related issues will be addressed including patterning resolution, process
control, and reliability. Additionally, several prototype devices including high
performance RF coils and superconducting quantum interference devices are
expected to be demonstrated during the course of the project. %%% The research
will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a fundamental level of
technological relevance to several aspects of advanced electronic and magnetic
devices with relevance to magnetic resonance imaging(MRI) and magnetocardiology.
Additionally, the knowledge and understanding gained from this research project
is expected to contribute in a general way to improving the performance of
advanced devices and circuits utilizing high temperature superconducting
materials by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and
processing advanced materials and devices. An important feature of the program
is the integration of research and education through the training of students in
a fundamentally and technologically significant area. ***