* 9531957
* Mathematical Sciences:  Sums of L-functions, the            Metaplectic Group, and Non-Generic Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1999
* Solomon Friedberg, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Sidney W. Graham
* 08/31/1999
* USD 66,000.00

Friedberg 9531957 This investigation will deal with four main directions of
research. First, the principal investigator proposes to continue his work, joint
with D. Bump and J. Hoffstein, to obtain information about automorphic
L-functions through the systematic study of certain naturally occurring
Dirichlet series in two complex variables. These L-functions are not themselves
Euler products, but their individual coefficients are Eulerian. These series
arise as integrals of Rankin-Selberg type, possessing meromorphic continuation
and functional equation. The integrals may be analyzed by local representation-
theoretic methods, and the Dirichlet series coefficients related to L-functions.
The properties of the integral are then used to obtain properties of the
L-functions. The principal investigator will investigate integrals on certain
orthogonal and symplectic groups and on their metaplectic covers, which should
give analytic information concerning such objects as twists of GL(2) automorphic
forms by cubic characters, mean squares of twists by ideal class characters of
quadratic extensions, and the nonvanishing and mean size of quadratic twists of
the standard L-function associated to an automorphic representation on GL(3).The
study of more general sums of L-functions, involving more than two complex
variables, is also anticipated. Second, the principal investigator proposes to
investigate the Euler products associated with higher degree metaplectic
automorphic forms. The existence of such Euler products is predicted by the
hypothetical correspondence between metaplectic forms and non-metaplectic ones;
however, they have only been exhibited in a few cases. There are two such Euler
products known on covers of GSp(4), one on the double cover due to the principal
investigator and Wong, and the second on the triple cover due to the principal
investigator's student T. Goetze. The principal investigator proposes to first
give these works less computational foundations by connecting them to the theory
of non-unique models presented by Rallis and Piatetski-Shapiro, and then to use
this new approach to generalize them to covers of degree higher than 3, and to
groups other than GSp(4). This work will probably be joint with D. Bump. Third,
the principal investigator will continue to work on the relative trace formula.
This formula, which combines period considerations arising from integral
expressions of $L$-functions with Langlands functoriality, should ultimately
allow one to establish in many cases that L-packets contain generic members.In a
recently completed massive project, the principal investigator and Jacquet have
proved the fundamental lemma for one such formula. Fourth, in recent work with
D. Goldberg, the principal investigator has begun to use certain models which
are not Whittaker models to deal directly with non-generic representations on
orthogonal and unitary groups. It is proposed to use these models to establish
both local results (e.g. Langlands conjecture on Plancherel measure) and the
global continuation of many L-functions arising from Eisenstein series a la
Langlands-Shahidi, even for non-generic representations of these groups. This
research falls into the general mathematical field of Number Theory. Number
theory has its historical roots in the study of the whole numbers, addressing
such questions as those dealing with the divisibility of one whole number by
another. It is among the oldest branches of mathematics and was pursued for many
centuries for purely aesthetic reasons. However, within the last half century it
has become an indispensable tool in diverse applications in areas such as data
transmission and processing, and communication systems.