* 9531295
* SBIR Phase II: Optical Transfer of Data Between Rotating and Stationary Subsystems
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* Sherif Gindy, SensorData Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/2000
* USD 222,749.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will explore an
innovative solution to the generic problem of transfer of information, logical
data and analog signals, between rotating and stationary members in a mechanical
system. The particular problem to be addressed is precision measurement of
torque in a rotating shaft. Precision torque transducers currently available are
typically based on technology over 20 years old, are costly to make, and require
specialized equipment to recover the torque signal. They have a practical upper
limit to shaft speed of about 25,000 RPM. For speeds above 10,000 RPM, the price
increases rapidly with the speed differential. The objective of this research is
to develop a new technology for contact-less transfer of information between
rotating and stationary members in a mechanical system with the goal of making
precision contact-less torque transducers at low cost which are suitable for
speeds up to 100,000 RPM. The research approach is to process the analog torque
signal on the rotating shaft where it is generated, and to optically communicate
the result to the stationary subsystem. A specific goal of Phase II research is
to build a truly non-contact (no bearings) manufacturing prototype torque
transducer rated at 100 to 1000 NM. It will be tested for speeds for speeds up
to 50,000 RPM. The power needed for processing the torque signal will be
supplied by a rotary power transformer, integral to the transducer. The
digitized torque signal communicated by optical coupling to the stationary
subsystem will be processed by a microprocessor, integral to the transducer, for
decimal display and optional RS232 interface. Unlike the non-contact (with
bearing ) transducers available in the market, it will not require any dedicated
instruments to recover the torque signal. While the opportunity in this project
is presented in terms of rotary shaft torque transducer application, the
developed technology will be useful for measurement of other physical variables
such as force, temperature, pressure, etc., in mechanical systems with moving
parts. If successful, the research will lead to a new technology for transfer of
information between rotating and stationary members of a mechanical system. It
will find application in equipment used for product development in aircraft,
automobiles, heavy machinery, and durable goods industries. It is suitable for
on-board applications in ships and aircraft. It has potential for on-board
application in automobiles, particularly in steering control of electric cars.