* 9531785
* Surface Chemistry and Kinetics of the Metalorganic          Chemical Vapor Deposition of II-VI Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/1996,07/31/1999
* Robert Hicks, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Geoffrey Prentice
* 07/31/1999
* USD 290,001.00

ABSTRACT CTS-9631785 This is a study of the surface chemistry underlying the
deposition of cadmium zinc telluride alloy films by metallorganic chemical vapor
deposition (MOCVD). It includes characterizing the atomic structure and
composition of the film as it nucleates and grows on a gallium arsenide or a
germanium (001) surface. Alloy growth kinetics are determined by a combination
of ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) surface-science experiments, macroscopic measurements
of film deposition rates, and numerical simulations of the MOCVD process. The
heteroepitaxy of cadmium zinc telluride on gallium arsenide or germanium (001)
is studied using a UHV scanning tunneling microscope to monitor the evolution of
the interface structure as each layer of atoms is deposited. The quality of the
films is evaluated using transmission electron microscopy and photoluminescence
measurements. Epitaxial thin films of II-VI compounds such as cadmium zinc
telluride are used in a variety of optoelectronic and magentic devices.
Metallorganic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) is a promising method for
depositing these films. However, it is a challenging process in a manufacturing
environment because the film growth rate and composition depend on the intrinsic
reaction kinetics, making them very sensitive to the operating conditions. This
effort provides the basic knowledge needed to provide reproducible growth of
thin films of II-VI compound semiconductors. ***