* 9531824
* Disjoint Paths and Hamilton Cycles
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* Xingxing Yu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Perlis
* 07/31/2000
* USD 60,000.00

9531824 Yu This investigation is a continuation of previously funded NSF
projects. The investigator has solved several important problems in graph
theory, some in collaboration, including a 1970 conjecture of Grunbaum, a 1972
conjecture of Nash-Williams, and a 1975 conjecture of Plummer. The highlights
are the solution of a conjecture of Thomassen about Hamilton cycles in locally
planar triangulations of surfaces and the solution of a conjecture of Robertson
and Thomas; both have opened up new directions for research. The investigator
will extend the techniques of finding "Tutte paths" and cutting surfaces
developed in solving the above mentioned problems to attack some other important
problems about Hamilton cycles in graphs in surfaces. One such example is an old
conjecture of Barnette, which states that every 3-connected cubic plane graph in
which each face is bounded by at most 6 edges contains a Hamilton cycle. This
problem is related to molecular structures of certain organic compounds in
Chemistry. Another problem is the conjecture of Grunbaum (1970) and Nash-
Williams (1973) that every 4-connected toroidal graph contains a Hamilton cycle.
The investigator will also work on a conjecture of Dirac (1964) about
K5-subdivisions. Dirac's conjecture is equivalent to the conjecture that every
5-connected non-planar graph contains a K5-connected subdivision. One approach
is to characterize all 4-connected graphs containing a K4-subdivision with
prescribed degree three vertices. This problem is related to designing
communication networks. Finally, the investigator was able to solve the rooted
K4 problem for planar graphs; he would like to extend the techniques used for
planar graphs to attack the general rooted K4 problem. This research is in the
general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of Combinatorics is to find
efficient methods of studying how discrete collections of objects can be
arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely important to modern
communications. For example, the design of large networks, such as those
occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in computer science
deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of combinatorial
research.