* 9531564
* SBIR Phase II:  Low-Cost Proton Exchange Membrane Hydrogen  Oxidation Catalysts
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/1997,05/31/2000
* John Kosek, GINER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl F. Albus
* 05/31/2000
* USD 299,975.00

DMI-9531564 Kosek This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II is directed
at a method to significantly reduce the cost of fuel cells actively being
developed as power sources for electric vehicles. A recently completed Phase I
program demonstrated the feasibility of inexpensive catalysts, containing very
little noble metal, as H2 oxidation catalysts in a proton-exchange membrane fuel
cell (PEMFC). The catalyst is intended to replace the costly PI anode catalysts
currently used in PEMFCs. Objectives of the Phase II program include (1)
continued catalyst development, including investigation of methods to improve
contaminant tolerance, (2) development of improved electrode structures to
enhance PEMFC performance, particularly at high current density, (3) evaluate
low-cost cathode catalysts containing little or no noble metal, and (4) to
scale-up a PEMFC stack containing the low-cost catalysts in both stack height
and active area. The program will culminate in continuous operation for 1000
hours of a 6-cell PEMFC stack, with each cell having a 160 cm2 active area,
containing the most promising anode and cathode catalyst. The development of
inexpensive catalysts to replace the high Pt-content PEMFC catalyst would result
in a significant reduction in PEMFC cost, increasing the economic
competitiveness of PEMFC-powered vehicles with vehicles powered by Internal
combustion engines. Due to the recent mandates of California, and states in the
Northeast requiring zero emission vehicles, there is potentially a large
commercial market for PEMFCs with the low-cost anode catalyst. Fuel cells are
also being considered for dispersed micro-cogeneration applications; the low-
cost PEMFC is attractive for this application and other cogeneration
applications. Military applications include mobile electric generators and
transportation applications. exchange membrane fuel cell, anode catalyst,
hydrogen oxidation _