* 9531220
* Influence of Climate and Environmental Factors on the       Thermal Regime of the Active Layer and Permafrost
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Yuri Shur, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jane V. Dionne
* 07/31/1998
* USD 212,459.00

Permafrost is one of the primary components of the Arctic land-atmosphere-ice
system. Recent unexpected discoveries of a large-amplitude temperature cycle in
the permafrost and of large and systematic changes in active layer thicknesses
(since 1986) indicate that the current understanding of climate-active layer-
permafrost interactions needs improvement. These interactions are important
because warmer air temperatures predicted in the Arctic from increases in
greenhouse gases will cause permafrost to thaw as the active layer becomes
thicker. A better understanding of the linkages between the atmosphere, soil
surface, active layer, and permafrost is required to answer questions regarding
the rate and extent of permafrost degradation, modifications to its thermal
regime, release of carbon and trace gases by thawing permafrost, changes in soil
moisture, the biota, the hydrological cycle, how these changes will influence
the use of polar lands, and the development, calibration, and validation of
small-scale numerical models (&lt;2 km grids) of land-atmosphere interactions
that are to be nested in larger scale models. A permafrost research program is
propose that combines field measurements, laboratory measurements, and analyses
and interpretation of data to be obtained at six long-term study sites along a
transect from Prudhoe Bay across the coastal plain and foothills into the Brooks
Range. These sites are in undisturbed areas, span a wide range of permafrost,
climatic, and environmental conditions, include drillholes in the permafrost (40
to 75 m in depth), and have a long time series of data (since 1983). This
research will extend the time series of measurements at the sites and will focus
on investigating how the active layer and continuous permafrost, in a variety of
climatic and environmental setting, has responded and continues to respond to
climate change. The primary thrust of the proposed research is to investigate
the effects of climate (especially air temperatures, snow, wind and
precipitation) and environmental factors (especially vegetation and surface
morphology) and their interactions on the thermal and moisture regimes of the
active layer and permafrost in an effort to answer questions raised by current
research.