* 9531830
* SBIR Phase II: Advanced Intelligent Control of Next         Generation Vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/1997,06/30/2000
* Richard Saeks, Accurate Automation Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 06/30/2000
* USD 319,800.00

9531830 PI: Saeks This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will
develop an integrated hierarchical neurocontrol system for a 4 motor / 4 wheel
drive Hybrid Electric Vehicle (HEV). To achieve this goal a hierarchical
neurocontroller will be developed for, the HEV's energy subsystem, and a vehicle
management system will be designed to generate commands for the energy and
vehicle control systems from driver input. The systems will be integrated with
the vehicle control system developed under Phase I into a graphical vehicle
simulator which will be used to evaluate the performance of the proposed
neurocontrol system. Finally, these designs will be incorporated into a
preliminary design for a Phase II road test vehicle. This will result in the
design of a three level hierarchical neurocontrol system for a 4 motor / 4 wheel
drive Hybrid Electric Vehicle, and will set the stage for a Phase III road test
program and the commercialization of the proposed neurocontrol system. By virtue
of its elimination of "all" drive train components, the 4 motor / 4 wheel drive
HEV is ideally positioned to realize a three fold efficiency goal for a NGV. To
realize the potential of this class of vehicle, a high performance control
system is required. The successful completion of the proposed program will
therefore lay the foundation for the development of the coming generation of
HEV's by the U.S. automotive industry.