* 9531511
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Molecular Biosciences
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Norman Curthoys, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* William R. Gordon
* 02/28/1999
* USD 150,000.00

This award will support the participation of undergraduate students in the
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program offered by the Colorado State
University in Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. Biochemistry/molecular biology
employs the methods of chemistry, physics, cellular biology, microbiology and
genetic manipulation to study the structure and function of complex
biomolecules, how these molecules generate the phenomenon we call life, and how
alterations in these molecules perturb the living organism. Because of its
breadth, biochemistry/molecular biology serves to integrate didactic and
experimental material learned in a multitude of basic science courses. This REU
site program in Molecular Biosciences will enable qualified undergraduates to do
independent research projects in a range of areas and using a variety of
experimental approaches. The program is designed to (a) offer the participants a
wide variety of research areas from which to choose an independent studies
project; (b) offer project areas that are meaningful and exciting to the
student; (c) teach the student how to formulate and test hypotheses; (d) help
develop the ability to trouble-shoot and problem solve when confronted with the
unexpected; (e) instruct the participant in state-of-the-art techniques and
instrumentation of biochemistry/molecular biology; (f) develop the ability to
communicate with one's peers concerning ongoing research efforts as well as more
formal presentations of completed research projects; (g) provide, in our faculty
and in outside scientists invited to speak to the REU students, appropriate role
models that will reinforce the intellectual excitement of a scientific career;
(h) emphasize to all participants gender and diversity issues that impact
research careers in science; and (I) render assistance to participants in
applying for graduate studies and fellowships. This award will foster the
continued education and training of individuals who will be part of the next
generation of basic researchers in the diverse aspects of biochemistry and
molecular biology.