* 9531293
* Mathematical Sciences:  A Common Framework for Curve        Evolution and Image Segmentation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 67,000.00

9531293 Shah In recent years, curve evolution has developed into an important
tool in Computer Vision and has been applied to a wide variety of problems such
as smoothing of shapes, shape analysis and shape recovery. The underlying
principle is the evolution of a simple closed curve whose points move in the
direction of the normal with a prescribed velocity. A fundamental limitation of
the method as it stands is that it cannot deal with important image features
such as triple points. The method also requires a choice of an "edge-strength"
function, defined over the image domain, indicating the likelihood of an object
boundary being present at any point in the image domain. This implies a separate
preprocessing step that is in essence precomputing approximate boundaries in the
presence of noise. The initial curve also has to be preselected. The
investigator demonstrates that the different versions of curve evolution used in
Computer Vision together with the preprocessing step and the choice of the
initial curve can be integrated in the form of a new segmentation functional
that unifies and extends curve evolution models. Moreover, the numerical
solutions obtained retain sharp discontinuities or "shocks," thus providing
sharp demarcation of object boundaries. The new functional described provides a
unified approach to the segmentation problem and shape analysis. The principal
objective of the proposed research is to carry out a mathematical analysis of
the new functional, apply it to real images, and study its possible extensions.
This project is in the field of machine vision, with applications especially in
medical imaging. The underlying mathematical theory proposed here is potentially
applicable also to seemingly unrelated fields such as liquid crystal technology,
metallurgy, flame propagation and combustion. A computer receives visual
information through a camera in the form of millions of numbers per picture
frame, each number describing th e intensity and the color of light at a point
in the scene. The sheer volume of the visual information makes the task of its
interpretation by the computer extremely difficult. The first processing task
for the computer before it can begin to recognize an object in a scene is to
find the object's outline. This is what is called the segmentation problem. The
fundamental difficulty here is how to separate the object's outline from the
rest of a cluttered scene. Even when the computer has successfully located the
object outline, it is difficult to identify the object because its appearance
changes depending on its orientation as the object and the camera move. Worse,
the object might be partially obscured. Therefore, characteristic features that
distinguish one object from another and that remain unchanged as the appearance
of the object changes must be defined and calculated. This is the problem of
shape analysis. This project formulates a new unified approach to the
fundamental mathematical questions underlying the two problems. It develops new
mathematical tools based upon this approach and applies them to specific classes
of practical problems, in particular to analysis of biomedical images.