* 9531798
* SBIR Phase II:  Efficient Electrical Impedance Tomography   Using Boundary Element Methods
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Georges Chahine, Dynaflow Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1998
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9531798 Duraiswami This Small Business Innovation Phase II Research project
will develop practical, efficient, fast and accurate algorithms and software for
imaging using Electrical Impedance Tomography (EIT) for both two and three-
dimensional applications in medicine and industry. EIT images the inside of an
object by determining the spatial distribution of impedance. This is achieved by
applying specified currents at their surface, and measuring the voltage induced.
Compared to other imaging methods promises significant advantages in economy,
convenience, and safety for a wide variety of clinical and industrial
applications. The main obstacle to making EIT more widely applicable is the lack
of an efficient algorithm that can perform accurate data inversion. Inversion
algorithms currently in use are based on either heuristic techniques of limited
applicability, or on full numerical solution using finite elements. In Phase I
of this research the computationally efficient Boundary Element Method (BEM) was
extended to EIT by using new algorithms that use dual reciprocity techniques.
Further improvements in efficiency and accuracy were obtained by developing a
new methodology for parametrizing the inverse problem. Phase I results
demonstrated the speed and accuracy advantages of EIT images obtained using the
new algorithms. Phase II research will further improve these algorithms. They
will be specialized to particular applications, incorporate more efficient ways
to perform the multiple parameter minimization, and account for available a
priori information. The developed algorithms will be validated and refined by
performing experiments. The software developed will be integrated into a user-
friendly package BEM software for Electrical Impedance Tomography will have a
very large commercial market in medical imaging, two-phase flow imaging, and
industrial nondestructive evaluation and testing. The developed software will be
licensed to manufacturers of EIT systems, while we w ill develop EIT based
multiphase flow instrumentation. ***