* 9531651
* Conference:  Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB),       January 3-6, 1996, in Hawaii
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1997
* Teri Klein, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Toni Kazic
* 02/28/1997
* USD 20,240.00

The first Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing (PSB-1) will be held January 3-6,
1996, in Hawaii. PSB-1 will bring together top researchers and educators, from
the US, Asian Pacific nations, Europe and throughout the rest of the world, to
exchange research results, teaching experiences and to address open issues in
all aspects of computational biology. Replacing and extending the last three
years of the Biotechnology Computing Track at the Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS), PSB-1 will provide a forum for
presentation and discussion on virtually all areas of computational biology with
special emphasis this year in the following areas: molecular evolution,
interactive molecular visualization, genome informatics and databases, protein
structure analysis and prediction, population modeling, quantum/classical hybrid
methods, biological control systems, protein design, internet tools and
biocomputing education. PSB-1 is a genuinely interdisciplinary meeting,
emphasizing the critical and difficult areas in both computer science and
biology, with in-depth coverage of such areas as evolutionary inference, protein
biophysics, advanced data representations, and high performance computing. The
Biotechnology Computing Track of HICSS in previous years attracted researchers
from more than 20 countries. Initial feedback from PSB-1 conference
announcements suggest that participation at the new meeting will be just as
diverse. No other computational biology meeting has greater international
participation. To our knowledge, PSB's educational workshop is the first ever
organized meeting on the teaching of computational biology. Course and
curriculum development are at their formative stages. Many faculty are facing
similar problems in this emerging and crucial area, yet there is a lack of
published materials and no widely available gu idelines. A forum on educational
issues at this time will significantly advance instruction in this field. The
organizing committee is requesting funding in order to: (i) attract high caliber
educators and researchers; (ii) attract educators and researchers who have
recently become involved in course and curriculum development in computational
biology; and (iii) fund graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, young faculty,
and women or minorities, with preference shown to those who will be giving oral
presentations or displaying posters.