* 9531461
* SBIR Phase II:  Real-Time Magneto-Optic Nondestructive      Inspection of Tagged Composite Materials
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1997,03/31/2000
* Gerald Fitzpatrick, Physical Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 03/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will further develop a
nondestructive inspection technique (NDI) for composites first explored in Phase
1. Composite materials are strong, lightweight substitutes for many traditional
metallic structural components. However, composites are often difficult to
inspect for discontinuities due to their high electrical resistively and/or high
ultrasonic attenuation. In Phase I, Physical Research Inc. (PRi) demonstrated
the basic feasibility of using real time magneto-optic/eddy current imaging
(MOI) techniques (developed by PRi) to form images of defects in `tagged`
composites. Composites tagged during manufacturing with trace quantities of
magnetic particles, or constructed with electrically conducting wire screens,
were successfully inspected for voids, cracks, impact damage and discontinuities
in fiber weave. The principal objectives of the Phase II research are to 1)
Develop an MOI system that is specially adapted to applications in composites
(e.g., improved magneto-optic sensors, on-board magnetizing devices) 2) Work
with manufacturers of composite materials to develop tagging techniques that are
compatible with industry needs 3) Complete studies designed to elucidate basic
principles. The Phase II research will consist of controlled experiments (and
calculations) designed to determine the optimum kinds of tagging for a
particular type of defect, the minimum amount of tagging required and the effect
this tagging has on the physical properties of composites. Pri anticipates that
the Phase II research will be successful and that an MOI system capable of
inspecting a wide range of composite materials will be the outcome. Both the
military and civilian aerospace sectors will benefit from this new NDI method.
Tagging composites with magnetic particles (or wire screens) during
manufacturing will result in a simple, low cost, rapid method for MOI-based NDI
of composites. This new capability for NDI of composites during manufacture and
later in-service or during repairs, will lead to enhanced sales of the MOI.