* 9531729
* VLSI Delay Vernier Architectures and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Wentai Liu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* None
* 06/30/2000
* USD 214,300.00

This project is concerned with two performance enhancing techniques of VLSI
systems that have developed from wave pipelining: delay vernier architectures
and non-zero skew design methodologies. Many high performance applications
require extremely fine timing resolution or very high data sampling rates.
Examples include high speed network transceivers, A/D converters, phase-locked
and delay- locked and delay-locked loops, and ATE pin electronics. Normally,
expensive circuit technologies and very high frequency clock signals are used to
satisfy these performance requirements. However, the proposed delay vernier
structures are capable of achieving a very high time resolution using CMOS
technologies and relatively slow clock signals. This research will focus on
refining and extending delay vernier architectures and design techniques so that
their usefulness is maximized. The effectiveness of the architecture in a number
of applications will be evaluated. Also, some real-world factors, such as
process variation and noise, will be investigated. The non-zero skew design
approach allows the VLSI systems designer to take advantage of intentional skew
to optimize clock distribution for a particular set of propagation delays, and
thereby greatly improve system throughput. A critical necessity for these
systems in the ability to create precise clock skews. This research will focus
very strongly on the delay vernier technique, since it can provide this required
ability. Finally, prototypes systems will be built for several promising
applications.