* 9531769
* Mathematical Sciences:  Regularity and Oscillations in      Mathematical Theory of an Ideal Incompressible Fluid
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Mikhail Vishik, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 05/31/1999
* USD 67,500.00

DMS-9531769 Vishik The PI will investigate the mathematical problems of fluid
motion. Methods of harmonic analysis and partial differential equations will be
used to study the evolution of singularities and loss of smoothness for the
incompressible flows of an ideal fluid. The typical vorticity field admissible
for the analysis is not essentially bounded although the set where it blows up
is in some sense small. The proposed study will provide precise information
about the separation of Lagrangian trajectories of liquid particles and
generation of small scale structures by the flow. The PI in collaboration with
S.Friedlander will continue to investigate nonlinear instability and spectrum of
small oscillations of an ideal fluid about a given equilibrium using methods of
dynamical systems and spectral theory. %%% Mathematical theory of fluid motion
is aimed at understanding phenomena in fluids, such as turbulence, from the
basic equations. This subject is fundamental for applications in meteorology,
geophysics, astrophysics, oceanology, and aerodynamics.In the past, the partial
differential equations of fluid motion have been a source of several important
concepts in mathematics. The proposed research will address two problems. First,
one particular scenario of the evolution of fluid flow when mild singularities
are present in the velocity field, will be investigated. Such flows of an ideal
fluid may approximate viscous flows at very high Reynolds number. The second
line of research is hydrodynamic stability theory.Its goal is to understand the
general conditions for the parameters and geometry of the flow under which fluid
loses stability and to describe frequencies of small oscillations when the flow
is not too far from the steady state. ***