* 9531281
* SBIR Phase II:  Effective Software for Contextualized       Mathematics Education
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/1996,07/31/1998
* Sabrina Lin, Sparkle Productions
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1998
* USD 290,533.00

*** Lin 9531281 New information technologies are seen as likely to be especially
effective in providing meaningful and intrinsically motivated contexts for
integrated and purposive learning of mathematical principles; and a wide array
of recent scientific research efforts within psychology, education, and computer
science documents the potentially major educational benefits of thoughtful uses
of computers in education. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II
project conducted by Sparkle Productions, Inc. will address the demand for high
quality, innovative, educational software capable of significantly increasing
both the motivation to learn about mathematics and the depth of mathematics
learning in children. Phase I results indicated that the development of such
software is technically feasible and that both teachers' and children's ratings
of the prototype materials developed compared very favorably with current
offerings in this market. In addition, the results suggested that the present
design approach may have special appeal to girls inasmuch as an effort was made
to redress the balance, i.e., most computer-based mathematics activities have
proved much more interesting and motivating for boys; thus contexts, themes,
icons, formats, and other features were selected with the aim of being of
interest to both genders equally or of interest particularly to girls. The
objective of the Phase II effort will be to leverage the Phase I results
obtained and to continue development of a multifaceted educational software
product that teaches children mathematics in the context of visiting and
exploring cities. As such, the research in Phase II will be devoted to the
further development of the Phase I conceptual prototype into a complete software
prototype, which can then be more fully evaluated by educators and students. It
is expected that the effort will further support the successful preliminary
results from the Phase I research and will therefore yield promising approaches
f or the creation of commercially viable educational software products for the
teaching of mathematics. Further, it is expected that the design techniques
developed in this effort can potentially be leveraged for the design and
development of educational software products for other domains as well. The
proposed research will further understanding of effective designs for
educational software for mathematics learning. Commercialization of the designs
into innovative education software offerings can address the demand for
educational software in the home, anticipated to be a billion dollar market by
the end of the decade. Moreover, this software may prove of special appeal to
girls, a largely untapped half of this market. ***