* 9531967
* Mathematical Sciences: Research Group in Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Richard Rochberg, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2001
* USD 284,499.00

Abstract Rochberg, Krantz, Wickerhauser, Weiss, Taibleson, McCarthy The
principal investigators propose to form a Research Group in Analysis. They
propose to investigate a broad range of areas in harmonic analysis, operator
theory, function theory, and differential equations. Specific areas of research
include analysis of Bergman and Hardy spaces and the operators which act on
them, the relationship between the geometry of complex domains and the
associated function theory and operator theory, the theory of wavelets and
related constructions and the applications of those tools and ideas in
theoretical and computational problems, and harmonic analysis on trees and the
exploration of the analogies between analysis on trees and continuous harmonic
analysis. The principal investigators propose research programs in harmonic
analysis (in the broad sense). One of the basic unifying viewpoints in harmonic
analysis is the development of systematic techniques to decompose complicated
objects into simple, well understood, pieces put together in a straightforward
way. In many cases these same techniques, which were first developed to
understand theoretical mathematical constructs, can also be adapted productively
to the analysis and manipulation of data and images. An important recent example
of this is the development of new waveform technologies which have provided
important new tools in signal processing. The detailed research proposed
includes both theoretical and applied components. The latter center on expanding
the range of applicability of the new adapted waveforms techniques such as
wavelets. Those techniques, originally developed for use in theoretical
mathematics, have already provided important new tools in signal processing. It
appears that they these ideas have great potential for further development as
tools for computation and for data analysis. That development is one of the
themes of the proposed research.