* 9531133
* Ballistic Electron Emission Spectroscopy and Microscopy     Studies of Heterojunction Band Offsets and Local Electronic Transport
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/1996,12/24/1998
* Venkatesh Narayanamurti, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/24/1998
* USD 315,867.00

9531133 Narayanamurti A unique, variable temperature, Ballistic Electron
Emission Microscope (BEEM) recently developed at Santa Barbara will be used to
perform the first spatial studies of local electronic band structure and
transport of novel compound semiconductor heterostructures and quantum wells in
GaInP/GaAs and A1GaN/GaN. Both of these materials systems have great
technological importance for optoelectronic devices, and there is a strong
electronic materials and device effort at UCSB in this area. Yet the fundamental
knowledge of important electronic parameters, such as heterjunction band
offsets, is either poorly understood (GaInP\GaAs) or unknown (A1GaN/GaN).
Initial BEEM studies at UCSB in the prototypical A1xG1-xAs/GaAs system have very
recently shown the power of BEEM to perform spectroscopy of semiconductor
heterostructures buried spatially below the Schottky barrier and gives us
confidence in the potential of the technique for probing new materials systems
Such studies using BEEM have never been done before. It is anticipated that the
results of this undertaking will yield a concrete body of invaluable information
which will lead to understanding of transport in quantum heterostructures, and
will enable the characterization of technologically important (and heretofore
poorly understood) semiconductor materials on a local scale. ***