* 9531954
* Mathematical Sciences: Noncommutative Harmonic Analysis and Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Gelu Popescu, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2000
* USD 40,000.00

9431954 POPESCU This proposal considers some problems in ``Noncommutative
harmonic analysis and operator algebras''. The framework of this proposal is
mainly the C*-algebra (resp. non-self-adjoint algebra) generated by a class of
semigroups of isometries on Hilbert spaces. Noncommutative Poisson transforms,
Wold-type decompositions, positive-definite functions on semigroups, and
isometric dilations are considered to study these algebras and their
representations. The proposer expects to find noncommutative analogs to some
classical results. The main directions of this proposed research are the
following: 1. Poisson transforms on some C*-algebras generated by isometries. 2.
Joint dilations and universal operator algebras. 3. Positive-definite functions
on semigroups and isometric representations. 4. Noncommutative analog of the
Hardy space of bounded analytic functions on the unit disk. The motivation of
this research is the recent worldwide interest in the noncommutative aspect of
harmonic analysis originated from the concept of quantization which links
together several branches of mathematics and is closely related to mathematical
physics. The objective of this research is to advance the understanding of this
relatively new area of mathematics and to apply some of these results to
noncommutative probability theory, interpolation theory, and model theory.