* 9531255
* SBIR PHASE II:  Analysis and Selection of Microencapsulated Transfected Cells
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Jan Trnovsky, ONE CELL SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1999
* USD 420,000.00

9531255 Trnovsky During the last two decades, manipulation of DNA for the
production of recombinant proteins has become a cornerstone of the biotechnology
industry, and the recombinant proteins are now widely used as research reagents
as well as therapeutics. Transfected cell line development however, can take as
long as six months and can cost in excess of $100,000,000. In the emerging field
of cellular therapeutics, patient cells are isolated, transfected, and expanded
ex vivo, or outside the body, and then reinfused or encapsulated in implantable
devices. Since the quality of the cell population is critical to therapeutic
outcome, new separation approaches have become vital to treatment success. This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project from One Cell Systems
outlines research to develop a rapid, high throughput method for screening
transfected cells based on recombinant protein secretion. Using gel microdrop
single cell encapsulation technology, a unique capture assay format, and
fluorescence activated cell sorting; protein secretion of individual cells can
be measured and high producer cells isolated and recovered for gene therapy or
bioprocessing applications. As additional biotechnology based products move
toward commercialization, methods which improve the efficiency of cell selection
and enhance bioprocessing yields will increase in importance. This novel,
platform technology is adaptable to several clinical diagnostic, drug discovery,
and therapeutic applications. Production of recombinant proteins using
transfected cell lines is a multibillion dollar industry currently dominated by
US biopharmaceutical companies. Existing methods for selecting and expanding
transfected cells are time consuming and highly variable. Successful completion
of this research will result in improved cell screening for bioprocessing, drug
discovery, and gene therapy applications.