* 9531730
* REU Site:  Multiple Autonomous Mobile Robots for Search     and Rescue Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Julian Martinez, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Burton
* 06/30/1998
* USD 102,800.00

9531730 Murphy, Robin Martinez, Julian Colorado School of Mines Research
Experiences for Undergraduates: Multiple Autonomous Mobile Robots For Search And
Rescue Applications This Research Experiences for Undergraduates project will
support ten students per year in programs carried out both during the Summers
and the academic years, for two years. Activities will include technical (e.g.,
hands-on laboratory skills), intellectual (e.g., problem-solving skills), and on
professional and personal development (e.g., communication and management
skills). The project targets both CSM resident students and students from
traditionally minority institutions. In the first year and a half, the students
will use two identical mobile robots certified for search and rescue activities
in underground mines and will demonstrate and test their results in the CSM
Edgar Experimental mine. During the second year, the participants will transfer
their software to small robots suitable for SAR work in collapsed buildings. The
use of two sets of robots and two variations of the same task will reinforce the
development of general purpose solutions and basic software engineering skills.
Analysis and design procedures will be emphasized at each step of the project
and the project also entails significant written and oral presentations during
the year. ***