* 9531437
* STTR Phase II: Multi-elemental Microsample Analysis System  with Microwave Plasmas
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,03/31/1999
* Larry McCormick, J and D Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 03/31/1999
* USD 319,622.00

9531437 McCormick This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project will
develop a capacitively coupled microwave plasma (CCMP) as a microsample
excitation plasma for multielement determinations with the detection limits,
accuracy, precision and sample size requirements of modern graphite furnace
atomic absorption spectrometry using atomic emission spectrometry. Currently,
there are no widely applicable analytical methods for multielement
determinations on microsamples. In the unique CCMP approach the helium plasma
supported on an electrode in the microwave field envelops a tungsten cup
containing the liquid (2 - 10 microliters) or solid (ca. 1mg) sample. The
transient emission is detected with an echelle spectrometer using a Charge
Injection Device (CID) detector. Detection limits are in the low pg range with
10 microliter liquid samples (0.5-5 ppb). Studies using the Thermo Jarrell Ash
IRIS echelle spectrometer indicated that the CCMP is well suited for
multielement detection. Phase II will include the design of an optimum optical
interface between the plasma and the echelle spectrometer, optimization of the
CID data acquisition for transient signals, refinement in the electrode,
redesign of the power supply to allow more reproducible computer control of the
microwave field, and a comprehensive study of potential interferences in a
variety of matrices, using both liquid and solid samples. The unique combination
of multielement capability, high sensitivity, low cost, and ease of use results
in substantral potential markets in clinical research, medical diagnostics, and
routine laboratory analysis.