* 9531911
* Necessary and Sufficient Conditions for an Interval Polytopeof Characteristic Polynomials to Contain a Stable           Polynomial
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/1997,09/30/2000
* L. Pujara, Wright State University
* Continuing Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 09/30/2000
* USD 127,006.00

ECS-9531911 Pujara The main focus of this project is to investigate some
necessary and sufficient conditions for an interval polytope of characteristic
polynomial to contain a stable polynomial. In this project, this problem will be
called the "Interval Polytope Problem". Note that a polytope is being called an
interval polytope if it is generated by an uncertain characteristic polynomial
with independent coefficients. The proposed investigation centers around the
conjecture: if an interval polytope contains a stable polynomial, then the
Kharitonov rectangle of at least one of the maximal subpolytopes contains a
stable polynomial. There is a strong basis to surmise that the conjecture is
true. This optimism is based on some very recent results of the PI which show
that the conjecture is true for interval polytopes of dimension up to five. In
addition to this, an investigation of numerical examples of interval polytopes
of large order also reveals that the conjecture is true for these numerical
examples. To make sure that the investigation of these numerical examples really
truly reveals the truth, arbitrarily large and small bounds were considered
around the coefficients of stable polynomials, ranging from six to nineteen
degrees. A successful resolution of the interval polytope problem would lead to
new techniques which will throw some additional light on a possible approach to
solve the more difficult and important question: what are the necessary and
sufficient conditions for a general polytope of polynomials to contain a stable
polynomial? Two important applications of the general polytope case are also
mentioned which are the main driving force behind this research area.