* 9531990
* Primary Production in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 06/15/1996,09/17/1998
* Walker Smith, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing grant
* Polly A. Penhale
* 09/17/1998
* USD 325,766.00

9531990 SMITH This research project is part of the US Joint Global Ocean Flux
Study (JGOFS) Southern Ocean Program aimed at (1) a better understanding of the
fluxes of carbon, both organic and inorganic, in the Southern Ocean, (2)
identifying the physical, ecological and biogeochemical factors and processes
which regulate the magnitude and variability of these fluxes, and (3) placing
these fluxes into the context of the contemporary global carbon cycle. The Joint
Global Ocean Flux Study (JGOFS) has had three successful field efforts (North
Atlantic, Equatorial Pacific, Arabian Sea), and the next major field effort will
be in the Southern Ocean. The overall objectives of JGOFS are to quantify and
understand processes controlling the time-varying fluxes of carbon and
associated biogenic elements, and to predict the response of marine
biogeochemical processes to climate change. The Southern Ocean is critical to
the global carbon cycle, as judged by its size and the physical process which
occur there (e.g., deep and intermediate water formation), but its present
quantitative role is uncertain. In order to address the objectives of USJGOFS
successfully, the measurement of primary production is required for all process
cruises planned for the Southern Ocean Study. Three methods will be employed: in
situ incubations, deck incubations, and the photosynthesis-irradiance response.
The areas of study will be the continental shelf of the Ross Sea, and the Polar
Front region to the north of the Ross Sea. The controls on photosynthesis will
also be investigated. It is hypothesized that on the continental shelf,
irradiance limitation is the major factor controlling phytoplankton
productivity, whereas in the Polar Front region, the availability of iron limits
phytoplankton growth and influences the size distribution of the populations.
The productivity data in conjunction with hydrographic data, will form a large
part of the Southern Ocean JGOFS database which both at-sea investigators and
modelers will use to clarify the role of the Southern Ocean in the global carbon
cycle.