* 9531394
* SBIR Phase II: Multicast Transport of Compressed Audio and  Video in Computer Networks
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/1997,01/31/1999
* Ciro Noronha, Optivision Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 01/31/1999
* USD 299,999.00

9531394 Noronha This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project is
aimed at the design, integration and test of a complete system for transporting
point-to-multipoint (i.e., one sender, multiple destinations) compressed video
streams over traditional computer networks, both in the LAN and in the WAN
environments. The advent of MPEG compression has made it possible to encode
high-quality video using relatively low bandwidth. This makes it possible to
transport video using traditional LAN and WAN technologies. From a transmission
technology point of view, the main problems to be solved are error control and
latency for interactive applications. The research proposed here will
investigate the use of Forward Error Correction (FEC) for error control, and
changes in the MPEG encoding scheme to reduce latency. FEC has been chosen
because it is scalable to an arbitrary number of destinations, and has little
impact in the system latency. Additionally, error concealment techniques will be
investigated for occasions where there are uncorrected errors. Session layer
protocols and user-interface issues will also be considered, to complete the
system design. Commercial applications include video distribution (replacing
analog channels), remote teaching, remote surveillance and video conferencing,
both in LAN and WAN environments,