* 9531892
* The Roles of Cameral Liquid Transport and Shell Strength in Ammonoid Suture Complexity
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Peter Ward, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John A. Maccini
* 12/31/1996
* USD 28,460.00

Ward 9531892 Ammonoid and nautiloid cephalopods are externally shelled molluscs
with an extensive and diverse fossil record. The shell is subdivided into a
number of chambers; the partitions dividing these chambers (the septa) have
shown a remarkable evolutionary pattern of increasing complexity. The
intersection of these septa with the lateral walls of the shell form a complex
and foliate suture. These sutures, in turn, have long been recognized as one of
the most complex and rapidly evolving structures in the fossil record. But their
function ("the ammonoid suture problem") remains one of the oldest unresolved
questions in paleontology. The prevailing interpretation, the ammonoid septa and
their sutures were buttresses to prevent implosion, is now largely unchallenged.
In this proposal, however, we provide evidence that strongly challenges this
view. This evidence follows from a combination of approaches including finite
element analysis of stress distributions in models of septa exposed to pressure
loads, data from the fossil record that are inconsistent with the idea of
buttressing, and a new modeling effort that suggest septal surface elaboration
may be related to the transport of liquid from the chambers. Since this cameral
liquid transport is related to both the growth rate of the animals and to short
term buoyancy regulation, we suggest that one selective process in the evolution
of these complex characters is related to the physics and physiology of cameral
liquid transport. The proposed research revolves around two central hypotheses:
(1) that septal surface elaboration reduces the stress in the chambered portion
of the shell (the phragmocone) and (2) septal surface elaboration augments
cameral liquid transport rate. These hypotheses with a combination of
computational and mathematical approaches as well as physical modeling and
morphometric approaches. Limited set of clades for which there is an ample
fossil record that contains well preserved specimens. The fossils will provide
morphometric data with which we will examine the above hypotheses. Then use a
new mathematical method to quantify the shapes of septa and sutures from
digitized data. This method will also used to prescribe shapes for both stress
and cameral liquid transport analyses. Currently developed finite element
analyses for stress distributions and will apply this method to both real and
hypothetical ammonoids to examine the relationship between stress and surface
elaboration. Theoretical models that will describe relationships between cameral
liquid transport and surface elaboration, we will develop models to test our
transport ideas. In sharp contrast to conventional views, our preliminary work
suggests that surface elaboration leads to augmented stresses on portions of the
phragmocone. Moreover, our initial modeling efforts on cameral liquid transport
indicate that septal surface elaboration is manifested as greater rates of
chamber liquid flux. Thus, an exciting consequence of this work is that we
suggest that this surface elaboration involves two conflicting selective
processes: increased cameral liquid transport at a considerable mechanical risk.
The consequences of this trade-off, let alone its possible existence, have not
been previously proposed.