* 9531877
* Collaborative Research:  Warm Water Pathways and            Intergyre Exchange in the Northeastern North Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2002
* Philip Richardson, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Eric C. Itsweire
* 06/30/2002
* USD 1,191,900.00

9531877 Bower In this project, the PIs will study the North Atlantic Current,
which transports subtropical water northeastward from the Gulf Stream, and the
Poleward Eastern Boundary Current, which carries Mediterranean Outflow Water
northward along the European continental slope. These two current systems are
thought to be the two most likely sources of warm, salty water that is
transformed into intermediate and deep water in the subpolar region. Specific
objectives are to: 1) provide a quantitative description of the bifurcation of
the North Atlantic Current east of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge; 2) assess the
importance of meridional eddy fluxes, compared to large-scale advection, in the
northward flux of heat and salt in the northeastern North Atlantic; and 3)
establish the degree of continuity of the Poleward Eastern Boundary Current to
the entrance to the Norwegian Sea and the fate of the Mediterranean Outflow
Water carried by this current. To meet these objectives, a total of 68
isopycnal, acoustically-tracked RAFOS floats will be deployed in the eastern
Basin of the North Atlantic, forty in and adjacent to the North Atlantic
Current, and twenty-eight near the eastern boundary. The floats will drift
submerged for two years, sampling three cooling seasons, with tracking provided
once daily using moored sound sources. This study is a contribution to the US
Atlantic Circulation and Climate Experiment (ACCE), and to the International
World Ocean Circulation Experiment (WOCE). The high-resolution RAFOS floats will
specifically address important features of the circulation that have relatively
short time and/or spatial scales, such as bifurcations, eddy mixing and boundary
flows.