* 9531507
* REU-Site:  A Two-Summer Research Experience in Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Lon Mathias, University of Southern Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/1999
* USD 150,000.00

9531507 Mathias This REU site award will provide a new type of educational
opportunity for undergraduates that combines research experiences over two
summers, first at an academic site and then at an industrial one. Rising juniors
will first attend USM to receive broad training (first week short-courses) in
polymer science, instrumental analysis, and safety followed by a research
project carried out in collaboration with industrial partners. Two separate
weekly meetings of students and faculty will involve: 5 minute student summaries
of their projects combined with an industrial presentation on selected topics;
and an introduction to molecular modeling combined with discussions on
professional ethics. Final talks will be given to combined USM-industrial
participants. Rising seniors will spend their summer continuing the projects at
industrial sites (like a co-op or internship) but with project groundwork
already established. Weekly teleconferences will be held with the faculty
partner. Final presentations will be given at USM in the same summer-end meeting
for the first-summer students. A total of 15 students are planned for the USM
program each summer, 10 funded by NSF and 5 by industrial grants (10 X $2500
each). Second-summer industrial stays will be totally funded by industry, as
will travel to USM for the final program. Each of 10 industrial partners will
take 1 or 2 second-summer students, depending on attrition. Student recruitment
will build on existing strong programs at USM, but will extend to include active
participation by industry in finding local and regional participants. Minorities
and women participants will be sought through USM's extensive network of feeder
schools and the undergraduate recruitment office. Projects will be jointly
developed by USM professors and industrial scientists, and will involve basic
exploration of real-world problems (examples are included). By year four of this
project, the 10 industrial partner s will be asked to increase their support (to
$7500 each) to make this a self-sustaining program for training undergraduates
for careers in the polymer industry and graduate school. ***