* 9531290
* SBIR Phase II:  Disposable Electrodes for Anodic Stripping  Voltammetry Analysis of Heavy Metals
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Robert Henkens, ALDERON BIOSCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 09/30/1998
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9531290 Henkens This Phase II SBIR project will develop and commercialize
ASV-based instruments for metal testing in field or small laboratory
applications for process monitoring and environmental testing. The methodology
will include the use of screen printed sensors containing an ultramicroelectrode
array of nanometer-sized gold particles, that provide high heavy metal
sensitivity. The sensors will be inexpensively mass produced, pre-calibrated,
and used with inexpensive, small, electronic monitors. Lead monitors, in
particular, are clearly needed. Lead poisoning is an environmental and public
health hazard of global proportion. Ubiquitous environmental contamination has
led to mandated screening programs instigated by numerous countries that will
require millions of tests annually, most accomplished in small laboratories.
Demand for portable instruments capable of field and small laboratory testing
for heavy metals in complex sample matrices is increasing dramatically,
especially in the environmental market. Ground waters and industrial process
waters and effluents require tests of metal levels; lead, copper, cadmium,
mercury and zinc being of particular concern. Traditional heavy metal
determinations employ relatively large, expensive instruments used under the
supervision of skilled professionals. The fieldable sensor/monitor units
resulting from this project can measure a wide range of metals and overcome the
expense and difficulty of operating and maintaining these large instruments. The
expected products are disposable, high-sensitivity, metal-specific sensors
paired with a reusable hand-held electrochemical monitor. The disposable sensors
in combination with the monitor will determine the concentrations of lead,
copper and other heavy metals and will meet the criteria of 10 minute assay
times in field and small laboratory settings, with appropriate sensitivity and
accuracy, at approximately $1.00 per test. ***