* 9531459
* SBIR Phase II:  A Fast Hybrid Fourier/Real Space Algorithm  for Coulomb Energies
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/1996,08/31/1998
* Jing Kong, Q-Chem, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia J. Ekstein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 283,073.00

*** 95-31459 Johnson This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project
will continue the development of an innovative alternate approach to the
evaluation of the Coulomb interactions in large molecules. Recently there has
been a rapidly growing interest in Density Functional Theory (DFT) as a general
procedure for predicting physical properties of molecules, which is relatively
inexpensive compared to traditional correlated methods. For the largest
molecular systems whose study is feasible by the current DFT programs (several
hundred atoms), the treatment of the Coulomb interactions, with its quadratic
cost in system size, is computationally dominant. In order to be able to perform
calculations on truly large molecules, a reduction in the scaling of the Coulomb
contribution is required. The Phase I research established the feasibility of a
breakthrough hybrid Fourier/real space method, the KWIK algorithm, which solves
the Coulomb problem in only linear work in system size. The experience gained in
Phase I with the one-dimensional version of KWIK will be used to develop the
extensions that are required to handle two- and three-dimensional systems and to
treat the continuous distributions in electronic structure calculations. The
Phase I research effort has revealed not only that it is technically feasible to
implement the KWIK algorithm, but also that the kernel of a KWIK program module
is simple and tunable. It was also shown that the structure of KWIK is quite
amenable to simultaneous vectorization and parallelization - ingredients that
are both critical to achieving near-peak performance on many modern computing
platforms. During Phase II, the Phase I results will be refined and attached to
the Q-Chem quantum chemistry program, and the implementation will be extended to
parallel platforms. It is therefore anticipated that a highly efficient parallel
program for the study of molecules of unprecedented size will result from this
work. This research will allow highly accurate d ensity functional calculations
to be carried out on much larger molecular systems than is possible with current
techniques and programs. This will be of considerable value in computational
quantum chemistry and physics researchers at universities as well as industrial
and govemment facilities. ***