* 9531743
* Local Bonding and Properties of Cr-Oxycarbonitrides Using   Scanning Tunneling and Optical Spectroscopies
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/1996,05/31/2000
* Dawn Bonnell, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2000
* USD 372,000.00

9531743 Bonnell This research project seeks to understand the effects of local
variations in chemically graded Cr-oxycarbonitride films on film properties.
This grant, which is supported under the GOALI initiative, is a collaborative
effort between researchers at the University of Pennsylvania and DuPont. It is
planned to use precise and well characterized variations in sample composition
to correlate electronic structure, charge density, dielectric properties, and
optical properties. The principal experimental research tools proposed are
scanning tunneling and optical spectroscopies along with more standard
characterization methods (SIMS, RBS, EDS, etc.). A major goal of the project is
to achieve sufficient fundamental knowledge to develop a model relating local
bonding to properties in multicomponent systems. %%% An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education by provision of an
invaluable opportunity for students to conduct fundamental materials science
research in both University and Industrial research environments. The students
will receive joint mentoring by Prof.Bonnell/University of Pennsylvania, and Dr.
French/DuPont. A computer network connection will be established to allow
experimental data and modeling at either location to be accessed at the other;
the network will also include a bulletin board for information exchange. The
project represents a strong research alliance between academia and industry, and
at the same time provides an attractive arrangement for integration of education
and research through the training of students in a fundamentally and
technologically significant area. ***