* 9531425
* SBIR Phase II: Sensorless Active Magnetic Bearings Using    Neural Networks
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1997,10/31/1999
* Eugene Parker, BARRON ASSOCIATES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 10/31/1999
* USD 299,993.00

9531425 Parker This Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project pertains
to neural network methods for achieving Self-sensing active magnetic bearings
(AMBs). AMBs employ collars of electromagnets to levitate rotors. The absence of
mechanical contact and elimination of need for lubrication systems are
advantages that make AMBs a candidate technology for the replacement of rolling-
element and fluid-film bearings in many rotating machinery applications.
Stabilization of the rotor requires that controllers be provided the
instantaneous values of rotor displacement and coil current. Self-sensing AMBs
exploit the fact that the current and voltage signals in the actuation coils can
provide the information needed to sense rotor position. The fundamental reason
for this is that the inductive coupling between rotor and stator is
displacement-dependent. Phase I demonstrated the basic technical feasibility of
self-sensing AMBs, even when the bearings are saturated magnetically. Static
polynomial neural networks (PNN's) play a central role in computing displacement
based on nonlinear functional relationships among current and voltage signal
features. Phase II efforts will focus on perfecting and generalizing the
technique, and on demonstrating the performance of PNN-based rotor position
estimators operating in the closed-loop feedback control of an AMB rig. The use
of sensorless magnetic bearings, although potentially beneficial wherever AMBs
are employed, will be especially important in high-volume, low-cost applications
(e.g., small pumps, air conditioning and refrigeration compressors, energy-
storing flywheels for automotive applications, etc.) where the cost of sensing
instrumentation can be prohibitive. In many applications, e.g., for reasons such
as reliability, high temperatures, etc., conventional bearings cannot be
utilized.