* 9532055
* Mathematical Sciences:  Chromosome Geometry and Chromosome  Aberrations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/1996,07/31/2000
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2000
* USD 150,000.00

Sachs 9532055 The investigator models chromosome aberrations in live mammalian
cells, emphasizing implications for large-scale chromosome geometry and for the
biology of ionizing radiation damage. He analyzes formation of chromosome
aberrations after induction of DNA double strand breaks by radiation during the
interphase part of the cell cycle, using probabilistic models for DNA geometry,
motion, and reactions at the macromolecular level. For example, one area
concerns the combinatorics and kinetics of illegitimate recombinations,
involving the exchange of fragments between several different chromosomes.
Polymer models are used for large-scale chromosome structure and motion.
Statistical questions arise when very detailed experimental information about
specific individual chromosomes is made available by modern fluorescent in situ
hybridization techniques; these he addresses by extending already developed
Monte-Carlo simulations. The study involves developing computer algorithms,
explicitly solving stochastic process models, and collaborating with
experimental groups. Ionizing radiation damage to chromosomes is being studied
mathematically. When ionizing radiation hits cells, as occurs for example in
tumor radiotherapy or radiation accidents, one gets breakage and large-scale
reshuffling of DNA molecules. The resulting chromosome aberrations have been
implicated as symptoms or causes of most major radiobiological effects. They are
especially important in biodosimetry, the estimation of past exposure to
radiation dose by looking at residual cellular damage. They are also a window on
fundamental biology because they are influenced by, and symptomatic of,
chromosome geometry and motion. Recent developments, whereby specific human
chromosomes can be "painted" different colors, have dramatically increased the
amount of information obtained from aberration studies. A very rich and colorful
variety of aberrations can now be observed. Trying to und erstand the number and
kind of reshufflings one sees leads to mathematically nontrivial problems,
amenable to computer simulations or "pen and paper" calculations. The
simulations and calculations are being carried out under the grant. The results
allow systematic comparisons of cellular radiation damage effects observed by
different laboratories using different chromosome painting schemes. In addition,
mechanistic modeling of how chromosome aberrations evolve in time is helping to
attack the main mystery of radiobiology: how to extrapolate from the larger
doses needed for statistically significant experimental results to the much
smaller doses relevant to risk estimates for large human populations subjected
to radiation from environmental or man-made sources.