* 9532033
* Mathematical Sciences: Harmonic Analysis Method in Certain  Evolution Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1999
* Paul Yang, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/1999
* USD 73,098.00

Abstract Yang 9532033 The proposed will develop harmonic analysis methods to
solve a number of nonlinear evolution equations including the nonlinear
Schrodinger equation, the nonlinear wave equation, the modified Korteweg-de
Vries equation, the Zakharov systems and a fourth order elliptic equation
arising in conformal geometry. In the analysis of the relevant integral
operators, harmonic analysis estimates will be used to analyze the oscillatory
kernels. The known body of results concerning these equation deal mainly with
the equation in the whole space. New ideas and techniques will be needed to
handle the problem on domains with boundary. The fourth order equation will
require an understanding of the Sobolev inequalities for higher order
derivatives. In particular, a search for analogue of the positive mass theorem
is required. All of the evolution equations mentioned above represent various
models in materials science and fluid mechanics. For example, the collective
response of a nearly collisionless plasma when the electron temperature is much
greater than the ion temperature is dominated by electron plasma waves (Langmuir
waves) and ion acoustic waves. Under appropriate conditions (energy density of
the waves small compared to particle thermal energy densities, and
characteristic scales large compared to a Debye length), Zakharov's model is a
useful description of the nonlinear coupling of these collective models.
Schrodinger equation can be understood as a limit case of Zakharov's model and
can also be used to describe in certain regimes the Langmuir waves in a plasma,
i.e., the time evolution of the envelope of the propagating electric field. Our
main project is to analyze the solutions of the equations by using the tools of
harmonic analysis. For example, we want to understand the development of
singularity at certain time, which represents, in the Schrodinger models, how
the Langmuir waves collapse. This typical proble m is understood when the models
are on the whole physical space. Part of our work is to study the situation when
the models are confined in a bounded region in the physical space. The other
project we are working on is to study a non-linear problem in geometry. Here we
are looking for a conserved quantity analogous to the total mass of a
gravitational systems which will play an important role to the solvability of
the equation.