* 9532066
* Wavelets and Multi-resolution Analysis in Models for Layout Design of Mechanical Components
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Alejandro Diaz, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2000
* USD 215,231.00

This award provides support to study the use of wavelet-based, computer aided
methods to design mechanical components. The research seeks alternatives to the
standard, finite-element based modeling practice that are simpler to use and do
not sacrifice accuracy or mathematical rigor. Methods to be investigated are
intended to be used at the conceptual design stage. They will enhance the design
process by relieving much of the burden associated with the detailed modeling of
component geometries that is typical in standard finite-element based
methodologies. The research also focuses on the use of wavelet-based approaches
to the solution of the problem of optimization of the layout of material to
enhance structural performance. If successful, this investigation will provide
the foundation for new computer-aided tools for design of mechanical components
with a variety of applications, typically in automotive and aerospace
industries. These new tools will be simpler to use and more accessible than
those that are currently available to designers in standard practice. They also
will address the problem of design of structural components at a stage where
improvements can have most impact on cost or overall performance. The result
should be enhanced productivity by putting better, more effective tools in the
hands of a broader audience.