* 9532030
* Mathematical Sciences:  "Variational Analysis in            L-Infinity".
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Wenxiong Liu, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/2000
* USD 194,894.00

9532030 Barron, Jensen and Liu Calculus of variations problems in which the
performance functional is the supremum of the admissible functions and their
derivatives are the focus of this project. The specific projects under
consideration include the following: (1) determination of the function from the
class of Lipschitz functions with prescribed Lipschitz constant that is closest
to a given function in the sup norm; (2) determination of the relaxation of
multidimensional sup norm functionals; (3) finding the limit, if it exists in
any sense, of homogenized functionals in the sup norm; (4) extending the theory
of Young measures to sup norm functionals; (5) determination of the associated
Euler-Aronsson conditions for variational problems in L-infinity subject to
constraints; (6) characterizing the Lavrentiev phenomenon in L-infinity; (7)
analysis of the problem of shape optimization when the cost involves the sup
norm; (8) extending the theory of robust and H-infinity control to maximum cost
functionals. Auxiliary problems in optimal control, differential games, and
Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman theory are also part of this investigation. Many
problems in engineering, economics, medicine, and in other fields require the
minimization of some performance criterion subject to various constraints on the
design variables. In order to simplify the analysis, the most appropriate
performance criterion for a particular application is often replaced by another
that is more amenable to mathematical analysis but is suboptimal for the problem
under consideration. For example, in the design of the shape of a structural
member, the designer may be primarily interested in minimizing the largest
stresses in the member, but in fact may select design parameters based on
minimizing the average of such stresses. Similarly, In designing a liftoff plan
for a space vehicle, it may be the maximum acceleration and its attendant forces
on the vehicle that should be minimized, not the aver age acceleration and
forces. In drug or radiation therapy it is the maximum level of the tumor load
that the therapy is attempting to minimize, not the average tumor load. In
general, replacing a performance criterion based on an average of some density
with one based on the maximum of that density enormously complicates the
analysis of the problem. This project has the goal of providing the tools,
methodology, and theory that will allow the direct treatment of such problems.
Consequences of the research will be improved performance in many important
applications areas such as those described above. ***