* 9532006
* Acquisition and Use of 222Rn Measurements in Development    and Validation of a Global Transport Model
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Mark Kritz, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 06/30/2000
* USD 185,268.00

Abstract ATM-9532006 Kritz, Mark A., State University of New York-Albany Title:
Acquisition and Use of 222Rn Measurements in the Development and Validation of a
Global Transport Model The primary objective of this program is to obtain and
use a set of free tropospheric radon (222Rn) measurements in the development and
validation of an off-line global 3-D model under development at the Climate and
Global Dynamics Group at the National Center for Atmospheric Research. To this
end the PI will work interactively with members of the NCAR group on questions
of transport parameterization and sub-grid scale processes, flight planning and
sampling strategy, and the application of the results. There are also two
secondary objectives: First in cooperation with Dr. Pieter Tans (NOAA/CMDL)
Boulder) to acquire simultaneous CO, CO2, CH4 Measurements in the course of
those flights, for use in model validation and to further our understanding of
the global carbon budget. Second, by concentrating the flights in one season, to
acquire a data set which will be useful in the development and validation of
other regional and global models as well, such as 3-D GCM-based climate and
chemical transport models. Measurements will be made aboard a NASA Lear 24 jet
aircraft flying in the central and western United States, using a fast sampling
system which the PI has flown aboard NASA C-141 and C-130 aircraft. The flight
series will consist of five round trip flights between Moffett Field, CA and
Minneapolis, MN (with a refueling stop in Colorado) and five local (offshore)
flights out of Moffett Field, to be flown over a five week period in the summer
of 1996. The sampling strategy for both the outbound and return flight will be
similar, with vertical profiles obtained over specified locations in Colorado
and Minnesota, and upper level observations made in the course of the flight
legs between Moffett, Colorado and Minnesota locations. Present plans call for
the outbound legs to be fl own on Tuesdays of the five successive weeks, and the
returns on Thursday or Friday; however there is enough flexibility in the timing
of the outbound and return legs to avoid possible problems due to aliasing, or
recurrent synoptic situations. Vertical profiles in the vicinity of Moffett, and
200 miles offshore will be acquired on each of the offshore flights, to
investigate modeling artifacts associated with boundary layer parameterization
and continental edge effects. The PI will work with NCAR and other interested
modeling groups in the application of the radon data, and with NOAA and others
on the application of the trace constituent data set. The radon results will be
archived and made available via anonymous ftp and "3.5 floppy discs. This
research is important because it will provide valuable observations that are
needed to test and evaluate atmospheric general circulation models that are
being developed to include chemistry processes.