* 9532071
* Dissertation Research:  The Effect of Breeding System on the Level and Pattern of Molecular Variation in Plant          Populations
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1998
* Martin Kreitman, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Allen Moore
* 04/30/1998
* USD 10,000.00

9532071 CHARLESWORTH This research will test recent theories that highly selfing
species should be depauperate in neutral variation. Theoretically, the pattern
and amount of genetic variation in plant populations are greatly influenced by
the mating system which, in turn, is strongly influenced by the self-
fertilization rate. Nucleotide sequence variation will be quantified in a group
of plants with known differences in self-fertilization rates (Leavenworthia ;
Brassicaceae). The resulting data will allow the comparison of levels of neutral
and fitness-related variation at the nucleotide level among taxa with diverse
breeding systems. Understanding the influence of inbreeding on genetic
variability at neutral and fitness related loci, and the causes of differences
in each kind of genetic diversity among populations, is important in relation to
all aspects of plant genetics. Findings on genetic variation from natural
populations will also be of value for plant genetic conservation. Conservation
biologists assume that inbreeding taxa are highly susceptible to environmental
degradation, because of their low reservoir of genetic variability in traits
affecting fitness. The funded research addresses the validity of this assumption
by quantifying fitness-related genetic variation for such highly inbred
populations. The nucleotide sequence data can be further utilized for inferring
the phylogeny of the group studied. This will, in turn, ppovide a valuable
framework for understanding the evolutionary history of breeding system traits
and life history characters in the genus.