* 9532087
* BLOCK TRAVEL: International Conference on Power Electronics,Drives and Energy Systems for Industrial Growth.  To be heldin New Delhi, India, January 8-11, 1996.
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/15/1995,11/30/1996
* Subrahmanyam Venkata, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Saifur Rahman
* 11/30/1996
* USD 10,000.00

9532087 Venkata This funding is requested in order to permit attendance of 20
U.S. participants at the international conference on Power Electronics, Drives
and Energy Systems for Industrial Growth to be held in New Delhi, India during
January 8-11, 1996. The conference is jointly sponsored/organized by the IEEE
Industrial Applications Society, the IEEE Power Electronics Society, IEEE Power
Engineering, and IEEE Indian Sections. The organizers are seeking active
international participation to provide a forum for academia, engineers, and
researchers in industry to discuss the latest developments in power electronics,
drives, energy systems and related areas. The primary purpose if the U.S.
participation is to disseminate and transfer the latest research ideas on
various topics of relevance to the conference theme. India represents one of the
most dynamic economics in the world today, with an enormous potential for
consuming, manufacturing, and supplying high-quality engineering products. The
conference is to provide a forum for academia, researchers, and engineers to
discuss the challenges, problems, and directions of the future technological
growth of India and other developing nations. Today many U.S. companies are
seeking an active presence in India through partnerships with Indian firms, in
order to access a share of this emerging market, and to be able to utilize the
lower-cost technical work force. Another of the goals of PEDES 1996 is to
provide a mechanism for fostering contacts that will enable the formation of
such partnerships. Through the exhibition at the conference, U.S. companies will
be able to display their capabilities, and further their long-term business
interests in India. ***