* 9532079
* CRB: The Application of Neutral Landscape Models in         Conservation Biology
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/1996,10/30/1998
* Adam Porter, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Scott L. Collins
* 10/30/1998
* USD 75,000.00

9532079 With Metapopulation theory is one of the underlying paradigms of
conservation biology. Patch-based models, such as metapopulation theory, deal
with spatial complexity in a simplistic fashion to render the models
analytically tractable. This research will couple a generalized hierarchical
model of population structure with neutral landscape models to provide a
unifying framework for understanding population dynamics in patchy environments.
Neutral landscape models are a key element in the development of generalized
spatially explicit theory of population responses to landscape structure. The
specific goals of this research are to investigate the demographic consequences
of habitat fragmentation by (1) varying life-history and dispersal parameters of
species in spatially complex landscapes and searching for extinction thresholds,
(2) assessing how the scale of habitat fragmentation interacts with the
demographic potential and dispersal abilities of species as detected by shifts
in extinction thresholds, and (3) comparing how extinction thresholds relate to
critical thresholds in landscape connectivity. Percolation theory has served as
a model framework for understanding the dispersion of species in complex
landscapes. This research is unique because it unites in one modeling approach
population biology, landscape ecology and conservation biology within an
expanded framework defined by percolation modeling.