* 9532039
* Mathematical Sciences:  Estimation in Semiparametric Models and Empirical Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,09/30/2002
* Jon Wellner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* John Stufken
* 09/30/2002
* USD 138,176.00

DMS 95-32039: Wellner This research involves the study of empirical processes,
bootstrap methods in statistics, semiparametric models, and inverse problems and
nonstandard asymptotics. The research will involve limit theory for infinite -
dimensional M - estimates and related bootstrap methods, preservation theorems
for uniform Donsker classes of functions, uniform in P bootstrap limit theorems,
estimation of monotone and convex functions, convergence of iterative convex
minorant algorithms, and the behavior of global functionals in models with
interval censoring. %%% For the analysis of failure time data which are subject
to right censoring and/or left truncation, many methods are now available.
However, in many biomedical studies, including those arising from HIV/AIDS
studies, failure times are censored or truncated in more complicated ways. One
such complication is ``interval censoring'', in which one knows that the event
of interest occurs within a random time interval, but not the exact timing: for
example, HIV positivity or the drop of the CD4 count below a certain threshold
may only be determined to be between two clinical visits, but not the exact time
may remain unknown. This research will involve developing new statistical method
for data arising from these and other more complicated censoring mechanisms
ranging from animal carcinogenesis experiments to data in sociology and
econometrics modelling. A detailed study and evaluation of the properties of
methods recently proposed by other statisticians will be completed. ***