* 9532082
* A Comprehensive Study of the Environmental Deterioration    Process of High-Strength Bridge Wires
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Paul Duby, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Vijaya Gopu
* 08/31/2000
* USD 300,000.00

*** 9532082 Betti The fundamental objective of the research is a systematic and
comprehensive investigation of the environmental deterioration of the high-
strength bridge wires under the actual service conditions. The research will
focus on four different tasks. In task 1, a proper determination of the stress
intensity and distribution in high-strength wires will be investigated. The
importance of residual stresses due to wire manufacturing processes, initial
stresses due to straightening of coiled wires and applied stresses due to
imposed external loads will be considered. Task 2 will investigate the
determination of the rate of wire deterioration under normal and accelerated
conditions of environment/wire reactions while the effects of hydrogen
embrittlement and corrosion assisted cracking will be the focus of task 3.
Deteriorated galvanized and ungalvanized bridge wires as well as new wires will
be subjected to experimental testing simulating aggressive corrosive
environment. Theoretical analyses will be performed to interpret the
experimental results. Task 4 will concentrate on the evaluation of the effects
of wire metallurgy on the rate of wire deterioration in a corrosive environment.
Studies on recent developments in wire manufacturing and on new materials will
be conducted in view of the conclusions from the previous tasks.***