* 9532072
* Field Application Effects in Rapid Sintering of Activated   Powders by a Manufacture Friendly Consolidation Process
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Kazuo Yamazaki, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/2000
* USD 257,775.00

9532072 Groza In the prior NSF funded research, the investigators have
demonstrated that metals and ceramics powders can be rapidly consolidated to
very high density by applying electric fields as well as pressure in a specified
manner. The process is termed "Plasma Activated Sintering." The underlying
hypothesis is that electric discharge creates plasma between particles causing
local changes on the surface which facilitates the rapid sintering in the
subsequent resistant heating under pressure. However, the exact mechanism has
not been verified. In the current research, the investigators will use fiber
optics to see whether there is indeed plasma between particles. The role of
electric field will be studied since the process appears to work on both highly
conductive metals (nickel) as well as less conductive ceramics (aluminum oxide).
While prior work has suggested atomic level interfacial bonding with clean oxide
free grain boundaries in aluminum nitride, what is going on at the particle
surface has not yet been understood. The research will also include developing
and verifying sintering models under field assisted consolidation. The resultant
microstructures will be correlated to the process to develop controls needed to
make useful parts from powder materials. Powder consolidation is central to the
manufacture of several classes of advanced structural ceramics as well as many
powder metal parts used in the industry. Starting from very fine powders is the
desired approach to maximize the material properties. However, in processing
fine powders, elimination of pores between particles is very difficult without
losing the intrinsic advantage of the starting fine particle size. Since pores
weaken the parts, any process such as the one described here which can rapidly
consolidate the powders offers a new manufacturing avenue. This research will
lay the foundation for the necessary large scale equipment needed for the
process to be scaled up from the research stage to deve lopment and final
commercialization. Several industrial powder processing manufactures have shown
interest in this novel process.