* 9532074
* Quaternary Paleoclimatic Variations of Beringia: Large-scale Controls and Regional Responses
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2000
* Patrick Bartlein, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Steven M. Colman
* 05/31/2000
* USD 222,573.00

Abstract ATM-9532074 Bartlein, Patrick J. University of Oregon Title: Quaternary
Paleoclimatic Variations of Beringia: Large-scale Controls and Regional
Responses The climate system of the Arctic is a key component of the global
system, and an understanding of the nature of paleoclimatic variations in the
Arctic is therefore an important element in predicting how that region may
respond to changes in the large- scale controls of climate. This PALE/ARCSS
award supports the analysis of Quaternary paleoecological records from Beringia
to a) document the nature and magnitude of past climatic changes, b) test
hypotheses about the controls of regional climatic variations, and how changes
in those controls are expressed at the regional and local levels, and c) exploit
the growing number of paleoenvirnomental records from this region for use in the
examination of paleoclimatic variations along key transects and for application
in model-validation studies. This analysis requires the compilation of modern
sets of climate and vegetation data from the region, and their use to establish
relationships between vegetation and climate. These relationships can then be
applied to a) interpret fossil-pollen data in climate terms, thereby
illustrating the range of past climate changes, b) test specific hypotheses
about the controls of past climatic variations by comparing the "observed"
record of vegetation change with that implied by the hypotheses, and c) validate
climate model simulations of Arctic paleoclimates.