* 9532021
* Mathematical Sciences: Modeling of Material Processing      Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Gerald Young, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Deborah Lockhart
* 06/30/1999
* USD 59,714.00

9532021 Young The proposed project will examine the continuous casting of steel,
the horizontal Ohno continuous casting of pure and cored fibers, and the
photocopolymerization of multiple monomer systems into optical fibers. The
general goals of the models are to determine the process sensitivity to the
operating conditions, describe the scientific phenomena of heat, solute, and
momentum transport within the system, and to elucidate the coupled dynamics of
these transport mechanisms. A combination of asymptotic techniques coupled with
practical computational methods will be used to simulate these systems. Primary
emphasis will be placed upon the development of approximate analytical solutions
to the systems of equations governing these processing techniques. In instances
where this is not practical, an asymptotic approach will be used to reduce the
governing set of equations to a simpler set of evolution equations. Numerical
simulation of these equations will be conducted. The proposed project will
examine mathematical models of several material and manufacturing processes. In
particular, the continuous casting of steel, the horizontal Ohno continuous
casting of pure and cored fibers, and the photocopolymerization of multiple
monomer systems into optical fibers will be investigated. The proposed solution
methodologies enable one to represent the general trends that material and
system parameters have on the system performance. This approach also allows one
to investigate a variety of models in response to changing technologies, and can
be modified to new areas of application. Further, the design of real-time
controllers, real-time optimization methods for complex, multi-stage,
manufacturing processes, and the desire for quick evaluation of a large number
of alternative process designs, require models which capture system trends and
are not computationally intensive.