* 9550905
* A Laboratory for Enhancing Performance and Retention of     Introductory Computer Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* James Silver, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 12/31/1997
* USD 34,489.00

The goal of this project is to enhance student performance and retention in
introductory computer science courses through the use of closed laboratories. To
enable this teaching approach we will create a computer laboratory. The
laboratory will consist of a file server, a Postscript printer, a network of 20
microcomputers equipped with Alsys ActivAda, and 10 dot-matrix printers. This
facility will be used to conduct weekly closed laboratories. Each laboratory
will provide hands-on learning experiences for mastering basic programming
skills and becoming competent with the tools most frequently needed for program
development. These tools, which are integrated within ActivAda, include an
editor, compiler, formatter, debugger, librarian, and execution profiler. The
laboratory will be staffed 14 hours a day. In addition to being used for
scheduled closed laboratory sessions, it will be used by students to complete
course programming projects. An additional 5 licenses for ActivAda will permit
students to access this software from other campus computer clusters when the
lab is scheduled. By integrating a closed laboratory into our current course
structure, we expect to improve student performance on programming projects and
increase the percentage of students who successfully complete the introductory
sequence.