* 9550777
* SSC:  "Summer Academy for African American Males in Math    and Science
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Judith Shay, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1997
* USD 62,500.00

CHROME (Cooperating Hampton Roads Organizations for Minorities in Engineering),
a collaborative partnership southeastern, Virginia, will operate three math and
science Academies for African-American males. The goal of the Academies is to
increase the pool of African-American males interested in and prepared for SMET
careers. Specific objectives are to: (1) stimulate more positive attitudes
toward and interest in math and science, (2) raise the level of awareness of
SMET careers and interest students in SMET careers, (3) encourage students to
complete high school, (4) prepare them to enroll and succeed in Algebra I and
higher math and science courses, (5) develop understanding of the scientific
process, and (6) improve communication skills. The Academies will be an integral
part of a broad and remarkably effective regional initiative which has been
promoting minority and female participation in SMET for eleven years through
CHROME. Students will receive extensive and continuing enrichment and support
through high school via the very effective network of school-based CHROME clubs
as well as Academy follow-up programs. The nurturing environment, team structure
and many group activities will help solidify a supportive and enduring peer
group. Each student will have a mentor, one of many local African-American in
SMET careers, who will take a personal interest in and encourage the student,
discuss career interests and paths, and provide ongoing support. Students also
will be exposed to role models of minorities in math and science in the
university faculty and students, work site contacts, and guest speakers. A total
of 75 rising 7th and 8th grade African-American males will be served at three
sites, sponsored by partner universities: Hampton University, Norfolk State
University, and Old Dominion University. The partners offer both predominantly
(or, in the case of ODU, significant) minority student populations and strong
SMET research and degree programs. Students will be drawn primarily from four
minority-majority urban school districts in Hampton Roads and selected for their
interest in and need for the program. ***