* 9550052
* Mathematics and Science Teacher Enhancement through Chaos   and Fractals
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1995,08/31/1999
* Lee Klingler, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,110,170.00

9550052 Peitgen MATHEMATICS AND SCIENCE TEACHER ENHANCEMENT THROUGH CHAOS AND
FRACTALS Florida Atlantic University targets 200 middle and secondary school
teachers in Broward County, Florida, with enhancement experiences in the
exploratory and creative aspects of chaos and fractals. The first year of this
39-month project is devoted to preparation and planning: fifteen lead teachers
participate in a three-week summer institute; and write, pilot, and revise
several CATEs (Curriculum and Textbook Enhancements) prior to the project's
larger-scale teacher enhancement activities in subsequent years. In years 2 and
3, school teams of mathematics and science teachers are recruited from the
middle and secondary schools in the Broward County system. They complete an
initial three-week summer institute and participate in follow-up activities
during the academic year plus one-week in the subsequent summer. Development,
field testing, and revision of CATEs is one component of the project; these are
clusters of activities that explore ideas drawn from chaos and fractals, and
which are used to enhance a topic in the curriculum or to connect a topic with
other parts of the curriculum. CATE's are written and based on the Broward
County School District curriculum and their state-adopted textbook series. After
use throughout this project and further evaluation and testing, the CATEs will
be revised for broader use and published. Springer-Verlag of New York has made a
commitment to serve as publisher. Project evaluation, in addition to collecting
ongoing data for formative evaluation, addresses some of the larger questions:
Does the teaching style of the teachers change (as reflected in interviews and
in their portfolios) as they become more focused on problem solving? Does the
learning of the students (as reflected in interviews and in their portfolios)
suggest that they, too, are adopting a more open-ended, exploratory/confirmatory
model with respect to mathematics? Evaluation activiti es include interviews,
videotaping, standard and open-ended items, and in-class observations. Cost-
sharing from Florida Atlantic University and the Broward County School System
represents 83% of the NSF award amount.