* 9550929
* Development of Hydrogeologic Component of the               Geology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Jeffrey Niemitz, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 33,735.00

This project provides funds to install an educational water well field
laboratory for the purposes of teaching hydrogeologic principles, groundwater
resource evaluation, and contaminant remediation. The field consists of five
wells variously spaced and 200 feet deep. The wells are fully instrumented to
permit measurement of aquifer hydraulics in a heterogeneous, anisotropic,
unconfined aquifer, as well as long-term monitoring of water quality, static
water level, and local precipitation. The key instrumentation is an in situ
water level transducer/water quality probe/precipitation gauge datalogging
system that allows monitoring on a variety of time scales and downloading to a
portable computer for further analysis on and off site. This faaility permits
the university to expand the hydrogeology component of the geology and
environmental science curriculum at introductory and upper course levels at a
time when many students are entering the hydrogeology job and graduate school
market. Hydrogeologic principles and their application to water resources
management and contaminant remediation are being taught through a series of
discovery laboratories at the well field site. The emphasis is placed on
directed activities that include the collection, analysis, and interpretation of
hydrogeologic data commonly preformed by a professional hydrogeologist. The
level of sophistication increases at each course level in the curriculum.
Introductory students explore the surface and subsurface processes in the
hydrologic cycle. Upper-level students perform and evaluate pump/slug tests,
water sampling and chemical analysis, contaminant plume simulation, well field
siting methods, and geophysical logging techniques. Student independent research
projects can take advantage of the unique site location between a perennial
groundwater feed stream, impermeable diabase dikes, and high-volume springs.