* 9550857
* Enhanced Plastic Recycling Experiments to Further Improve   Undergraduate Materials Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Peter Liu, Eastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 05/31/1997
* USD 80,545.00

Since plastics account for approximately 20 percent of the landfill volume,
recycling plastics will play a significant role in reducing solid waste flow to
the already congested landfills in the nation. Students must be educated in the
methods to recycle plastics and to produce products from recycled materials in
order to protect the environment. This project enhances materials recycling
experiments by adding a drying experiment, an injection molding process, and a
study of melt property for recycled plastics. Over several courses, and with an
integrative overview at each stage, students are being involved in a series of
plastic recycling experiments. These experiments include collecting and cleaning
postconsumer containers, grinding, extrusion compounding and pelletizing,
drying, injection molding, controlling melt behavior, and testing the final
properties for recycled plastics. Students are now able to produce products from
recycled plastics with an injection molding machine, to control the quality, and
to improve efficiency of the processing of the recycled materials. Students in
the technology majors and non-science-majors can gain fundamental understanding
and practical experience through this series of experiments. They are educated
with knowledgeable insights of reducing, reusing, and recycling plastics to
protect our environment and to conserve natural resources. This project could
serve as a model of materials education in the nation for undergraduate students
concerning the materials and product cycles and their impact on the environment.