* 9550098
* Exploratorium Institute for Inquiry
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Lynn Rankin, Exploratorium
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 10/31/2001
* USD 5,999,680.00

9550098 Rankin With this project the exploratorium creates a national leadership
institute, the Exploratorium Institute for Inquiry, which combines its
extraordinary facilities and resources supporting scientific inquiry with a
"local laboratory" of Exploratorium- stimulated district science education
reform projects. Designed to foster high quality inquiry-based teaching and
learning in the nation's elementary schools, the Institute for Inquiry will
provide educators from across the country with advanced professional development
opportunities to augment science reform initiatives already underway as well as
support the development of inquiry innovation in the local laboratory. The five
year project will create a nexus of practitioners committed to changing
elementary school science and provide a gathering place to integrate the
experiences, ideas and insights of the nation's inquiry designers and
implementers. Through a unique combination of theory and practice, the Institute
will give at least 800 elementary educators, from all strata of the field --
such as lead and resource teachers, science resource teachers, administrators,
informal science educators, principal investigators of science education reform
projects, scientists, university educators and national leaders in the field --
an unusual and powerful opportunity to explore inquiry-based teaching and
learning. Its components include two and three week workshops designed to
provide professional developers with in-depth inquiry experiences in science and
learning, four day seminars for reform implementers with initial exposure to
inquiry instruction, and two day forums with provide platforms for vigorous
debate and review by national leaders on critical topics in inquiry. These
activities will build upon a local laboratory of inquiry innovation including
advanced inquiry projects, Exploratorium associate schools practicing inquiry,
and classroom teacher workshops. An ongoing Inquiry Network for p articipants
will consist of an annual proceedings publication and an Internet-based
electronic communication network. The cost sharing is 42% of the NSF award. ***