* 9550765
* AMP:  Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP)
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1995,09/30/2003
* Milton Slaughter, Louisiana Board of Regents
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 09/30/2003
* USD 5,944,914.00

9550765 Ford The Louisiana Alliance for Minority Participation (LAMP) is a
comprehensive statewide coordinated program aimed at substantially increasing
the number and quality of minority students earning baccalaureate degrees in
science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) areas. In the long term, the program
design will lead to significant increase in minority SEM graduate enrollment in
U.S. graduate schools. It is estimated that Louisiana institutions will increase
to 500, the minority undergraduate SEM enrollment, while increasing graduate
enrollment nationally to 100, by 1999. LAMP strategy centers on enhancing and
coordinating existing SEM pipeline activities at Louisiana institutions,
supporting undergraduate student research activities and introducing strategic
statewide and regional academic and research activities to promote networking
and technology exchanges. The LAMP implementation would continue the expansion
of the State's SEM infrastructure and join the several systemic initiatives and
EPSCoR programs coordinated through the Louisiana Board of Regents. Twelve
institutions initially will manage a variety of campus-based programs and
participate in several statewide and regional projects. Southern University and
A&amp;M College, the LAMP lead institution is an 1890 Land Grant university with
a nationally recognized systemic model for physics education and is slated,
under a recently court approved settlement agreement, to develop doctorate
degree programs in Science and Mathematics Education, Material Science,
Biomedical Sciences and in Administration and Information Systems over the next
10 years. Southern University System, parent organization to Souther University
campuses in the major metropolitan areas of Baton Rouge, New Orleans, and
Shreveport, enrolls more than 36% of all African American college undergraduates
in the State of Louisiana. Southern University and A&amp;M College will provide
management leadership to array of campus coordina ted minority participation
enhancement activities around the State. Grambling State University, the fourth
public Louisiana HBCU, as well as private Xavier University and Dillard
University, both of New Orleans will be active LAMP participating institutions.
RCMS projects at grambling State University, Southern University and A&amp;M
College, Xavier University and the University of New Orleans will collaborate
with LAMP and serve as models for transporting to other Louisiana institutions.
Louisiana State University, Tulane University, of Southwestern Louisiana,
University of New Orleans and Southern University and A&amp;M College will
manage programs at the undergraduate/graduate interface and harness the projects
of increased SEM undergraduate degree production. These impressive projections
are conservative in view of a recent higher education desegregation settlement
agreement pledging substantial state resources to expedite the movement of state
HBCU institutions toward comprehensive graduate status through establishment of
new graduate programs, fund other race recruitment and scholarships, and support
articulation among institutions. The plan for expanding diversity on college
campuses makes available additional resources to meet the goals of the LAMP,
including improved facilities, increased student support and enhanced
faculty/mentor support systems. Establishing LAMP closes a critical gap in the
nation's SEM pipeline. Implementation of the LAMP moves the nation substantially
toward its goal of awarding 50,000 undergraduate degrees and 2,000 doctorate
degrees annually by 2000. Louisiana relatively large African-American population
puts the State in a unique position to make significant contributions to the
nations goal of increased minority participation in the SEM enterprise. the
timing of this application makes it possible for unprecedented federal/state
synergism to result in substantially increased resources and program development
activities consis tent with NSF AMP goals.