* 9550406
* SSC:  "Loyola/Aspira Summer Science Camp"
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Eric Hamilton, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Betty Ruth Jones
* 12/31/1996
* USD 39,734.00

Loyola University Chicago in conjunction with Aspira of Illinois, will offer a
bilingual (English/Spanish) six week, commuter Summer Science Camp integrating
computer science, engineering, and physics for thirty-five Hispanic middle
school students. The program continues with a thirteen-week academic year
follow-up. The interdisciplinary activities begin with students being introduced
to basic computer architecture, after which they assemble IBM-compatible
computers for subsequently use in the program. Each week, the students
experiment in three distinct labs: Digital electronics, Engineering design and
control, and Computer science programming, where computer concepts are
introduced through programming in Pascal language. The summer session includes
career-oriented field trips to the facilities of Argonne National Laboratories,
Northwestern University, Chicago Research &amp; Trade (a securities trading
firm), and People's Gas. Students are paid a $120 stipend to cover their
transportation expenses and are granted a high school course credit through the
Chicago Public Schools. Loyola/Aspira SSC replicates the DOE Loyola/Aspira Pre-
Freshman Enrichment Project (PREP), that in turn is a bilingual version of an
NSF Young Scholars Project redesigned for younger students. The NSF Young
Scholars Project has already significantly affected minority representation in
computer science studies in Illinois. Loyola/Aspira SSC's overall mission is to
intellectually nurture Hispanic students of limited opportunity, to provide them
with interest-stimulating experiences that enable and motivate them to take
college preparatory courses in science, engineering, and mathematics, and to
promote ultimately their entry into sophisticated SEM careers. ***