* 9550808
* Student-Made Instructional Science Video Laboratory Projects
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Frank Kuserk, Moravian University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 04/30/1997
* USD 40,000.00

This project improves the instructional capability of the laboratory component
of the basic core curricular course, Revolutions in Science, by enhancing
specific student video acquisition and production facilities. The course, which
is team taught by Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Earth Science faculty, serves
non-science-majors and science majors alike, and includes the full range of
student abilities. The course's video laboratory project requires the 55 to 70
students enrolled, working in groups of 3 or 4, to create instructional videos
on science topics of each group's choosing. Student responsibility for the final
video product extends from the initial research phase through and including
final editing. The videos are presented to their peers and the instructors at
the end of the course. This program had depended upon home-quality equipment,
which necessarily involved inefficient component integration. The nonlinear
editing capabilities of the new equipment provides a more professional and
robust system, allows a broader range of subject matter and techniques,
increases production quality and student efficiency, and provides a greater
capability for the production of student-made instructional science videos. This
project may serve as a model for training other science faculty in using this
successful experimental approach to science education.