* 9550791
* Laboratory Exercises in Plant Biochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* John Markwell, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/1999
* USD 48,208.00

John P. Markwell DUE 9550791 U of Nebraska Lincoln FY1995 $48,208 Lincoln, NE
685880430 ILI - Leadership in Laboratory Development: Life Sciences Title:
Laboratory Exercises in Plant Biochemistry Most laboratory courses utilize
experimental materials which students find abstract, are presented in an
uncoordinated manner, and are "canned" or confirmatory in nature. The use of
more interesting materials would promote student involvement, while presentation
in an intellectually stimulating context would enhance learning. This project is
developing a series of experiments on plant acids and pigments designed to
implement a new approach to engaging students in science. The target audience of
these exercises is non-major biochemistry students. The experiments are designed
to focus on the development of student expertise in the use of research tools,
expose all students to the process of scientific research, and provide a
framework for cooperative learning opportunities. The project is developing
coordinated experiments which will reward students with a sense of progressive
mastery of earlier concepts and tools, and foster a holistic view of science.
The goal of this tool-based approach is to empower students to generate and
answer their own questions about the world around them and lead them into
independent investigations. Plant acids are used to provide a pedagogical
vehicle for learning about Ph and biological buffering, while providing a
relevant bridge to familiar commercial products. Plant pigments, specifically
anthocyanins, chlorophylls and carotenoids, are used to provide an interesting
and colorful approach to an understanding of biochemical phenomena. The
developed exercises will be field tested at the P.I.'s institution and
disseminated without cost to inte rested undergraduate and educators via
electronic means over the Internet. The methods and exercises developed as part
of this project will be utilized in the development of an advanced science
content course for pre-service teachers in collaboration with faculty from the
University of Nebraska Teachers College.