* 9550136
* VPW:  Combinatorial Optimization, Automation, and Very High Speed Optical Networking
* EHR,HRD
* 12/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Milena Mihail, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1996
* USD 193,068.00

Development of the national information infrastructure is a top priority
direction by which this country has chosen to drive its technology to the
future, innovate its social and economical interests, and maintain its
international competitiveness and technological lead. At the backbone of this
information superhighway lies the breakthrough technology of optical networks.
This research outlines the relevance of the mathematical techniques of
algorithmic graph theory and combinatorial optimization in the design and
operations of backbone all-optical networks. Three prototype classes of problems
will be investigated. The first class is new and it exemplifies minimization of
investment cost. The second class is also new and it exemplifies optimization of
service. The third class exemplifies maximization of technological benefits, and
has been previously examined under different model assumptions. The significance
of automation in high speed network studies and relevance of algorithms and
optimization in the manufacturing of all-optical devices for all-optical
networks will be outlined. Interactive activites include: teaching a graduate
course on Approximation Algorithms and Applications, teaching an undergraduate
course on Introduction to Algorithms, organizing a workshop on Computational
Support for Very High Speed Networking, and organizing student field trips to
visit laboratories at Bellcore.