* 9550398
* Theoretical Development and Modeling of Structural/         Environmental Effects in Electron Transfer Reactions
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Kim Baldridge, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 11/30/1996
* USD 126,880.00

This research involves the development and application of state-of- the-art
theoretical chemistry to effectively calculate quantum mechanical observables
for complex systems involving solvent and ionic species. The ability to answer
questions involving complex molecular systems that involve solvent and ionic
species will significantly enhance the fields of bioorganic and medicinal
chemistry. Two difficulties have impeded progress towards this goal. The first
has been the inability to calculate efficiently systems of sufficient size to be
of interest to a broad range of fundamental biological processes. The second has
been the problem of coupling a meaningful description of the effects of solvent
to a quantum mechanical calculation. This research aims to 1) develop accurate
models for the inclusion of solvent effects in quantum mechanical calculations,
and 2) test such models on an experimentally studied electron transfer reaction.
Principle areas targeted for interactive activities include: 1) research being
carried out in theoretical chemistry; 2) teaching a graduate-level computational
chemistry course. (This course will be a new addition to the chemistry
curriculum at UCSD and as such will be an overview course to pique interest in
the subject among faculty and students. Future goals include expansion of the
course to allow student initiated projects to be developed and formalization of
the degree requirements in harmony with the existing chemistry curriculum.); and
3) offering a seminar course (open forum - informal instruction) involving a
weekly seminar series for one quarter at UCSD in which women scientists in
various chemistry-related fields (academic and industrial), will be invited to
give talks.