* 9550873
* Improvement of Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum Through   Updated NMR Capabilities
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* David Evans, Presbyterian College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 78,757.00

Through this project, the Chemistry Department is upgrading a 21- year-old
30-Mhz NMR spectrometer, which had been inoperable, with state-of-the-art
200-MHz FT-NMR capabilities. This new instrument provides the ability to perform
significant undergraduate research projects, while being simple enough to allow
upper-division (e.g., sophomore-level and up) students to record their own
spectra routinely for instructional laboratories. The exposure of students to
this instrument begins in Organic Chemistry, the normal sophomore-level course,
where they record the spectra for the products synthesized during the first-
semester lab course. During the second-semester lab, open-ended project-based
experiments are performed. Without a functional NMR spectrometer, the
incorporation of this type of experiment is extremely difficult. The upper-
division courses all, with the current exception of Physical Chemistry,
incorporate advanced NMR techniques in their laboratory offerings. The most
notable is the ability to offer a meaningful lab component to a newly introduced
Spectroscopy class. Undergraduate research is enjoying an immediate elevation in
opportunities with the presence of an FT NMR spectrometer. Two of the faculty on
staff are increasing their activity in research as a result of increased demand.
Their projects require NMR capabilities, ranging from routine 1H to 31P. The
spectrometer meets both the current requirements, as well as the foreseeable
future needs.