* 9550846
* Neurophysiology Laboratory for Undergraduates
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* Ann Jane Tierney, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 04/30/1997
* USD 34,250.00

This project establishes an undergraduate neurophysiology laboratory. The
laboratory is equipped with four-student electrophysiology rigs, including
microscopes, intra- and extra-cellular amplifiers, Apple computers, and MacLab
software. This laboratory serves students who major in neuroscience, psychology,
and biology and is used in both lower- and upper- division courses. It is used
to demonstrate experiments to first-year students and to allow them to conduct a
simple experiment. In the upper-division course, Fundamentals of
Neurophysiology, the rigs are used for a series of challenging laboratories that
teach students how to use the equipment, design experiments, analyze data, and
present their results both orally and in writing. The exercises focus on
invertebrate preparations and emphasize the principles of both cellular and
behavioral neuroscience. The laboratories bring to life concepts that students
only read about until now and should encourage some to pursue further studies in
neurophysiology. During the academic year and summer, many students conduct
independent research under the supervision of faculty members. The rigs are
available for such projects and for students who focus on neurophysiology for
their senior theses. Finally, the PI can use the equipment to develop new
neuroethological preparations suitable for undergraduate laboratories.