* 9550370
* VPW:  Development of New Techniques for Chromosome Mapping  in Salmonid Fishes
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1995,06/30/1997
* Ruth Phillips, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1997
* USD 159,199.00

The objective of this research is to develop new methods for chromosome mapping
in salmonid fishes including banding techniques using SINE sequences for
chromosome identification, species- specific and chromosome-specific paint
probes, and in situ hybridization using cosmid clones for localization of genes.
Although there is an extensive linkage map for allozyme loci in salmonids, no
single copy genes have been mapped to specific chromosomes. Construction of
chromosome maps would greatly benefit fisheries research and enhance the
usefulness of salamonid fishes as models for research in developmental genetics,
ecological genetics, and toxicology. Accurate maps will also allow us to
reconstruct chromosome evolution. Work on development of these methods will be
done during my visit to University of Washington in the 1995-1996 academic year.
The University of Washington is uniquely suited for this research because the
School of Fisheries maintains excellent laboratories for research on salmonid
fishes and expertise in the flow sorting of chromosomes and single copy in situ
hybridization exists in the department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology.
Dr. Phillips is developing collaborative projects with faculty members in the
School of Fisheries on chromosome mapping and related projects. Interactive
activities include teaching a graduate seminar in molecular systematics and
giving guest lectures in the Molecular Techniques class.