* 9550743
* SSC:  "Kids Investigating and Discovering Science"
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Luis Villarreal, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 12/31/1996
* USD 33,711.00

The University of California (UCI) Summer Science Camp Academy is directed
toward increasing the interest, participation and success of Hispanic middle
school students in science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET). The
objectives are (1) to strengthen interest and participation in science and
mathematics among male and female students, with limited-English proficiency;
(2) to connect science, mathematics, technology, and communication skills to
these students' everyday lives and concerns; (3) to involve students in hands-on
investigations in science, mathematics and technology-including research in
which they participate with Hispanic scientist who serve as role models; (4) to
provide career exploration by visits to local industries, and counseling
concerning the academic pathway into SMET fields-with Hispanic undergraduate
science majors serving as mentors; (5) to involve parents in a comprehensive set
of family activities which heighten their understanding of the accessibility of
careers in SMET fields to their children and to increace their involvement in
their children's education; and (6) to develop the project's science,
mathematics, technology and writing activities-including its bilingual
instructional approaches-for national dissemination. The focus of the program
will be on project-based learning on topics essential for understanding biology:
molecular biology, genetics, and their relation to the structure and properties
of DNA. Solving problems in these areas will require students to develop and use
mathematical, computer, and writing skills. Students will work together in
collaborative teams as they conduct hands-on experiments and computer
simulations. They will use computer tools to assist them in collecting,
analyzing and representing data. They will maintain lab books in which they
record their hypotheses, observations, and conclusions. In addition, each team
will prepare a research paper; they will them present the paper or ally at the
Academy Graduation for participants, their families, school district
participants, and UCI faculty and staff. ***