* 9550445
* Optical and Microstructural Characterization of GaN films for Short Wavelength
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Joyce Palmer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 05/31/1997
* USD 157,943.00

Recently, bright luminescence was reported in GaN films with high crystalline
defect densities. This result is puzzling since crystalline defects usually
quench luminescence. That defects can exist in light emitting devices without
severe degradation of the light output is very unusual and merits further study.
Dr. Palmer will carefully examine the relationship between crystalline defects
and optical properties in GaN. Samples will be grown by MOVPE at NTT
Optoelectronics Laboratories by Dr. T. Matsuoka, and characterized (TEM, X-ray
for crystal quality; PL for optical properties, C-V and Hall effect for
electrical properties; DLTS for non-radiative defects) by Dr. Palmer working
with graduate and undergraduate students. As part of this research, a graduate
student will be sent to Japan to: visit Dr. Matsuoka's laboratory and learn more
about the growth of III-V nitides, visit other Japanese laboratories actively
involved in III-V nitide research, and attend and present results at an
international conference to be held in Japan. Interactive activities include:
organizing a seminar in which prominent women in engineering and the physical
sciences speak about their work; teaching a challenging (required) upper
division undergraduate course, "Introduction to Semiconductor Devices" during
the spring term; and sponsoring an undergraduate woman research intern through
the host institution's Women in Engineering Program (WEP).