* 9550151
* VPW:  Meteorite-Asteroid Spectral Links:  Toward a Modified Model of Asteroid Belt Evolution
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1996
* Beth Ellen Clark, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 11/30/1996
* USD 72,709.00

The ultimate goal in meteorite-asteroid studies is to understand the links
between meteorite classes and their asteroid parent bodies. This will allow
effective use of detailed knowledge of meteorite petrology to study records they
preserve of solar system formation in the asteroid regions. This research is
focused on asteroid observations at spectroscopic resolution sufficient to
define specific mineralogies and meteoritic linkages, and these telescopic
observations will be supported with laboratory analog measurements. Certain
asteroids have been selected on the basis of their anomalous low-resolution IR
spectral properties, recently discovered among the results of the Seven Color
Infrared Asteroid Survey of smaller (-50 K,) main-belt objects (Clark et al.
1994). These asteroids are targeted for further study due to their promising
affinities to some of the more elusive meteorite parent bodies. At project
conclusion, a modified model for asteroid belt evolution will be presented.
Interactive activities include: 1) a graduate course will be taught on astronomy
of the Solar System, 2) a seminar will be offered on current readings on proto-
planetary nebulae and star formation regions, such as these fields have come to
bear on studies of the meteorite record, and 3) a workshop seminar will be led
for graduate and undergraduate students with the purpose of constructing an
introductory astronomy class curriculum. On the theory that the best student is
a teacher, students will be asked to lead the class.