* 9550107
* United States Center for the Third International Mathematicsand Science Study
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,03/31/2001
* William Schmidt, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 03/31/2001
* USD 4,090,159.00

; R o o t E n t r y F D Z C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t * O b j e c t
P o o l X C Z X C Z 4 @ ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 F Microsoft Word 6.0
Document MSWordDoc Word.Document.6 ; Times New Roman - - % ' ! ! ! ! * * % ! ! !
! * * ! ! U.S. involvement in the Third International Mathematics and Science
Study (TIMSS) offers significant opportunities to help inform change during this
critical time. TIMSS results will test and to advance the theoretical
underpinnings of systemic reform by providing empirical analyses as well as new
methodologies. The request for funding contained in this proposal is for data
analysis and dissemination activities. In particular this proposal asks for: 1)
continuing support for the U.S. National Research Center; 2) the development of
an analytical strategy for linking the intended curriculum (curriculum analysis)
to the curriculum implemented by teachers in the classroom and finally to what
students learn; 3) the analysis of the U.S. TIMSS data and writing of the
corresponding reports with an eye toward informing current policy initiative and
reform efforts and 4) public relations and dissemination activities designed to
make these results available to various constituencies especially the general
public and business communities. Two current policy initiatives are important to
this proposal: (1) t he National Educational Goals and (2) content-driven
systemic school reform. This proposal states our purpose to perform the work
that not only is grounded in the comparative education tradition and also will
enable the TIMSS data to address central policy questions of interest to the
United States and disseminate the knowledge gained to interested national
audiences: policy makers, researchers, educators, business and community leaders
and parents. ; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ' $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT The results of these policy initiatives and
supporting research have been an emerging movement towards content-driven
systemic change and the formulation of national education goals. U.S.
involvement in the Third International Mathematics and Science Stu Sadie R.
Jones Sadie R. Jones @ vC Z @ @ H4 Z @ V Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e # * # j j
j j j j j v 1 X T / v j v j j j j ~ j j j j 1 U.S. involvement in the Third
International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) offers significant
opportunities to help inform change during this critical time. TIMSS results
will test and to advance the theoretical underpinnings of systemic reform by
providing empirical analyses as well as new methodologies. The request for
funding contained in this proposal is for data analysis and dissemination
activities. In particular this proposal asks for: 1) continuing support for the
U.S. National Research Center; 2) the development of an analytical strategy for
linking the intended curriculum (curriculum analysis) to the curriculum
implemented by teachers in the classroom and finally to what students learn; 3)
the analysis of the U.S. TIMSS data and writing of the corresponding reports
with an eye toward informing current policy initiative and reform efforts and 4)
public relations and dissemination activities designed to make these results
available to various constituencies especially the general public and business
communities. Two current policy initiatives are im