* 9550017
* The West Virginia K-12 Ruralnet
* EHR,DRL
* 03/15/1995,08/31/2000
* Edwin Smith, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2000
* USD 3,057,249.00

9550017 Smith This 42-month project develops a cadre of 40 math/science teacher-
leaders in K-12, trained on the use of Internet, who serve as peer teacher
trainers and members of an on-line mentoring community. They in turn train,
support and mentor 1200 additional teachers from 400 schools in West Virginia.
All participating schools are connected to the Internet and the requisite
equipment provided through cost sharing. The strategies include 2-weeks of
teacher leader training, an implementation year including Project Green and on-
line learning, and a follow-up three-day conference to debrief and prepare the
participants for peer teaching. The peer groups are taught by two teacher-
leaders and one graduate student at various sites throughout the state. The
project includes year-long mentorships via the Internet, establishing affinity
groups, and developing a science education gopher. The science curriculum core
for the project is drawn from Project Green, is closely aligned with other state
efforts and the science frameworks, and is tied to the statewide concern about
water resources. Graduate credit is awarded through West Virginia University and
Marshall University and ranges from 4 to 7 graduate credits per participant. In
addition to developing the expert base and a large community of users, the
project investigates the effectiveness of the activity. Cost sharing is 218%.
***