* 9550157
* Special Project: RCMS: Support for the National Conference of Black Physics Students
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1996
* Cynthia Mcintyre, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* William E. McHenry
* 04/30/1996
* USD 35,000.00

9550157 McIntyre The 1995 National Conference of Black Physics StudentsSM
(NCBPS) meeting will be held February 9-12, in the metropolitan Washington, D.C.
area. the host institution for NCBPS'95 in The American Physical Society (APS).
The 1996 NCBPS meeting is scheduled for February, 11996 with Fisk University,
Nashville, TN being the host institution. Professor Eugene Collins is the
faculty member is charge. The 1997 NCBPS is tentatively scheduled for Brookhaven
National Laboratory as host institution in February or March 1997. The 1995
Conference will be the ninth consecutive meeting of NCBPS. The objective of the
NCBPS meeting is to assist and encourage Black students who have shown interest
and ability in physics to enter and complete Ph.D. programs, and to initiate
research, teaching, or technical careers commensurate with their educational
achievement in physics. NCBPS originated with a group of Black graduate students
at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The conferences have been
organized and implemented by students with faculty and staff assistance at the
various host institutions throughout the country. The growth of conference
participation is shown as follows: 1987 MIT 34 1988 MIT 68 1989 Howard
University 124 1990 Southern University 140 1991 Hampton University 150 1992
Stanford University 150* 1993 Michigan State University 210** 1994 Georgia
Institute of Technology328 *Over 50 students were turned away due to lack of
funds **Over 100 students were denied access due to lack of funds Information is
presented through the following mechanisms (1) lectures by distinguished
scientists and engineers, (2) technical presentations by Black gra duate and
undergraduate students, (3) workshops on the graduate admission process, (4)
seminars on financial support to students for science education at the
university level, (5) forums on successfully completing a graduate programs in
physics, and (6) career opportunities at all degree levels. The primary audience
for the conference consists of undergraduate students who are majoring in
physics and/or who have expressed a sincere interest in physics. A principal
goal for the Conference is to permit these students, who are in the process of
making career decisions, the opportunity to discuss with graduate students and
scientists their concerns regarding a scientific career and to seek
recommendations and advice about educational paths.