* 9550966
* Using Planetary Science to Transform General Education      Laboratory Courses into Research-Oriented Experiences       Relevant to Modern Society
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Harold Larson, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 05/31/1997
* USD 58,979.00

All undergraduate lab courses in the Department of Planetary Science are being
completely revised, and new lab courses created, to deliver relevant science
education to liberal arts majors satisfying their science requirement, science
majors in other disciplines requiring a planetary perspective, and education
majors preparing to teach science. Experiments coordinate the treatment of
measurements--the traditional hands-on activity that distinguishes laboratory
exercises from homework problems--and the models that scientists use to
interpret data and explain how systems work. Students use realistic scientific
tools to generate data and image-processing techniques to examine special
collections of data. Students performing image-processing exercises use the same
data and tools and make the same measurements and discoveries that scientists
have made, thus reinforcing concepts far more effectively than would passive
examination of the same material. The exercises are designed to give students
the opportunity to explore a fundamental concept or process in depth and to
discover its connections to other knowledge and experience. Most lab exercises
use computers in the expectation that science and computer literacy levels
reinforce each other. One immediate product of the project is an undergraduate
lab manual, allowing experiments to be adapted at other institutions.