* 9550768
* SSC:  "Camp SMART (Science, Math and Relevant Technology)
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Ruth Thomas, Girls Inc, of Metropolitan Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1997
* USD 57,360.00

Girls Incorporate of Metropolitan Dallas requests a 3-year grant beginning in
1996 for Camp SMART (Science, Math and Relevant Technology). The camp is a
collaborative project between Girls Incorporated of Metropolitan Dallas, a
nonprofit agency serving adolescent girls, and the Hockaday School, a private
girls' school. Camp SMART is a math and science study program for minority girls
entering grades seven through nine. Objectives includes: o To capture and
increase participants' interest in mathematics, the sciences and the
technological applications of both; o To increase participants' awareness of
career opportunities in scientific, mathematical technological fields; o To
provide participants with minority women role models, thus helping them see
themselves as scientists and mathematicians; o To improve participants' academic
performance through exposure to positive role models, specific instruction in
study and problem solving skills, and provision of support through the academic
year; o To enroll 45 minority participants annually. Methods to be employed
include a 4-week summer program and activities throughout the academic year. The
summer program consists of: 1) four 45-minute classes each morning in
mathematics, science, computers, and study and literacy skills; and 2) an
afternoon seminar on career exploration, which includes field trips and
presentations by professionals working in science and math careers. During the
academic year, Camp SMART participants will meet periodically for activities
such as presentations by math and science professionals and visits to local
colleges. Numerous opportunities will be available throughout the course of the
project for participants to discuss their attitudes toward math and science and
changes in those attitudes resulting from participation in Camp SMART. Camp
SMART contributes to the advancement of knowledge and education by providing
opportunities for i ntensive study of math and science in unique environment.
The project opens opportunities for minority girls to excel by providing them
with hands-on experiences with math and science as well as interactions with
people working in those fields. ***