* 9550153
* VPW:  Homotopy Methods for Analysis and Simulation of       Electronic Circuits
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Ljiljana Trajkovic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 11/30/1997
* USD 184,657.00

Finding dc operating points, steady state, and transient responses of electronic
circuits are essenntial tasks in electrical circuit simulation and involve
nonlinear differential/algebraic equations. Traditional methods for solving such
systems of equations often fail, are difficult to converge, and, often cannot
find all the solutions. Dr. Trajkovic will investigate the application of
homotopy methods to solving nonlinear equations describing power electronic and
switching circuits and power systems flow equations, that traditionally pose
simulation difficulties. Experiments with homotopies may lead to the development
of better circuit simulation tools and to better understanding of relationships
between homotopy methods and the behavior of nonlinear circuits. Dr. Trajkovic
will spend three months with the Electrical Engineering Department at the
University of Wuppertal, Germany where she will collaborate with Professor
Wolfgang Mathis and his students. Their "Theory and Computer Aided Design of
Electronic Circuits " group actively pursues research in circuit theory and
simulation. This will be a continuation of her research activities at Berkeley,
with emphasis on theoretical work based on experiments with various homotopies.
Interactive activities include: teaching a graduate course in "Advanced Circuit
Theory" that will introduce students to analytical results that provide insights
and understanding of complex behavior of electronic circuits; holding a
workshop/seminar series on "Application of Homotopy Methods in Solving
Engineering Problems," with special emphasis on circuit simulation and solving
equations describing nonlinear circuits; and organizing informal workshops where
female students make presentations and get advice about their research and
career goals.