* 9550701
* AMP: Xavier University of Louisiana Alliance for Minority   Participation
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Leonard Price, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2001
* USD 4,325,487.00

9550701 Price Xavier University (XU) of Louisiana's Alliance for Minority
Participation (AMP) program represents the combined resources, facilities and
faculties of 13 private, historically black members of the United Negro College
Fund (UNCF) in the Tennessee area: Bennett, Fisk, Knoxville, Lane, Lemoyne-Owen,
Oakwood, Philander Smith, Rust, St. Augustine's, St. Paul's, Shaw, and VA Union.
With strength in the natural sciences and in undergraduate research capacity,
the XU AMP's goal is to double, within five years, its combined science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) graduation rate. Improving SEM student
retention rates, particularly among students with strong intellectual promise
but poor academic preparation, will be a primary objective, as well as
increasing enrollments in the physical sciences and mathematics. The AMP's goal
and objectives will be accomplished by: three, new, shared bridge programs for
entering freshmen; new entry level physical science and math courses patterned
after those that are successfully offered by Xavier; improved articulation
within dual- degree engineering programs; and expanded opportunities for paid
and mentored undergraduate research experiences each summer in industry,
graduate institutions, and external research laboratories for bridge program
participants as they become sophomores, juniors and seniors. Working
collaboratively, 12 Campus Coordinators will seek and implement articulation
agreements for students with selected graduate institutions; effect share access
to on-line academic resources for students; organize undergraduate research
conferences, and develop academic support strategies in the context of each
participating campus and its students. In addition, UNCF will contribute funds
for scholarships and academic supports to the program, as well as its fund-
raising and media expertise. Over five years, the program will impact 4,712
students, all of whom will be African Americans, raisi ng the number of
graduates from the 1994 figure of 388 to 816. The increase in SEM graduates will
represent a seven and one-half increase in the national production -- from
institutions that enroll just one percent of the Nation's African American
college students. Dr. Leonard Price, past Chair of XU's Chemistry Department,
and a distinguished African American educator and researcher, will be Principal
Investigator. Dr. Willie E. May, Chief of the Chemistry Analytical Division of
the National Institute of Standards and Technology, will be Chairman of the
AMP's Advisory Board. William H. Gray, III, President of UNCF, will serve as
Chairman of the AMP's Governing Board, which initially will be composed of the
presidents of the participating institutions but expanded to include national
educational and SEM experts and officials. Ongoing program assessment will
inform the AMP's advisors and administrators and the program. It will be
comprised of: data gathering to monitor progress toward the goals, and
evaluation to determine the effectiveness, quality, and acceptance of the
program's various components.