* 9550064
* PPD/EP:  Engineering for Persons with Disabilities:  RASEM -A Regional Alliance on Science Engineering and Mathematics  for Students with Disabilities
* EDU,EES
* 03/15/1995,02/28/1999
* William McCarthy, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 02/28/1999
* USD 1,508,302.00

9550064 McCarthy New Mexico State University will establish and operate a
project entitled "Regional Alliance for Science, Engineering, and Mathematics"
or RASEM. The RASEM will be a Regional Center that will work with other
educational entities and organizations in the three-state region for the purpose
of encouraging students with disabilities to pursue science, engineering, and
mathematics (SEM) careers. The Center will provide leadership, coordination,
assistance, evaluation, and dissemination to state departments of education,
two- and four-year colleges, secondary schools, national research laboratories,
and public and private sponsors. The three-year project will support strategies
that remove obstacles that impede students with disabilities from pursuing
careers in SEM fields. The Center will also cooperate with the Alliances for
Minority Participation (AMP) and the Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority
Student Achievement (PMSA) programs in assisting student participants through
critical educational transitions. Students with disabilities at the secondary
level of education will be encouraged and assisted through strategies that
include conceptual videos, student stipends, adaptive technologies, computer
networking, SEM summer camps, and supercomputer experiences. Workshops will be
offered to precollege teachers and administrators to dispel stereotypes and
promote teacher involvement in support of students with disabilities. Strategies
to be used on the college level will include financial incentives, removal of
impediments to effective learning, and establishment of collaboration with other
educational partners. These collaborations will stimulate research opportunities
and mentoring relationships. RASEM should assure a steady growth in the number
of persons with disabilities who select SEM career paths serving as a model for
other centers in the country.