* 9550637
* SSC:  "Summer Science Camp"
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Henry Teoh, SUNY College at Old Westbury
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 62,380.00

The State University of New York/College at Old Westbury's Summer Science Camp
(SSC) will systemically improve the math and science performance of students
from underrepresented and undeserved populations. As in the past, SSC will serve
as a crucial link in the science and mathematics "pipeline" by providing summer
programs for 7th and 8th graders in preparation for entry to the highly
successful Science and Technology Entry Program (STEP). For 8 years, STEP has
offered summer and academic year programs for over one thousand two hundred
minority high school students. The four week summer camp operates at two levels
for fifty middle schools students, accommodating their various stages of
academic preparation. They receive intensive instruction in language,
mathematics, computer science and analytical skills, especially useful in
developing research oriented science projects. Science career opportunities are
explored through activities such as field trips to industries, government
laboratories and college research labs, complete with pre-tour briefing, post-
tour evaluations and informal meetings with scientistq, and with mentoring by
college/role models. Group workshop strategies for reinforced learning,
motivation through team competitions, a supportive environment, experienced
staff and carefully chosen courses tailored to students' needs are key elements
in our SSC program. Ancillary programs are used for developing students'
positive attitudes towards science, mathematics, engineering and technology
(SMET) careers, for increasing their academic confidence and for encouraging
parent participation in education. Follow-up activities during the school year
are maintained by the New York state support STEP program. SSC's past success
can be measured by the overwhelming numbers of applications, the near-perfect
student participation with a completion rate of 98 and 92 percent for the past
two summers, the high level of continuation in the summer and academic year
programs, high level of interest and continued study of mathematics and science,
and their academic achievements in the schools. This proposed three-year SSC
reapplication benefits from the experiences gained from past SSC and STEP
program, offered during the summer and academic years. ***