* 9550890
* A Series of Nested GC-MS Applications in the Introductory   Chemistry Sequence
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Claude Yoder, Franklin and Marshall College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/1997
* USD 23,942.00

This project designs a set of nested or interrelated experiments employing gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) as a technique that exposes students to
the use of this versatile instrument at ever-increasing levels of
sophistication. Because the intent is to incorporate GC-MS in the introductory
general and organic chemistry laboratory sequences, an instrument-intensive
research-like experience has been designed for each laboratory sequence around
an interdisciplinary theme: Environmental Chemistry for the general chemistry
laboratory (analysis of an artificial "gasoline" mixture followed by water and
soil analyses contaminated with gasoline and/or pesticides) and Plant Assays for
the organic chemistry laboratory (a fatty acid, methyl ester analysis of a plant
extract using standards synthesized by the students and synthesis,
identification, and characterization of a series of plant growth hormones). The
assumption in designing each project in this manner is that students gain
sufficient mastery in GC-MS by a sequential series of applications and that
exposure to modern instrumentation, especially in a hands-on format, is highly
desirable. The thematic basis for the projects creates links with the related
disciplines of geosciences and biology. Many aspiring premeds take biology, if
not geology courses, so the bridging laboratory concept helps those students see
the relevance of their laboratory work from several disciplinary perspectives.
In both the general and organic chemistry laboratory sequences, the
organizational paradigm of "Synthesis, Structure, and Identification" is
enhanced by the integration of the GC-MS with its dual capability of separation
and identification.