* 9550458
* Intergrating Programing into Engineering Education through  Context-Setting and Scaffolding
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Mark Guzdial, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1998
* USD 102,706.00

9550458 Guzdial Our world is changing in ways that make learning a critical
skill-a verb, not a noun. When our engineering students enter the workplace,
they will find: That organizations as a whole need to learn, and that
individuals who can learn are highly valued (Senge, 1992), that the half life of
their engineering knowledge is something on the order of five years (Lohmann &
Stacy, 1990); and that the artifacts they design and build must lend themselves
to being learned by their users; and it makes sense to design them so that users
can learn the artifacts easily (Norman, 1993; Soloway, Guzdial, et al., 1994a).
Modern cognitive science has cast new light on learning. We know that successful
learners are active learners: They seek to understand deep structure in what
they learn, they integrate what they learn into what they knew previously, and
they index learned knowledge so that it is usable later (Farnham-Diggory,
1990;kolodner, 1993). Passive learners who rely on knowledge being served to
them in terms of lectures and presentations are not successful learners-we
cannot expect passive learners to be able to learn from new situations without
someone there to package the new knowledge for them. Active learners learn based
on two components: * Activity: Students who are active learners are actively
doing, and are learning in order to better engage in that doing. Support which
enables a student to be successful and learn from an activity is called
scaffolding (Palincsar, 1986;Wood, Bruner, et al., 1975). * Context: The
situation in which students learn has a significant impact on what students
learn and how well they may use the learned knowledge later (Farnham-Diggory,
1990). My research and teaching plan are geared to prepare students for life in
a learning society. My research is focused on defining, implementing, and
evaluating methods that lead to active learning, particularly using (1) context-
setting and (2) scaffolding techniques. I apply the se methods in engineering
education because of the critical need for engineers who can learn and the ready
access to engineering educators who are willing to explore innovative methods in
education at Georgia Institute of Technology (Georgia Tech). My teaching plan
has two focuses: (1) on using these same methods in my own and other computer
science education and (2) on teaching these methods to others. The specific
research I propose in this research is to apply the methods of scaffolding and
context-setting to enabling the use of programming as an activity in engineering
education. My hypothesis is: * Programming can be an effective and efficient
activity for engineering education, achievable by (1) redefining the activity of
programming and (2) creating environments to support this redefinition based on
techniques of context-setting and scaffolding. Products of this work: * An
empirically evaluated theory of the technological context- setting and
scaffolding needed to integrate a complex activity (programming) into a range of
domains in engineering education. * The creation of a general programming
environment to improve engineering education by providing students with the
opportunities to define and debug processes in a domain-oriented manner. * A set
of courses at the undergraduate, graduate, and continuing education levels to
inform students about educational technology. Impacts of this work: *
Engineering education will be improved through use of a tool for students in
active learning. * Educational technology will have a theory to guide future
development of supportive and guiding structures in software to achieve active
learning. * Improvements in computer science education based on the research
into context-setting and scaffolding. ***