* 9550507
* Model Institutions for Excellence (MIE)
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/1995,02/28/2001
* Elizabeth Barron, Xavier University of Louisiana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 02/28/2001
* USD 12,278,835.00

9550507 Garibaldi The Model Institutions for Excellence award to Xavier
University od Louisiana will support the initiation and implementation of
systemic changes in the University that will result in significant improvements
in (non-health) Science, Engineering and Mathematics (SEM) student outcomes as
follows: o a 98% increase (from 43 to 85) in the number of Xavier students
graduating in SEM disciplines based on a projected 75% rate of retention; o a
quadrupling of the number (from 16 to 64) of Xavier SEM graduates enrolling,
annually, in graduate and professional schools; o the development of an academic
and physical infrastructure that will sustain, with the full commitment of the
University's administration, the new projected level of student outcomes; and o
the establishment and documentation of a successful and replicable model for SEM
undergraduate student preparation for graduate/professional school or
professional placement. To attain these goals, major changes will occur in the
areas of facilities, curricula, student services, and student scholarship
assistance. These changes will be coincident with and complemented by the
commitment of the University to secure funding of approximately $7 million to
construct a new facility (by the end of 1997) to accommodate existing and
projected needs of faculty and students in the SEM academic areas of interest.
The SEM disciplines of particular interest in this project will include Biology
(non-premed), Chemistry (non-ppemed), Computer Science, Mathematics, Physics and
the Dual Degree Engineering Program. The development of this project has been
accomplished through a process that involved extensive and open discussions
among most of the senior administrative officers of the University including the
President, Executive Vice President, Vice President for Academic Affairs, Vice
President for Development, Dean of Arts and Sciences, Academic Department
Chairs, special Program Directors, and other selected faculty and staff. Thi s
process of communication and cooperation will continue and will be expanded to
include the input of the corporate and public sectors and representatives from
other Universities as part of an Advisory Council/Committee. Evaluation of this
project will be an on-going activity built on the establishment of baseline data
on existing student outcomes and assessed against the specific visions, Goals
and Objectives set forth in the program description. The evaluation process will
be performed in close collaboration with Technical Assistants identified by the
National Science Foundation The project, from the planning stage and through its
implementation, will be carefully documented to provide the optimum opportunity
for the formulation of a Model Process and Program that is replicable in
comparable academic environments around the country. 2 Xavier University of
Louisiana