* 9550821
* Incorporating Engineering Workstations in Engineering       Technology and Computer Science Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* E. Hart, Bluefield State College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 07/31/1997
* USD 14,535.00

Shekhar Pradhan DUE 9550821 Bluefield State College FY1995 $14,535 Bluefield,
WV 247012100 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Engineering Title: Incorporating
Engineering Workstations in Engineering Technology and Computer Science Courses
The college is proposing to acquire six SUN workstations to improve the
laboratory experiences in engineering technology and computer science curricula.
The improvement plan proposed will introduce a new course in VLSI system
engineering technology. In this course, students will be introduced to modern
day VLSI software tools; hierarchial representation and layout of VLSI systems;
computer-aided design of monolithic circuits at transistor gates; circuits;
register for routing and cell placement; error checking; NMOS and CMOS
processes; MOS inverter; dynamic CMOS and clocking; special circuit layouts and
technology mapping; and testability for VLSI. The course will consist of
lecture, laboratory, and team projects on aspects of VLSI systems development
including specification, design, implementation, testing, validation,
performance evaluation, and integration into the operating environment. Group
management and team approach will be emphasized for the projects. As part of
this proposed work, the college will undertake a major enhancement of the
computer-aided-laboratory for use in the six academic departments within the
division. The development of this laboratory is vital to the success of the
proposed emphasis in VLSI systems courses. Students will be able to gain up-to-
date experiences needed in high technology industries.