* 9550776
* SSC:  Summer Science Camp
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Juanita Scott, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/1997
* USD 62,500.00

The goals of the proposed program will be to increase the number of minorities
entering SMET careers by providing a foundation for life-long interest in
science and mathematics for at least 50 participants annually; and, to provide
activities which encourage the participants to consider SMET as possible career
choices. The specific objectives are to: motivate students to remain in school
and interest them in studying the sciences and mathematics; to help students
understand science and future scientific questions through hands-on, mind-on
activities; help students become more self- reliant in their school work while
raising their self-esteem; provide enriching learning experiences to improve the
qualitative, quantitative and analytical skills of the participants and to show
the importance of science, mathematics, and communication skills in our daily
lives; expose students to a board range of participatory activities and to
professionals in the area of science, math, engineering and computer science;
offer students information and guidance in the career exploration process and
the academic preparation needed for a variety of professions, especially
potential math and science careers; heighten students' awareness of science and
mathematics disciplines as potential career choices, including science teaching,
encourage students through science participation, knowledge and attitude to take
prerequisite courses for college majors in science and/or math; and, capture the
attention and assistance of more parents by preparing them to support their
children through actual involvement of the program's activities. The methodology
will include providing academic enrichment in SMET during a 5-week Summer
Science Camp and Academic Year Follow-Up Activities. During the summer,
Classroom and laboratory activities in mathematics (including algebra), science
(life and earth), computer literacy and scientific communications will be
offered. Research methodology and career expl oration activities will also be
included. Academic year follow-up activities will include an extension of the
summer content/activities on Saturdays and participation in the South Carolina
Middle/Elementary School Academy of Science (SCMESAS) activities. In this effort
the College will join with the middle schools in Richland County School District
One to establish SCMESAS clubs in their schools. The desires outcome for the
program will be an increase in the number of minorities enrolling in SMET
courses in both high school and college with a subsequent increase in both the
program participants and their peers entering SMET careers.