* 9550002
* Implementation of the National Council of Teachers of       Mathematics Standards in Discrete Mathematics, Phase II
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/1995,05/31/2001
* Margaret Kenney, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* diane spresser
* 05/31/2001
* USD 1,569,033.00

9550002 Kenney IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL COUNCIL OF TEACHERS OF MATHEMATICS
STANDARD IN DISCRETE MATHEMATICS, PHASE II Boston College will develop a
nationwide cadre of 300 grade 7-12 teachers at six sites (California, Georgia,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Nebraska, and Ohio) who will activate the discrete
mathematics standard in their classrooms and share instructional experiences
with their students and colleagues. The three-year project, which builds on an
earlier NSF-supported project, also targets 60 collegiate faculty who teach
mathematics or mathematics education courses to future teachers. Participants
attend a three-week summer institute and two in-service follow-up days during
the subsequent academic year, and maintain e-mail (and other) communication with
a designated instructional team member. The college faculty participate in these
same activities, implement a course in discrete mathematics or topics in
discrete mathematics within an existing course that includes pre-service
teachers at their home institutions, and conduct other in-service activities in
discrete mathematics as professional development opportunities for teachers.
Summer institutes include opportunities for both residential and commuter
participants. Summer institutes and follow-up activities target discrete
mathematics content and pedagogy, leadership, equity, and assessment. Project
evaluation includes assessment of progress in achieving project goals and
objectives, effectiveness of participants, and project impact at the classroom
and school or district level. Cost-sharing from the universities housing the six
project sites represents 18% of the NSF award amount.