* 9550658
* Workshop on the Use of Slides, Videos, and Emerging Computer Technologies in Undergraduate Aquatic Science Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1995,07/31/1996
* C. Susan Weiler, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 07/31/1996
* USD 15,000.00

9550658 Weiler The American Society of Limnology and Oceanography proposes to
hold a workshop on the use of emerging computer technologies and aquatic science
data bases as undergraduate teaching resources. These tools enable any student
with access to the internet and the appropriate software, regardless of
geographic location, to both access and manipulate some the exceptional data
bases presently available through the Internet or on CD ROM. The interactive
capability of Mosaic will enable students to ask their own questions and
manipulate data sets in ways of their own choosing, and on a scale not possible
with traditional student laboratory or field experiments. This is an exciting
and challenging new way to introduce students to the power of the scientific
method. The workshop will bring together educators and data base managers to
discuss the emerging technologies in the context of undergraduate teaching, to
obtain hands-on experience with some of the existing data bases, to develop a
resource guide aquatic science information presently available on CD ROM and the
Internet, and to develop recommendations on how best to assemble or enhance
resources for use in interactive hands-on undergraduate aquatic science
education. Facilities will also be provided for materials used for undergraduate
aquatic science education and for sharing slide and video materials used for
undergraduate courses. The workshop, to be held in conjunction with the
Society's annual meeting (June 11- 15, 1995 Reno, Nevada).