* 9550581
* SSC:  A Summer Science Camp for Southwestern Puerto Rico
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Alvaro Lecompte, Inter American University of Puerto Rico San Juan
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 09/30/1996
* USD 62,490.00

The Summer Science Camp (SSC) program will take place on the San German campus
of Inter American University of Puerto Rico. The project goal is to provide the
foundation for a lidelong interest in science and mathematics to
underrepresented minority students in Puerto Rico in the intermediate schools
with the objective of encouraging these students to consider science,
engineering and mathematics as possible career choices. The program will offer
an intensified mathematics and science enrichment program during a five-week
period in the summer, and will serve seventy-five (75) students each year
selected from area schools. The program will provide instruction in math,
computer science, the biological and physical sciences, and in Spanish and
English communications skills as related to science. Other program activities
include field trips, hands-on laboratory experience, counseling and orientation,
seminars, training in study skills, career exploration activities, and
motivational activities. A follow-up component will be held during the regular
academic year to permit project continuity and increase effectiveness. The
participants are expected to be equally divided between males and females and
predominantly Puerto Rican. The outcomes of the SSC program will be seventy-five
underrepresented students annually in Puerto Rico who will have increased their
academic skills, performance and motivational levels to enter and successfully
compete with their peers in a science, engineering or mathematics career. ***