* 9550493
* Teaching Mathematical Thinking through Space Exploration
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/1995,03/31/1999
* Wallace Feurzeig, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc
* Continuing grant
* George W. Bright
* 03/31/1999
* USD 812,994.00

* 9550493 Feurzeig The goal of this three-year project is to develop four
curriculum units to replace or supplement current classroom materials on key
topics in algebra, geometry, calculus, and topology. These units will introduce
some of the most fundamental and central ideals of modern mathematical thinking
to a broad population of high-school students and teachers through a series of
highly graphic and interactive computer-assisted explorations, experiments and
games. The first three units can be used separately within the standard algebra,
geometry or calculus courses. Taken as a whole, they prepare the way for a
series of exploratory journeys in the world of one-, two-, and three-dimensional
space forms, which comprise the specific subject matter of the last unit. As
another alternative, units can be joined to provide a one-semester course,
either in place of pre-calculus or as an optional fourth-year college
preparatory course. The four units will support from 10 to 18 weeks of
instruction. The first year of the project will focus on development and
informal trials of the activities and supporting software; the second year on
continued materials development, staff development, classroom implementation,
pilot trials, and formative evaluation; the third year on teacher development,
field testing, evaluation, and dissemination. Local high schools will
participate in the pilot trials and field tests. The research, development, and
teaching will be carried out by an interdisciplinary team of mathematicians and
mathematics education consultants with expertise in curriculum development and
evaluation. The project team will work closely with the developers of ARISE, the
NSF Comprehensive high-school curriculum project underway by the Consortium for
Mathematics and its Applications (COMAP), to publish project materials in the
widely distributed series, High-school Mathematics and its Applications (HiMAP.)
***