* 9550399
* Trace Fossils and Ichnofabric of the Kope-Corryville        Sequence in the Type Cincinnatian
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Mary Droser, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1996
* USD 62,572.00

In spite of their obvious potential utility, trace fossils and ichnofabric have
been incorporated only rarely into stratigraphic analyses. For their potential
to be fully realized, a predictive model based on all aspects of the
ichnological record must be developed within a well-constrained stratigraphic
horizon. The purpose of this research is to document discrete trace fossils and
their distributions, record ichnofabric indices, and describe the ichnofabric
from the Cincinnatian Kope-Corryville succession. The sequence and cyclo-
stratigraphy of these strata have received considerable attention in the past
ten years and a high resolution choronostratigraphic study is currently
underway. As a result, a well constrained stratigraphic framework has emerged
providing an ideal opportunity to test the utility of the ichnological record in
stratigraphic analyses. These strata have an additional advantage; the
Ordovician represents a critical time in the history during this time. This
study will aid in our understanding of the history of the benthic community
during the Ordovician radiation. Dr. Droser will also attend the Third
International Ichnofabric Workshop at the University of Lopenhagen, Denmark and
participate in field trips that include visits to similar age strata to the
Cincinnationa Kope-Corryville succession but that represent very different
environmental conditions of deposition. The interactive activities consist of
five main facets: teaching one graduate-upper level undergraduate seminar in
ichnology; participating in additional paleontology and departmental seminars;
actively involving students, particularly undergraduates, in research; leading
general department field trips; and leading field trips for middle school and
high school museum volunteers at the Cincinnati Museum of Natural History.