* 9550504
* Implementation Proposal - MIE Program
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2001
* None None, Universidad Metropolitana
* Cooperative Agreement
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 09/30/2001
* USD 11,789,661.00

9550504 Diaz The Universidad Metropolitana (UMET), one of the three institutions
of the Ana G. M ndez University System (AGMUS), will implement the first phase
of a ten-year model comprehensive institutional development program to
substantially increase the number of quantity of minority science, mathematics
and engineering (SEM) BS degree graduates. The goal of the program is to: a)
increase the number of SEM majors and the number of students going on to
graduate school and science teaching; b) develop the capacity to
institutionalize and sustain this growth and to continue to expand and improve
well beyond NSF support; and c) develop a well-documented, replicable model for
similar Hispanic institutions. UMET will attract talented students from its
highly successful pre-college programs, but it will focus on increased
recruitment, retention and advancement of low-income, disadvantaged students who
are traditionally excluded from SEM careers. UMET's vision is to create an
environment of high standards and high expectations for all SEM students in
which the entire university is involved in offering an array of rigorous, varied
and exciting state-of-the-art SEM academic programs, that places quality
instruction and learning at the center of its activities, and that provide the
nurturing, extensive academic and personal support, enrichment, and resources
students need to be highly prepared for graduate work. The program will include
a comprehensive revision and restructuring of the entire current SEM curriculum,
new baccalaureate programs in physics, biology, chemistry, computer science, and
mathematics, and a pre-engineering transfer program. It will also include:
increases in the number and quality of SEM faculty; a pre-freshman summer bridge
program; student scholarships; significant increases and strengthening of
undergraduate research; systematic academic performance assessment and
monitoring; enhancement of SEM facilities and equipment; an undergraduate-t
o-graduate transition program and formal collaborations with graduate schools to
provide transition experiences and secure admission to graduate school. A
Science Support Center (SSC) will be developed as a hub for a host of student
supports and faculty development. A monitoring, evaluation and student tracking
system will be developed, along with extensive documentation of the model
program for dissemination. The program will be developed in collaboration with
DOE National Laboratories, other universities and industry. This initiative will
require fundamental institutional changes in academic and administrative
policies and structure to overcome traditional barriers to SEM development, as
well as a considerable investment of UMET's own resources. As a private
institution, UMET and AGMUS have the institutional flexibility and the
commitment to SEM to produce the types of institutional changes required as well
as the demonstrated commitment to investing considerable amounts of its own
resources to SEM. 6Universidad Metropolitana