* 9550414
* Continuous Record of Permain to Triassic Climate Changes in High Latitude Rift Deposits from the Interior of Southern   Gondwana
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Keddy Yemane, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 05/31/1997
* USD 68,294.00

This research involves comprehensive sedimentologic and isotope geochemistry
studies on Permian to Jurassic clastic and chemical deposits of a freshwater
rift lake from the Mid-Zambezi Basin, in southern Gondwana. The objective is to
document Permian to Jurassic climate changes from the sedimentary record and to
compare the climate data to those obtained from equivalent time-intervals in
Laurasia. The research will provide crucial field data and produce a realistic
conceptual climate model for large continental interiors against which numerical
model simulations can be tested and refined. Provenance and depositional
environments will be determined from petrographic and microfabric studies of
sandstones and carbonates, respectively. Distribution of primary clay mineral
assemblages will be determined on <2um sediment fractions and the variation
through time interpreted in terms of climate regimes for depositional times.
6-18O will be measured on meteoric calcite cements from strat-bound early-formed
concretions in shales throughout the sedimentary succession to establish changes
in isotopic composition of meteoric waters and to infer surface
paleotemperatures. C-org signatures from laminated primary lake carbonates will
be used to assess organic productivity of the ancient lake. Interactive
activities include: teaching one upper level undergraduate course on
palaeoenvironmental reconstructions from continental deposits, mentoring three
students in undergraduate geology research, and expanding contacts with middle-
school science teachers of the School District of Philadelphia, visiting and
demonstrating class activities in Earth and Environmental Sciences, as well as
guiding motivated individuals.