* 9550594
* SSC:  "Summer Science Camp"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Enrique Ainsworth, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1997
* USD 70,290.00

African American, American Indian, and Latino students are severely
underrepresentated in the Los Angeles Unified School District's (LAUSD) advanced
math and science sequence. Of the approximately 640,000 minority student who
start out in the educational pipeline, 1% transition to calculus, and fewer than
3% take physics. Of those who complete these courses, few students meet
scholastic standards for admission to an engineering or science major in the
University of California system. The UCLA School of Engineering and Applied
Science and the LAUSD Urban Systemic Initiative will implement a six-week summer
and 12- week academic year, commuter and Summer Science Camp for 40 African
American, American Indian, and Latino students in eight and ninth grade. Our
major goal is to increase students' access to educational experiences that: 1)
set high expectations; 2) enhance competence in advance math and science; 3)
provide a instructional approach that unifies the learning of math, science, and
technology; and 4) promote aspirations for professions in technical careers.
Proposed activities include: Math Connections: A math curriculum emphasizing the
interrelationship algebra, geometry, and technology through group discussions,
computer exercises, and collaborative problem-solving workshops. Science
Project: Rocketry and Sea Vessels. Two projects will form the thematic focus to
introduce the scientific process and explore applications in team-oriented
physics, math and related careers. Each project will involve students in physics
demonstrations, interactive hands-on laboratory activities, field excursions to
industrial sites, and lectures from quest speaker and specialists in various
fields. Career Explorations and Parent Involvement: Major features: Educational
planning sessions, career fair, college day, mentorships, role model quests
speakers, and five family day events. Follow-up: Support from the Information
Technology Division of the LAUSD wi ll ensure long-range tracking through the
first year of college. Academic year Saturday Academies will reinforcement and
feedback on student course enrollment and performance. ***