* 9550728
* SSC:  The Clark Atlanta University Summer Science Camp      Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Isabella Finkelstein, Clark Atlanta University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 57,696.00

Clark Atlanta University will sponsor a four-week Summer Science Camp for fifty
seventh and eight grade students each summer for the three-year period,
1996-1998. The goals of the Clark Atlanta University (CAU) Summer Science Camp
(SSC) Program are to provide a foundation and support to promote the development
for a lifelong interest in the sciences, engineering and mathematics (SEM) for
all of its participants and to encmurage participants to consider careers in
SEM. Program participants, selected from elementary and middle schools in
Metropolitan Atlanta, will enroll in an academic enrichment experience that
includes interdisciplinary science, computer applications, mathematics, and
communications skills. Instruction will emphasize problem solving and critical
thinking while focusing on real life situations. In addition to classroom
experiences. participants will interact with research scientists in their
laboratories and in career awareness seminars and discussion groups. Weekly
field trips will round out the academic experiences of the Program. Follow-up
activities during the academic year include workshops each semester for program
participants and their parents, an awards program at the end of the school year,
a mentoring program in which participants will be matched with undergraduate or
graduate student science majors who will serve as their mentors, and two
newsletters each semester that highlight the accomplishments of the participants
and Clark Atlanta University Scientists. ***