* 9550712
* RIMI:  Titanium Dioxide Catalyzed Photodegradation of       Organophosphorous Compounds:  A Kinetic and Mechanical Study
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* William Cooper, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 05/31/1998
* USD 149,912.00

9550712 O'Shea The Ti02 catalyzed photodegradation of the organophosphorus
compounds will be carefully monitored and evaluated to determine the kinetic
parameters for the process. These kinetic parameters are of importance in
evaluating and predicting overall rates and efficiencies for the degradation of
organophosphorus compounds in multi-component systems and for reactor design.
The mass balance between the initial substrates and the products formed during
these reactions will be used to determine the degree of mineralization.
Characterization of the reaction intermediates and products formed throughout
the course of the degradation will be used to establish the course of the
reactions. Hydroxyl radical, superoxide anion, and hydrogen peroxide are formed
during the photocatalytic process, each species will be independently generated
and the product distribution upon reaction with the simulants determined. The
characteristic product distributions for hydroxyl radical, superoxide anion, and
hydrogen peroxide will be compared to those observed for the Ti02 catalyzed
photo-reactions to establish the role and involvement of these intermediates in
the Ti02 catalyzed photodegradation. Since the solutions pH, dissolved oxygen
concentration, and reaction byproducts can dramatically effect the degradation
process, these factors will be thoroughly investigated. The use of additives to
accelerate the process will also be evaluated. These studies will provide a
fundamental understanding of the factors governing the chemical reactivity of
organophosphorus compounds on photoexcited TiO2. The information obtained from
the proposed investigations will find direct application in the optimization and
evaluation of semiconductor catalyzed photooxidation as a means of
detoxification of environmentally threatening organophosphorus compounds, such
as chemical warfare agents and pesticides. If supported this project will have a
substantial impact on the fundamental understa nding of the processes involved
in TiO2 photocatalysis and the professional development of several minorities
into the chemical and environmental sciences. One minority faculty member, 4-5
undergraduate students (three which currently plan to pursue a Ph.D. in
Chemistry upon completion of their BS degrees) and 2 masters students will be
directly involved in the proposed project. Support will increases minority
participation in the PIs' laboratories by 50%. ***