* 9550468
* PPD/MP:  Access to English and Science Outreach Project
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Harry Lang, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* None
* 06/30/1999
* USD 280,418.00

The Rochester Institute of Technology will conduct a three-year project
demonstrating techniques to increase participation of deaf students in science
education and career development. The primary premise of the project is that
deaf students will progress more rapidly in science education when they have
full access to the content and language of science and to information concerning
the past accomplishments of deaf people in scientific professions. The primary
goal of the project is to improve access to science for deaf students by fusing
best teaching practices used with deaf students from both science and English
language teaching. The project will consist of the design and delivery of
regional workshops, the creation of a national network of science teachers, and
the evaluation and investigation of change in teaching and learning science. The
regional workshops will provide science teachers of deaf students in mainstream
and residential schools with a set of instructional strategies and materials
that integrate visual and interactive presentations of science principles with
explicit and interactive uses of scientific English. The specific goals are: (1)
to develop and deliver a coherent set of instructional strategies that may be
used to teach the content and language of science to deaf students; (2) to
increase deaf students' access to information about the accomplishments of deaf
women and men in scientific professions; and (3) to disseminate an effective
intervention model for enhancing science learning by deaf students. Regional
workshops consisting of a two-day series of seven sessions will be designed and
implemented. The attitude and communication barriers deaf science students and
deaf scientists face will be described and the science teacher's roles in
breaking down these barriers will be presented. Science teachers will learn to
deal effectively with the language dimensions of science teaching when both deaf
and hearing students are in the cl assroom. Finally, the training will focus on
critical thinking skills and the importance of visual and hands-on experiences
in the teaching of science principles. Participants of each regional workshop
will be expected to identify target science principles (which appear difficult
for deaf students to learn) and best practices (which appear successful with
deaf students in science classrooms). The target principles will become the
focus of prototype mini-lessons as participants begin applying the strategies
learned in the regional workshop. Evaluation of the effectiveness of the mini-
lessons (and strategies) will begin after each workshop. Information will be
disseminated through publications, conference presentations, and a newsletter
for the regional workshop participants and other interested science teachers.