* 9550083
* Arkansas Physics Lending Library (APLL):  A Physics Teacher Enhancement Program
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/1995,03/31/2002
* Alois Adams, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Continuing grant
* Wayne Sukow
* 03/31/2002
* USD 655,149.00

9550083 Adams This five year program enables 54 Arkansas high school physics
teachers to build and test self-contained modules for demonstrating and
exploring basic physics principles. Development and testing of the modules would
be done during 4-week summer workshops and follow-up academic year working
sessions. Teachers will make a 3-year commitment to participate in each summer's
work enabling building on previous summers. Each summer participating teachers
may earn 3-semester hours of graduate credit in physics. The University of
Arkansas-Little Rock (ALR) will establish and operate module loan program for at
least five years following the grant's expiration, at which time the modules
will be transferred to the Arkansas Regional Educational Cooperatives. Each
module set contains 15 separate and distinct laboratory units, three for each of
the five areas: Mechanics, Waves and Optics, Electricity and Magnetism, Heat and
Modern Physics. Two or three member teams from the same Arkansas Education
Cooperative will participate each year. Over the three year period all 18
regional cooperatives will be represented Teams within a region and across
regions will be connected through INTERNET and distance learning technologies.
Further networking will be done as each participant mentors another physics
teacher as they use these modules.