* 9550759
* RIMI:  Process Simulation and Design of Magnetic Czochralski Bulk Crystal Growth
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* Mark Montoya, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 09/30/1999
* USD 358,621.00

9550759 Montoya The Chemical Engineering Department at New Mexico State
University (NMSU) is proposing a program to develop the technical and
professional skills of minority students and faculty. The focus of the research
program is development of a validated process simulation model of the magnetic
Czochralski process, the most frequently used commercial process for growing
large bulk crystals. Magnetic fields stabilize convection and turbulent flow in
the metallic liquid phase; the Czochralski process benefits form this increased
stability by producing uniform crystals with few defects. Coupled to the
modeling task is development of reliable estimates of the thermodynamic and
transport properties of the solid-liquid system. Also, a complete experimental
understanding of the process (albeit, the non-magnetic process at the current
time) will be obtained to verify the model. After full characterization of the
experimental apparatus using pure materials, this initiative will begin
investigations of materials that have been successfully grown only by thin-film
growth, such as gallium nitride, a wide-band-gap semiconductor which, when
incorporated into a diode, is capable of emitting visible blue light. The
outcome of a successful research program will be the introduction of new
processing techniques and novel materials into industry, as well as creating new
methods to grow large quantities of ildustrially important semiconductors and
ceramics. Resources will be developed for minority student and faculty training.
Minority graduate and undergraduate students will be directly involved with the
research, and collaboration with the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory
will encourage the development of external contacts for career development.
Publication of results will strengthen the reputation of both the RIMI program
and NMSU. Computing facilities and experimental equipment will be added to the
NMSU College of Engineering, providing facilities that wil l aid in obtaining
further grants to sustain current and future research. The nature of the
theoretical work employed in this proposal, the number of crystalline systems
that are of interest to industry, and the lack of research into magnetic-field
assisted materials processing will sustain this program well into the future.
***