* 9550090
* Building Bridges to the Future:  The Next Generation of     Science-enabled Elementary School Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Susan Johnson, Ball State University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 07/31/2000
* USD 2,017,590.00

9550090 Johnson This Local Systemic Change Through Teacher Enhancement project
is the result of a collaboration between nine small rural school districts, one
large urban district and Ball State University. The project will combine the
resources of the school districts, the university, the Indiana Department of
Education, private organizations, and the community to institute and support an
integrated, inquiry-based, hands-on science curriculum in the elementary schools
in the region. The curriculum to be implemented throughout the district will
include NSF funded FOSS, EDC-Insights, and NSRC-Science, Technology, and
Children materials as instructional modules for the school districts. The
project is an example of a university and school districts that have leadership
teachers who have been trained by past NSF projects and who are ready to support
district-wide efforts. This group of lead teaches will work with scientists,
science educators, and master teachers to plan and staff the summer leadership
institutes and will form a leadership team core at each school site to mentor
and educate teachers in elementary science teaching and reform. In addition to
attending the first summer institute, these teachers will each attend the second
summer institute and mentor a new teacher into the leadership team. This process
is repeated each year with a total of 336 teachers directly impacted by NSF
funds. This number represents no less than 6 teachers per school for 37 schools
in ten school districts.