* 9550705
* RIMI:  Ultrafast Dynamical Processes in Chemical Systems
* EHR,HRD
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Juan Gonzalez-Lagoa, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 06/30/1998
* USD 349,825.00

9550705 Lopez-Garriga The Chemistry Department of the University of Puerto Rico
at Mayaguez, presents a research proposal to (1) create a cluster of research
scientists, (2) establish a research facility dedicated to study fast kinetic
and dynamic processes in chemical systems, (3) assist in the education of the
students in the department, and (4) strengthen the existing research
capabilities. The cluster, ULTRAFAST DYNAMIC PROCESSES IN CHEMICAL SYSTEMS, will
focus its scientific activities on (1) subpicosecond studies of ligands in heme
proteins, (2) resonance Raman spectroscopy with UV picosecond excitation, (3)
ultrafast photolysis studies of ligand displacement reactions, (4) formation of
agostic bonds and cyclometalation in organometallic complexes, and (5) dynamic
studies of surface photochemical reactions. The major goal of the cluster is to
make significant contributions to the scientific community in the research areas
of interest indicated above and to assist in the scientific and intellectual
development of students in our University. Our University is committed to
develop the department as a center of excellence in chemistry and provide the
adequate education and research training for undergraduate and graduate
chemistry department in the last five years. The construction of the new
chemistry building, with over 100,000 sq. ft. of laboratory space, is
approaching completion and is expected to open in the 1995-1996 academic year.
The new building will serve as the main site for the research operations of the
cluster. This support reflects the major role and commitment from the University
to: (1) science education and training of hispanic and black graduate and
undergraduate students in modern spectroscopic techniques, (2) the involvement
of high school students in basic research, and, (3) improving the research
competitiveness of Puerto Rico in the sciences. To develop the intellectual
capabilities of our undergraduate and graduate students and members of the
proposed research cluster, nationally recognized speakers will be invited to
present and discuss their research findings related to dynamical processes in
chemical systems. The cluster proposes an external advisory board, whose members
will be chosen from the speakers of the conference. They will meet with the
investigators to review the progress accomplished and will provide written
recommendations, to be included in the RIMI reports for future development as
overall performance. With the approval of the herein proposed research program,
the Chemistry Department will add a major thrust to its research programs
nurtured initially by a previous RIMI Program, MRCE, and EPSCOR. Therefore, the
University will be able to increase further the quality and training excellence
of our undergraduate and graduate students in modern spectroscopic techniques.
Thus, our students will find a better niche for advanced degrees and additional
training in prestigious universities and our sprawling pharmaceutical industry
will be better served. In a similar way, researchers will be more professionally
assisted resulting in a concomitant increase in productivity. ***