* 9550502
* MIE:  The University of Texas at El Paso:  A Model of       Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2007
* Stephen Riter, University of Texas at El Paso
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 08/31/2007
* USD 20,326,546.00

9550502 Riter The University of Texas at El Paso (UTEP) is a national leader in
Hispanic education. Over 60 percent of its more than 17,000 students are
underrepresented minorities and an estimated two-thirds are the first in their
families to attend college. Approximately 85 percent of UTEP's students come
from El Paso County, a fast growing urban region representative of many large
southwestern cities that now have, or soon will have, a majority of their
population composed of groups currently underrepresented in the science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) workforce. UTEP, however, is unique in that
it is the only major urban university in the Southwest whose ethnic distribution
matches the demographics of the region it serves. The Model Institutions for
Excellence (MIE) program provides UTEP the opportunity to serve as a model for
the urban university of the future, one with a mission to serve a multicultural
population where minority students comprise the majority. UTEP's MIE project
will address the major impediment to increasing the number of bachelor's degrees
in SEM disciplines: the unacceptably high attrition of entering SEM students.
UTEP proposes a dynamic approach to meeting the needs of entering students,
needs that will change as local school improvement programs, such as the NSF-
funded El Paso Systemic Initiative, improve area students' preparation in
mathematics and science. UTEP's MIE plan will help first-year students
understand how to succeed in college, reduce class size in first-year courses,
and present a broad picture of what SEM disciplines are about and the
opportunities that careers in these fields provide. Most importantly, through
MIE, UTEP's faculty commit to the concept that they are responsible for more
than classroom instruction, that they are also responsible for the development
of the entire student and the creation of an on-campus environment that supports
learning and personal development. Since many of these activities will utilize
undergraduates a s mentors and peer instructors, an additional benefit will be
the provision of meaningful work experiences for a student body composed of
people with financial responsibilities they must meet while attending school.
UTEP will also use MIE to accelerate the introduction of active learning
strategies into all of its SEM courses. Such strategies include cooperative
learning, computer-assisted instruction, the linking of English composition
courses with SEM courses, and peer instruction. To make active learning and
effective teaching a reality, MIE will serve as a catalyst for a change in
thinking about the mission and responsibilities of faculty by working to modify
the major determinants of faculty rewards from research to the promotion of
learning. MIE will provide resources to enrich the quality and increase the
quantity of SEM programs through addition of faculty and staff and the upgrading
of infrastructure in the degree programs likely to yield the greatest increase
in SEM graduates. A goal of MIE will be to ensure that every SEM student
participates at least once in a professional enrichment experience by serving as
a research assistant in an on-campus research project or as an intern or co-op
student in government of industry. Finally, MIE will impact the university
educational infrastructure by providing resources to improve UTEP's ability to
advise students, track their progress, and evaluate the effectiveness of
programs. UTEP will manage MIE through a unique combination of expertise in
academic and student affairs. The Principal Investigator is a national leader in
engineering education with experience managing large interdisciplinary programs.
The Co-PI brings similar experience in the student affairs area. They will work
with an advisory committee of key faculty, administrators, and regional SEM
leaders from industry and government to change the very nature of SEM education
at UTEP. 2 University of Texas at El Paso