* 9550693
* SSC: "Summer Science Camp With SPACES and Schooner"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Karl Rosenbaum, Schooner Inc
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 42,258.00

As we move into the 21st century, science and technology play an increasingly
important role in all aspects of our society; therefore, it is imperative that
our future decision-makers develop a positive attitude toward solving problems
through science education as well as to comprehend the impact of science and
technology on the individual, culture and society. The New Haven SPACES
Initiative will identify 50 youth with at-risk factors operating in their
personal lives. They will be enrolled in the New Haven SPACES Initiative and
participate in a three-level program designed to develop positive attitudes in
personal growth, career development and interpersonal and global relations. The
proposed six-week summer camp will provide an intensive hands- on experience
with science and math activities for youth entering the seventh, eight and ninth
grades. An important part of the program will focus on aquatic ecology featuring
canoe trips down the Quinnipiac River to Long Island Sound. The activities
planned for such a camp would accomplish the following objectives: Positive
Youth Development- Experiential education has proven effective for knowledge
gain and development of positive attitudes and life skills. This program would
provide participants development opportunities that enhance positive self-
esteem, feelings of accomplishment, responsible decision-making and problem
solving, and communication and personal management skills. Improve Science and
Math Literacy- The summer camp setting will create and informal participatory
setting within which to foster scientifically literate individuals who will
effectively use their science education to make wise decisions and become
responsible, problem-solving citizens. Through active participation, youth will
learn how science and math relate to their lives and how they, as individuals,
impact their environment. By using operational processes of science and math in
informal settings, the participants will develop a positive attitude toward
learning. Career Preparation-The activities planned will allow participants to
explore a variety of science and math careers. Interaction with professionals in
these fields will enhance their experience and knowledge. Improved literacy
skills will prepare participants for productive employment in the fields of
science and math ***