* 9550980
* Computer-assisted Laboratories and Tutorials at the         University of Maryland
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Edward Redish, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1997
* USD 50,512.00

This project funds the purchase of computer and laboratory equipment to allow a
transformation of the structure and purpose of the calculus-based three-semester
engineering physics course at the university. This course serves approximately
700 students per year, most of them majoring in some form of engineering.
Students in this course often find the course confusing and fail to build either
strong physical concepts or a good understanding of the relation of physical
models to real-world experiments. The new course focuses on concept building and
the development of experimental and modeling skills. The new equipment is being
used to create three new microcomputer laboratories with computer-assisted data
acquisition. One lab will be a qualitative group-learning (tutorial) environment
similar to those developed at the U. of Washington but with computer tools
similar to Workshop Physics (Dickinson) or the CUPLE Physics Studio (RPI). These
sessions last 1 hour a week and are given in each of the three semesters.
Students work in groups of four using guided-discovery worksheets. The other two
labs are quantitative and are taken in the second and third semesters. They last
for 3 hours per week. Students take data both by hand and using the computer and
use spreadsheets to model their observations. The emphasis is on developing
understanding. The same computer tools are used in both the qualitative and
quantitative labs. Both labs use facilitated learning with Socratic dialog
methods.