* 9550601
* SSC: Technology Enhanced Applications of Mathematics and Science
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* C. Edwin McClintock, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1997
* USD 82,463.00

Florida International University (FIU), in collaboration with Dade County Public
Schools (DCPS) proposes a three year summer science camp for selected at risk,
underrepresented middle schools from the Dade School District. Sixty-six
students will participate during year 1, and 88 for years 2 and 3. The proposed
project, Technology Enhanced Achievement in Mathematics and Science (TEAMS), is
a major expansion of the Partnership of Academic Communities (PAC), bringing
substantive enrichment to this partnership between DCPS and FIU. PAC provides
underrepresented, at risk students their mathematics, science and technology
instruction on the FIU campus, using university faculty, graduate and
undergraduate students, and resources. TEAMS is proposed as a combined commuter
and resident program, with 7th and 8th graders commuting and 9th graders in
residence, providing the more mature students a full-day scientific immersion,
with afternoon and evening research and laboratory experiences. The five weeks,
four days per week summer experience will be supplemented by 9 academic year
Saturday sessions, featuring non- academic scientists, mathematicians, and
engineers e.g., a Bell South mathematician, and IBM systems analysts, and a City
of Miami Planning engineer . Dade County Public Schools' Urban Systemic
Initiative leader teachers in mathematics, science and technology, FIU faculty
in mathematics, the sciences, computer science, mathematics education, science
education, statistics, and graduate students, will all directly provide
workshops, field activities, and seminars. Likewise, professionals from
business, industry, and particularly the technology industry will provide to the
students of TEAMS enjoyable, meaningful experiences that are non-traditional,
rich and demanding and enriching hands and minds-on, predominantly technology
integrated. Drawing from an already proven successful for these students in the
PAC project base, the curriculum and instruction w ill exemplify the reform of
math and science (NCTM Standards and NSTA Standards). It will foster
mathematical and scientific thought, build positive attitudes and solid
knowledge bases in these fields. It will utilize NSF support funded and other
rich new curricula Mathematics in Context . The goals of TEAMS are: 1) to enrich
at-risk, underrepresented students' experiences in math, science and technology,
designed to improve their attitude toward and valuing of the sciences; 2) to
provide scientific ways of thinking and reasoning and systematic learning/study
experiences sufficient to success-oriented education and self-concept
enhancement; 3) to provide experiences paving the way for an economically
successful occupation, with at least adequate mathematics, science and
technology for this success; and 4) to build confidence sufficient that some
participants may choose to major in scientific areas. ***