* 9550750
* SSC:  Improvement in the Science and Mathematics            Achievement Levels of African American Students in          Mississippi
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* William Sumrall, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 98,559.00

Mississippi State University (MSU) will offer a Summer Science Camp (SSC) over a
four-week period in science/mathematics for 50 African American students (grades
7 or 8). Four follow-up sessions will be during the academic year. Prior to the
SSC, staff will receive an inservice in the optimal methods for teaching
minority students. SSC topics include the basic process skills (e.g., observing
techniques) and the casual process skills (e.g., experimenting) in science. An
emphasis in this SSC will be that process skills are not unique to any science
discipline. Math concepts will be integrated into the science content covered in
the SSC. This SSC will incorporate cooperative and inquiry learning, and
constructivist strategies. Career education opportunities will be presented by
science/engineers during campus research facility and industry tours. Mentoring
by African American educators, scientists, and engineers are within the four
week SSC. This SSC success will be based on pre/post testing of math/science
content and performance based measurements. In the follow-up Saturday sessions
participants will develop displays based on SSC activities for their school's
science fair and National Science and Technology Week held on the MSU campus.
***