* 9550660
* Planning Grant for a "Prime-Time" TV Science Drama
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1995,12/31/1997
* Leon Lederman, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 12/31/1997
* USD 94,820.00

95-50660 Wheeler PLANNING GRANT FOR A "PRIME-TIME" SCIENCE DRAMA ABSTRACT This
is planning grant that will enable the AAAS to bring together a group of
scientists, science educators, and television writers/producers to develop the
concept and initial scripts for a television series about science that would be
broadcast in prime time by one of the major networks. Tentatively entitled "The
Dean," the series would be the story of a Dean of Arts and Sciences at a
university which is modeled after a small M.I.T. The University has made it
reputation by being at the forefrmnt of scientific research. The Dean is in the
center of an exciting and fascinating vortex. Each week the Dean deals with
issues that range from social implications of new types of new types of genetic
engineering research to the intrigue of procuring top secret military contracts.
The issues are presented as stories about people -- the scientists, the
students, CEOs and politicians who try to influence the Dean as he/she grapples
with the scientific issues. Specific activities during the planning phase
include: o Bringing together an advisory group to develop storylines that
maximize the amount of science without damaging the prime-time, entertainment
constraints. o Writing of an initial script and an outline of the major elements
of a series. o Presentation of the concept and script to top executives at major
networks to assess their interest in and possible commitment to the series. The
key personnel in the planning phase would be Gerald Wheeler, Director of the
AAAS division for Public Understanding of Science and Technology; Leon Lederman,
physicist and initial creator of the general concept; and Adrian Malone,
television producer of such major series as "The Ascent of Man" and "Cosmos."