* 9550778
* SSC:  "Roanoke River Valley Consortium Summer Science Camp  (R2VCS2C)"
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Shirley Turnage, Roanoke River Valley Consortium - Warren County School System
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/1997
* USD 100,765.00

The Roanoke River Valley Consortium which consist of five predominately minority
school systems located in rural poverty- stricken Northern North Carolina in
partnership with North Carolina Central University (HBCU) proposes to offer a
comprehensive camp program. The goals are to create a cohort of students (150
eight grade African Americans over three years) and provide them a foundation
for lifelong interest in science and mathematics and to encourage them to
consider Science/Mathematics/Engineering/ Technology (SMET) as possible career
choices. The strategies to be employed consist of a four week residential camp
and an innovative academic year follow-up program. The residential camp will
focus on: the physical science discipline infused with mathematics and
integrated with life and earth science; career exploration and experiments in
science laboratory with computer application. Field trips will reinforce
classroom and lab work. Innovative academic year follow-up activities will
consist of multi-year activities for parents for their support and to increase
students' confidence in their academic abilities; camp-in field trip at North
Carolina Life and Science Museum; after school monthly meetings with master
teacher for career counseling and ongoing research; a series of six Saturday
Seminars with the mentor/assistant and master teacher throughout the year for
academic follow-up and assistance with research; a mentorship program for
"mentee" shadowing in the workplace; the publication of biannual newsletter;
and, the establishment of R2VCS2C alumni group for continued career counseling
and involvement. The significance of implementing R2VCS2C will show students'
increase in: the science and mathematics "pipeline" of well-prepared minority
high school graduates continuation in school; choosing to study more math and
science; academic performance in the sciences and mathematics; and, an increase
in the "pool" of potential scientists and mathematicians for th e workforce. ***