* 9550977
* Integrating Lab Activities into Geometry at Gustavus        Adolphus College
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Michael Hvidsten, Gustavus Adolphus College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 05/31/1997
* USD 23,000.00

New standards for the K 12 curriculum which have been developed by the National
Council of Teachers of Mathematics call for the integration of technology into
the teaching and learning of mathematics and for the increased use of active
explorations in mathematics. Mathematics education majors need to gain
experience in these areas during their preservice mathematics courses, so that
they can then bring this knowledge with them into the public schools. The
objective of this project is to integrate computer visualization of geometric
ideas into a geometry course. Seven lab activities are being developed, with
components on Euclidean and Non-Euclidean geometries, transformations and
projective geometry, tilings, polyhedra, and geometric constructions. The
primary software used to carry out the lab projects is GeomView, a geometry
exploration system developed at the Geometry Center in Minneapolis, MN.
Additional software will include Mathematica and Geometer's Sketchpad. The
project will provide mathematics education majors models and tools which they
will integrate into their own teaching, thus strengthening the climate for
teaching and learning in the public schools. Evaluation of the effectiveness of
the project will be through surveys of teachers once they are in the public
schools.