* 9550154
* VPW:  Waveform Relaxation Method
* EHR,HRD
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Hong Zhang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1997
* USD 107,738.00

The advent of new generation of massively parallel computers has caused
previously efficient numerical algorithms to be reexamined. Massively parallel
computers are comprised of many hundreds, sometimes thousands of processors. For
a numerical algorithm to fully exploit the power of such machines it must be
able to be 'decomposed' into largely independent pieces which can be distributed
across the available computer processors. The waveform relaxation method is such
a method for solving systems of ordinary differential equations and time-
dependent partial differential equations. In addition to its advantages in
parallel processing, it also allows different integration step sizes to be used
for different subsystems, resulting in substantial savings in computation for
some applications. The theoretical and experimental studies suggest that the
waveform relaxation method has a great potential for developing reliable,
scalable efficient parallel algorithms for solving a wide range of differential
equations. The objective of this research is to further investigate the nature
of the waveform relaxation method, and develop fast scalable parallel algorithms
for solving certain type of ordinary differential equations and time-dependent
partial differential equations. The long term goal of this research is to make
the developed algorithms applicable to real-world computational problems, such
as the real time integration of torpedo or missile trajectories, modeling of
earthquake effects on buildings, and simulation of fluid-structure interaction.
This work will involve the algorithm design, theoretical analysis with a
possible focus on the search of optimal convergence rate, and numerical testing
on sequential and parallel computers. Interactive activities include: teaching a
course at the graduate level on numerical linear algebra, numerical partial
differential equation, or on parallel numerical computation; and leading an
interdisciplinary research seminar seri es on scientific computation and
applications to which both local and national researchers will be invited to
participate.