* 9550861
* Instrument Aquisition in Support of Marine Biology          Curriculum Development
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Janet Hodder, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 07/31/1997
* USD 18,400.00

Janet Hodder DUE 9550861 Oregon Inst of Mar Biol FY1995 $ 18,400 Charleston, OR
97420 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Life Sciences Title: Instrument Aquisition
in Support of Marine Biology Curriculum Development The University of Oregon's
Institute of Marine Biology has a well recognized program for undergraduates.
Courses are attended by students from both the University of Oregon and from
institutions throughout the nation. We offer students intense field oriented
courses that cover a variety of marine science disciplines. The problem
addressed in this proposal relates primarily to two of our process oriented
courses, biological oceanography and estuarine biology. These courses should
include an investigation of the open waters of the nearshore ocean and estuary.
We have neither had boats for access to these habitats nor the appropriate
equipment to allow students to sample these areas and gain a full understanding
of the processes involved in open water habitats. The recent acquisition of
suitable boats at OIMB now enables us to take students on to the water. This has
allowed us to plan laboratory exercises in these courses giving undergraduates
the opportunity to conduct investigations, using modern oceanographic equipment,
of these open waters. With this proposal we seek funding for equipment to
facilitate the development of these laboratory exercises. The funds will provide
field and laboratory equipment for students to answer questions about
oceanographic and estuarine processes. We propose to expand the biological
oceanography and estuarine biology courses to include activities that
investigate the physical and biological parameters of open water using modern
instrumentation and techniques. Students will obtain hands-on experience in the
co llection of data in the field, and will have the opportunity to process these
data in both field and lab settings. This will provide them with a more complete
picture of the biology of coastal and estuarine habitats.