* 9550932
* Interactive Tools for the Introductory Physics Laboratory   as the Basis for an Integrated Workshop Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Nilgun Sungar, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1998
* USD 38,699.00

This grant provides instrumentation to support a calculus- based introductory
physics workshop whose format and content is extended to a "supercourse," taught
by a multidisciplinary faculty team, that integrates the material found in the
common lower division science/mathematics/engineering core curriculum. The
course utilizes interactive technologies to produce a highly visual and dynamic
environment, creating interest and excitement to motivate and to engender
positive attitudes toward the learning experience. The goal is the development
of cognitive skills built on a firm conceptual base. Learning is example driven,
inductively leading from observation of phenomena to general principle. The
interplay of pictorial, graphical, numerical, verbal, and analytic approaches to
the analysis of physical systems is stressed. Coordinated activities utilize
locally developed and commercially available computer-based tools. The core
technologies utilized are (1) data collection and display by interface to
external probes, (2) video digitization and analysis, and (3) systems modeling
through simulation. Libraries of self-guided auxiliary activities allow flexible
paths of exploration for students of different abilities. Student and instructor
support materials are designed as coordinated standalone modules to ensure
transportability and flexible use of curricular elements in different teaching
contexts.