* 9550622
* CPMSA:  "Comprehensive Partnerships for Minority Student    Achievement"
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1995,01/31/2001
* Donald Martin, Winston-Salem/Forsyth County Schools
* Cooperative Agreement
* James R. Oglesby
* 01/31/2001
* USD 2,498,663.00

The Winston-Salem/Forsyth County CPMSA Project addresses its purpose: to
develop, provide and make systemic a high quality math/science educational
program which expands access, participation and achievement of K-12 minority
students who are under-represented in science, engineering and math pipeline.
Project goals are: to significantly increase K-12 student participation in high
interest mathematics and science activities; to significantly increase minority
K-12 student participation in gatekeeper courses for math, science, engineering
and technology college preparation; to significantly increase minority college
student majors in SMET fields; and to put in place a systemic reform of
curriculum, instruction, and community involvement which facilitates ongoing
realization of the first three goals. Project objectives are: (a) to provide a
broad scope of programs which provide weekly and summer opportunities for all
minority students and parents to participate in science and mathematics
activities in their neighborhoods, in their schools and at project
collaborators' facilities; (b) to strengthen the capacity of the teachers in the
delivery system to develop and deliver the high interest and motivational
activities; (c) to motivate minority students and their parents/guardians with
opportunities to participate in high interest activities; (d) to mentor the
minority students with university and industry faculty entering the gatekeeper
courses, to encourage their successful participation in the gatekeeper courses
and continuation with those courses; (e) to evaluate the students and monitor
their progress through the project each year; (f) to demonstrate the ability to
replicate and continue the project's strategies and interventions which
correlate significantly with reaching project goals--statewide, regionally, and
nationally. Project partners collaborating with Project JUST are: Winston- Salem
State University; Wake Forest University; SciWorks (The Science Cen ter and
Environmental Park of Forsyth County); The Urban League; and the YMCA. Each
collaborating partner will provide direct services to students of the targeted
project population: approximately 14,000 K-12 African-American students living
in the city's designated Enterprise Community, a 15 square mile section from
which most elementary school student are bussed to achieve racial integration in
32 schools. Project activities will be provided: in neighborhoods, through
partnering with the housing authority and churches; at all K-12; at Winston-
Salem State University; at Wake Forest University; and at SciWorks. Project
activities will involve mentors, through partnering with professional SMET
associations and with local businesses (e.g., RJR Tobacco). Project activities
will include students' family involvement. School system
curriculum/instructional reform of K-12 science and math will be achieved
through teacher driven staff development, provided by strong science/math
teacher and designed to be systemically accessible through site-based
expectations and scheduling. ***