* 9550829
* Mechanical Systems Laboratory: Computer Based Interfacing   and Design
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Stephen Ross, University of New Haven
* Standard Grant
* Norman Fortenberry
* 01/31/1998
* USD 25,039.00

Through this project, the Department of Mechanical Engineering is developing a
new mechanical engineering laboratory course that emphasizes computer-based
interfacing and control of thermo- mechanical equipment. The course includes a
strong design component and represents a significant improvement in the
curriculum. A special module of the course is being designed for ME faculty.
This module is also suitable as a continuing education course for practicing ME
engineers. Students participate in hands-on activities and learn both the
theoretical and the practical aspects of interfacing equipment with a computer
as well as mechanical design and control. Some newly purchased hardware is used
for the experiments. However, students design and build their own hardware from
design kits that each receive. This aspect of the course draws upon students'
past experience in design and includes the following design considerations:
project planning, concept generation and evaluation, hardware design, and
evaluation of the built assembly in its control operation. The controls aspect
is based on the use of an interface A/D board, a PC, and various
thermomechanical devices. The students learn how to set up hardware and write
their own control programs in C. Control aspects include automated testing of a
process or equipment; monitoring of pressure, temperature, and shaft speed;
warnings if setpoints are exceeded; safety shutdown of equipment; and collection
of data and sequencing control.