* 9550974
* Implementing an Environmental Geophysics Field Course
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Christopher Schmidt, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 05/31/1997
* USD 42,891.00

This project integrates geophysics into the undergraduate hydrogeology and
environmental programs. A 5-week environmental geophysics field course is being
implemented and provides students with hands-on experience and applications of
geophysical techniques necessary in resolving environmental, hydrogeological,
and engineering problems. The aim is to provide the students with the essential
principles and experience in the integrated use of several geophysical
techniques and the ability to select the appropriate method(s) in addressing
different environmental problems. Students work on specific projects in order to
fulfill the following objectives: acquire, process, and interpret geophysical
data, as well as provide written reports for their projects. This project
specifically provides funding for state-of-the-art geophysical instrumentation.
Several sites within Southwest Michigan have been selected as teaching sites for
this new course. Ongoing hydrologic investigations at these sites have centered
on aquifer characterization, contamination, and aquifer vulnerability problems.
Using geophysical techniques, students characterize an aquifer and define
contaminant plumes, thereby gaining valuable experience in the use of geophysics
in addressing environmental problems.