* 9550471
* Excellence in Mathematics Scholarship: Assuring Quality     Undergraduate and Graduate Programs at Doctoral Institutions
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Morton Lowengrub, American Mathematical Society
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1999
* USD 165,000.00

Mathematics departments in the nations's doctoral institutions represent a
powerful resource for fulfilling important national needs. From improving
quantitative literacy to training scientists and engineers, from connecting
universities and industries to educating the next generation of mathematics
teachers, these departments have the potential to make a real difference in
areas that extend well beyond their own majors and boundaries. Universities have
become vitally engaged in efforts to assess their role, exploring new thinking
about scholarship, reform in curriculum and teaching and the relationship
between undergraduate teaching, graduate training and research. Since nearly
every student who enrolls in a university takes a mathematics course at some
point, mathematics is strategically positioned--even obligated--to affect the
role of the university and improve in teaching, learning and scholarship. This
project will identify critical issues related to quality mathematical
experiences for undergraduate students in doctoral institutions, set strategies
for implementation of the recommendations of recent reform reports and develop a
continuing agenda enabling mathematics departments to assure quality
undergraduate and graduate programs at doctoral institutions. The project will
highlight activities that work in departments across the country, engage both
faculty and administrators in dialogues about programs and resource needs, and
give departments the information and means necessary to replicate or adapt
successful programs.