* 9550934
* Computer-Assisted Interactive Calculus at Virginia          Wesleyan College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* John Lang, Virginia Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/1997
* USD 28,083.00

Thomas R. Fanney DUE 9550934 Virginia Wesleyan College FY1995 $ 28,083 Norfolk,
VA 23502 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Mathematics Title: Computer-Assisted
Interactive Calculus at Virginia Wesleyan College The Virginia Wesleyan College
Department of Mathematics and Computer Science is presently incorporating some
of the many innovative ideas stemming from the calculus reform movement into its
own curriculum, and is shifting from more traditional teaching methods to those
involving more experimentation and discovery in the classroom. The Department,
which consists of six full-time teaching faculty and several adjuncts, serves a
sizable fraction of the general student body through small sections of its
introductory courses, as well as a modest but talented group of majors in
mathematics and computer science. In recent years the department has kept
abreast of reform efforts advocating experiences that make mathematics more
relevant and interesting to the students, and has begun to adopt these ideas in
its classrooms, in part through the use of graphing calculators and computer
software. It is now preparing to take another step by offering, at the
precalculus and calculus level, laboratory courses styled after those in the
natural sciences. The department is asking for aid in funding the creation of a
laboratory classroom to be used for hands-on, computer-enhanced instruction of
mathematics, physics, and computer science courses. This room would be equipped
with a network of 13 Pentium microcomputer workstations, a central file server,
a color projector, and MAPLE and MATHCAD, the principle software instructional
tools. The room would initially serve as the meeting place for all calculus
sections and selected precalculus sections. The facility wou ld also be
available to instructors of other math and scienae courses and would ultimately
be used in teaching most upper-level mathematics courses as well. VWC also has
tutoring and mentoring outreach programs with area K-12 schools that could
benefit from the availability of such a computer classroom. The college's
enrichment programs for these at-risk students would be significantly enhanced
in such a technologically-advanced teaching environment. Members of the math/cs
department have also expressed interest in future summer math workshops that
introduce contemporary teaching technologies to area public school teachers.