* 9550659
* A Workshop to Develop a National Agenda for the Future of   Engineering Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* George Sehi, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 03/31/1997
* USD 111,319.00

A three-day invitational workshop is being held to examine issues and charter a
national agenda for the future of engineering technician education. The workshop
involves key individuals from business and industry, engineering and engineering
technology educators, top level administrators from two-year colleges, and
government representatives. The workshop participants are involved in
predicting, identifying, and rank ordering the changes that must occur in the
engineering technology education process over the coming decade. In multiple
breakout sessions the participants discuss many diverse issues; such as Future
Demand for Technical Skills; Nature of Future Technical Employment; Industry
Recognition of Associate Degree Engineering Technicians, Curriculum Changes for
Educating Future Technicians; New Instructional Tools, Technologies and
Techniques; Accreditation and Policy Issues; Strategies for Development and
Implementation of Alternative and Innovative Programs; Effectiveness of Various
National Movements (Tech-Prep, School-to-Work, etc.); Preparation of Future
Community College Engineering Technology Faculty; Articulation with Four-year
Engineering, Engineering Technology, and Other Science and Technology Programs;
Assessment Process and Academic Standards; Role of Professional Societies and
Professionalizing Technician Careers; and Varied Paths for Technicians. The
workshop report will be disseminated to academic institutions, private sector,
and selected government agencies. Planning and implementation of the workshop is
a cooperative effort involving Sinclair Community College, the American Society
for Engineering Education (ASEE), the Technology Accreditation Commission of the
Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (TAC of ABET), and the
National Science Foundation (NSF).