* 9550687
* RIMI:  Analysis of Dynamic Stress Fields in Pavements and   Transportation Infrastructure
* EDU,EES
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Jerry Wekezer, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 12/31/1998
* USD 270,078.00

9550687 Wekezer The proposed study will use DYNA3D, a nonlinear, explicit, three
dimensional finite element computer code for solid and structural mechanics
(Whirley, Hallquist, 1991). The code was developed by the Department of Energy
and is being widely used by researchers associated with the Department of Energy
and is being widely used by researchers associated with the Department of
Energy, the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, and most of
national laboratories and other research agencies. DYNA3D is a public domain
computer code and is being provided by Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory to
the FAMU/FSU College of Engineering at no charge. Finite element models of some
vehicles, roadside safety structures, as well as pavement properties and their
models will be provided by federal and state agencies as a technology transfer
effort. Three small research groups consisting of one principal investigator and
one graduate student each will be formed and will work on three research
projects. The research proposal asks for funding to support all three research
groups and for funding of one computer work station to be shared by all
investigators. The proposed research activity is significant to the advancement
of knowledge in the area of transportation. It will be beneficial to federal and
state transportation agencies and to transportation related industries and it
has a potential for securing future research support. ***