* 9551460
* From Descriptive to Adaptive Understanding: Using           Interactive Computer Simulation in Quantitative Biology and Statistics Labs
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Thomas Arsuffi, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 08/31/1998
* USD 62,320.00

This project improves the effectiveness of laboratory exercises in quantitative
biology so that undergraduates can develop essential analytical skills and an
adaptive understanding of dynamic statistical and biological principles. The
premise is that the requisite laboratory instrumentation for teaching adaptive
knowledge of quantitative biology is high-speed computers running responsive
Monte Carlo simulations tailored to exercise objectives. The differecne with
this project is that it provides a set of focused and appealing lab exercises
based on realistic computer simulations running at spectacular speeds and set in
a playful learning environment. The intent is not to push, but rather to lure,
students toward an adaptive working knowledge of important principles in
statistics and quantitative biology. Most of the simulations are Monte Carlo
simulations of random processes in biology. Students are required to execute and
interpret appropriate hypothesis tests and to file reports (on the server)
describing the behavior of the simulated models in a digital portfolio complete
with tables and charts. Appropriate software can be acquired externally (when
available) or developed by the PI. The instrumentation includes computers based
on the new PowerPC processor family: 20 networked student workstations on carts,
3 courseware development stations dedicated to the foup PIs, 1 file/print
server, 1 printer and 1 scanner, and software required to provide the necessary
functionality and maintain the network. SWT's Aquatic Biology program is the
focus of the project, and the targeted courses include two ecology courses
(either required for all Biology and Aquatic majors), Aquatic Biology, Biometry
(all required for Aquatic majors), and a practical statistics course in the Math
Department.