* 9551790
* Integration of Exercise and Investigative Techniques to     Study Physiology
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Marlene Moore, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 05/31/1997
* USD 21,804.00

Over 10 years ago, the development of the biology curriculum began with the
establishment of a new course, Methods in Biological Research, and the
institution of a research curriculum. Our investigative approach emphasizes
creativity, critical reasoning and problem solving, integration of writing,
mathematical and processing skills, and self-reliance. However, this program is
at a very critical stage: outfitting the physiology laboratory with up-to-date,
reliable, and computerized equipment. This project funds the purchase six
computerized physiology workstations. Students are being provided with quality
and reliable equipment and moving forward with the research curriculum. The
laboratory experience is taught from an investigative perspective that utilizes
exercise as a stress to extend and integrate basic physiology. The foundations
of physiological control mechanisms are provided during the lecture course,
while the lab experience emphasizes understanding the effects of acute and
chronic exercise on several body systems. Student-driven experiments test the
effects of exercise on several systems. During the final weeks of the course,
students plan and conduct research experiments, analyze data, and present their
findings at the Annual Physiology Poster Session. This project enables the
university to incorporate computerized data acquisition techniques and to
develop scientifically and computer-literate citizens of tomorrow.