* 9551812
* Simulation and Experimentation with Electronic Devices      (SEED)
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Bashir Sayar, Jacksonville University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 31,520.00

The Laboratory for the Simulation and Experimentation with Electronic Devices
(SEED) is designed for freshman students in the dual-degree engineering program
(DDP) and for science students from chemistry, physics, biology, and
environmental science. It is hands-on, multidisciplinary, project-driven, and
team-based. It focuses on the design of functional module assemblies that
interface various data acquisition devices with the computer for simulation and
analysis. SEED surveys micro-electronics, functional modules, and prototype
boards. Multidisciplinary project development is a major component of SEED:
teams design the signal acquisition system starting with the probe and ending
with the computer. The students gather the data and use the computer to analyze
it and simulate the system's dynamics. The students deal with the macro-aspect
of the designs rather than the in-depth electronic treatment of the separate
components. Various issues, such as compatibility, resonance, feedback,
impedance matching, and analog-to-digital conversions, are explored. The SEED
lab also enhances the existing electronics laboratory and transforms it into an
advanced instrumentation lab. It will play an instrumental role in alleviating
the current DDP's retention problem by adding an element of excitement to the
lower-level curriculum and will set the tone for the whole program. SEED will
also affect some of the advanced science laboratories in which measurement, and
not only analysis, is computer-based. SEED, a DDP requirement and a science
recommended elective fulfilling a lab degree requirement, supports five
different stations (3 students per station); it directly involves 60 students
during its first 2 years of operation.