* 9551108
* Applications of Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy in a Novel Integrated Chemistry Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Anne Glenn, Guilford College
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 11,767.00

There have been numerous attempts to create laboratory exercises that integrate
the concepts of physical, analytical, organic, and inorganic chemistry. Most of
this work concentrates on pre- planned labs where the answer is known. However,
true chemical research relies not only on the integration of the concepts, but
also on the ability to work on problems where the answer is not known a priori
and where working effectively within a team of researchers is vital. The
objective of this project is the continuing development of an integrated lab
sequence which incorporates concepts from organic, inorganic, physical, and
analytical chemistry into projects involving original research ideas. Students
work in teams of four or five, each team including both organic chemistry and
physical chemistry lab students. Each student brings his or her particular
skills and background to the research group, and the resulting combination of
skills and personalities often results in novel and original research. Majors in
chemistry take the integrated laboratory sequence twice, as part of their
organic chemistry and physical chemistry lab courses. Research that has already
been performed under the rubric of the integrated laboratory include
sonochemistry, synthesis of buckminsterfullerene, synthesis of water-soluble
polymeric dyes, and synthesis and testing of conductive polymers. Students are
not only able to do better research, they are also able to gain valuable
experience in using instrumentation they are likely to encounter in their
professional careers. The integrated laboratory sequence provides a means for
students to obtain expertise in applying their knowledge of chemistry to real-
life problems.