* 9551942
* Mobile Psychology Lab for Mercy College's Bronx Majors in   Psychology, Sociology, and Behavioral Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* James Towey, Mercy College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/1998
* USD 30,871.00

James P. Towey DUE 9551942 Mercy College FY1995 $ 30,871 Dobbs Ferry, NY
105221134 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Psychology Title: Mobile Psychology Lab
for Mercy College's Bronx Majors in Psychology, Sociology, and Behavioral
Science ILI funds are needed for a computerized, Mobile Psychology Laboratory at
Mercy's Bronx Campus to serve Psychology Majors (29% of all majors at this
campus) as well as Sociology Majors and Behavioral Science Majors (respectively,
1% and 13%). The Bronx location is Mercy's largest and fastest growing branch
campus. It serves primarily minority (72%) and female (70%) undergraduates, who
must typically balance schoolwork with part-time (37%) or full-time jobs (37%)
and their family responsibilities. The proposed instructional lab will help
provide more coherent and better integrated teaching and learning experiences
than is currently available for these targeted majors during their required
introductory statistics course and their required course in scientific methods.
The computer-based instruction provided by the proposed Mobile Psychology
Laboratory will include a modified Electronic Instructional Theater component as
well as a modified Distance Learning component. The latter will permit students
to engage in computer conferencing outside of class using Mercy's dial-up
Bulletin Board System, which is accessible around the clock. The proposed
hardware and software will also facilitate teaching and learning of the major
stages of the research process (hypothesis formation, scientific testing,
statistical analyses, tentative conclusions). The proposed computer technology
will be used to enhance their communication skills, e.g., when students write up
their research reports and make oral presentations of their findin gs. Wide
dissemination of project results is planned.