* 9551118
* A Digital Terrain Analysis Component for Extending and      Integrating a Geography Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Judy Olson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/1997
* USD 44,600.00

Daniel G. Brown DUE 9551118 Michigan State University FY1995 $ 44,600 East
Lansing, MI 48824 ILI - IP Geography Title: A Digital Terain Analysis Component
for Extending and Integrating a Geography Curriculum This project expands and
further integrates the undergraduate curriculum in geography through the
addition of a digital terrain analysis initiative. The expansion, made possible
through a redesign of the curriculum, occurs through demonstrations and
carefully structured laboratory exercises in introductory and intermediate
courses in physical geography and geographical methods and through a new course,
Digital Terrain Analysis, which will integrate these two areas at the advanced
level. The course provides experimentation and project work using the new
capabilities afforded by the new equipment and software. By addressing the
curriculum at all levels and in two emphasis areas, the project will provide for
a coherent and integrated understanding of new material on the part of the
students. Additionally, the project will enhance the experience and knowledge of
students who are training to be teachers and should give them the background
they need to take thee condepts of diigital terrain analysis into schools. The
project involves the purchase of a Unix-based server and four Unix-based
workstations, with software from ERDAS, Inc., and Environmental Systems Research
Institute (ESRI), for the efficient provision of advanced capabilities in
terrain data interpretation, collection, management, and visualization. An
additional PC-based workstation will be set up to demonstrate lower cost
software (from R-WEL, Inc., Golden Software, and the Idrisi Project) to
teachers-in-training so that they might be encouraged to use the software in
their own classrooms. The effectiveness of the project in expanding the
knowledge and skills of the students will be evaluated through supplemental
course evaluations and focus groups, the results of which will be presented to
colleagues in professional organizations.