* 9551939
* Undergraduate Laboratory for Experimental Methods and       Research in Psychology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Harvey Ginsburg, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 08/31/1997
* USD 32,778.00

Harvey J. Ginsburg DUE 9551939 Southwest Texas State U FY1995 $ 32,778 San
Marcos, TX 78666 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Psychology Title: Undergraduate
Laboratory for Experimental Methods and Research in Psychology A computer
laboratory for Experimental Methods and Research is being planned, which will
(1) introduce students to the fact that psychological research can be as precise
and rigorous as other natural sciences and (2) integrate the core areas in
experimental psychology. Students will perform 3 student-authored exercises,
requiring them to apply research methodology to psychological research in the
areas of (1) sensation and perception, (2) cognitive processes and (3) learning
and memory. They may share their experiments with other undergraduate psychology
laboratories networked through the Internet (MacLaboratory for Psychology
Project). The equipment will serve approximately 240 students during the first
full year of operation. The laboratory will also have a multiplier effect by
facilitating students' rigorous application of experimental research methods to
issues discussed and examined in advanced course work. The lab will also be used
by students for independent studies research, honors theses and an advanced
undergraduate computer applications course work. The laboratory serves the
important function of integrating aspects of our curriculum that are currently
segregated, e.g., statistical concepts, experimental research methodology and
specific content areas in our core experimental curriculum.