* 9551598
* A VLSI Design Laboratory Implemented in a Simulated         Corporate Environment
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Richard Turpin, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 07/31/1998
* USD 24,000.00

This project is creating a new laboratory that involves students in all aspects
of integrated circuit design and fabrication. The university is implementing the
laboratory in a "simulated corporate environment" that emphasizes technical
communication skills and teamwork for engineering students. In the laboratory
students (1) gain hands-on experience with computer-aided design tools for
designing integrated circuits; (2) fabricate designs through NSF-sponsored
facilities (MOSIS); (3) conduct measurements on fabricated chips; (4) work in
teams to achieve overall success; and (5) develop written, verbal, and e-mail
communication skills. In the laboratory, students participate as "employees" of
a VLSI design "company" working in different divisions to solve a common
problem. The company framework is being created through local area network (LAN)
of 10 Pentium-- based computers. This project is equipping the LAN with
additional software to allow for circuit simulation, physical circuit layout,
word processing, presentation, data analysis, and electronic mail. For the
accurate measurement of fabricated chips and comparison of designed values, two
pieces of additional test equipment are being added to pre-existing lab
facilities. The "simulated corporate environment" was designed to prepare
engineers for situations in the workplace, where they evaluate problems, define
potential solutions, form plans of action, and communicate ideas to peers and
superiors. This laboratory will be critically evaluated by students, faculty,
and industry contacts to confirm its value in engineering education.