* 9551525
* Integrating Multimedia-Based Activities into University     Physics Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Robert Fuller, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 07/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

Vicki L. Plano Clark DUE 9551525 U of Nebraska Lincoln FY1995 $40,000 Lincoln,
NE 685880430 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Physics Title: Integrating
Multimedia-Based Activities into University Physics Laboratories This project
will improve the laboratories which accompany the calculus-based university
physics courses. The new laboratories will use the power of multimedia tools to
build student understanding of specific physics concepts while developing
students' abilities to properly apply these tools. The lessons developed will
have the following structure: hands-on exploration of concept, microcomputer-
based laboratory (MBL) and visual-based laboratory (VBL) applications, and
assessment of student understanding. The MBL activities will use various
probeware interfaced with a computer to acquire and display data in real time.
The VBL activities will use video sequences, prepared digital images, and
simulation software to allow careful measurements of phenomena or systems that
would otherwise be too difficult or too expensive to reproduce in the classroom.
During the application activities, students will have spreadsheet and symbolic-
algebra software packages as well as an electronic physics data base at their
disposal to aid in their analysis and scientific development. An assessment
activity will be completed at the end of each laboratory period to evaluate
student understanding of the covered topics. In addition, computers will be made
available in the Physics Learning Center where laboratory-related questions will
be integrated into the lecture courses. This project will be evaluated by
assessing student performance and enrollment. Furthermore, the materials and
results of this project will be published and made available for distribution
through The Learning Team, a non-profit educational corporation in Armonk, NY.