* 9551020
* Digital Imaging For Inquiry-Based Bioscience Laboratories
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Presley Martin, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 09/30/1998
* USD 28,500.00

Students majoring in the life sciences are taking part in a new curriculum that
is organized around a series of investigative laboratory modules. The program
now extends over the five quarters of the freshman and sophomore years, has
greatly decreased emphasis on lectures, features extensive use of computers and
technology, and involves integration with other disciplines. Students work in
small groups and model, plan, carry out, and report on their experiments. These
same concepts are being extended into upper-division and nonmajors courses. The
new approach has brought into sharp focus the need for new analytical techniques
that will extend the number of biological principles that students may prove for
themselves. The techniques should be quantitative, easily mastered, and linked
to the cmmputer for data analysis, ready comparison with national data bases,
report writing, and research presentations. This project funds a platform of
four techniques for collecting images in digital form for analysis and
quantitation on a laboratory network of Macintosh computers. The four are a
flatbed scanner (to digitize graphic data), a Hi-8 camcorder (to capture macro
images, time lapse, and fast frame), monochrome video cameras (to capture medium
light intensity macro to micro scale images), and a sensitive CCD color video
camera (primarily for microscope work). Appropriate accessories and data storage
devices also are obtained under this project.