* 9551044
* Integration of Fourier Transforms Nuclear Magnetic ResonanceSpectroscopy into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Nathan Ledford, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 80,000.00

This project is acquiring of a high field Fourier transform multinuclear NMR
spectrometer for use as part of the overall improvement of the undergraduate
curriculum. The improvement plan is integrating the theory and applications of
multinuclear FT-NMR into ten regularly scheduled laboratory courses and the
undergraduate student research program. The spectrometer provides students and
faculty with the capability to perform pulse techniques which furnish structure
information that are routine by today's standards. Courses which focus on the
technical aspects of FT methods and the applications of both C13 and H1 NMR
methods for quantitative measurements are also being enhanced by the
spectrometer. Experiments which target the studies of reaction mechanisms,
stereospecific reactions, thermodynamic properties, equilibrium and substituent
constants, and enzyme kinetics are being introduced into physical, organic,
analytical, and biochemistry laboratories and into two Instrumental Analysis
courses. The enhanced capability of high resolution NMR pulse techniques also
improves both the quality and quantity of undergraduate student research which
is a requirement for all students seeking a major in chemistry. Integration of
high resolution FT-NMR into the chemistry curriculum enhances the undergraduate
experience with modern instrumentation and reinforces student understanding of
how modern chemistry research is conducted. The Bruker DPX-250 was chosen for
its cost effectiveness, versatility, and ease of use in providing a number of
applications. The AVANCE DPX system incorporates digital signal and filtering
techniques which provide ultra-high stability and sensitivity required for 3-D
and inverse experiments. All advanced NMR experiments and techniques, from ID
and DEPT to inverse, 2D or gradient experiments are performed automatically.
Experimental results are automatically processed and plotted. The Ethernet
interface allows for transfer of data via a network to individual workstations
or PCs. Most importantly, the AVANCE DPX is an ideal teaching tool for
illustrating the fundamental concepts of NMR and illustrating how it is used to
solve molecular structure problems.