* 9551467
* Teaching Concurrent Engineering Principles Using a Rapid    Prototype Machine
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Gary Winek, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 08/31/1997
* USD 49,882.00

In this project, the Helisys Rapid Prototyping (RP) machine is used to teach the
principles of concurrent engineering in an Engineering Technology program. Rapid
prototyping is the process of creating a three-dimensional object directly from
a computer- aided design (CAD) file. This process is revolutionizing the
prototyping step in the design/engineering process in much the same manner CAD
revolutionized drafting and computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) revolutionized
manufacturing. The RP equipment is being immediately incorporated into the
curriculum to teach the contemporary concept of concurrent engineering. This
concept allows manufactured products to be developed and produced much faster
than previously possible because several design and manufacturing activities can
occur at once. One of the key pieces of equipment to teaching concurrent
engineering is the RP machine. This machine gives students hands-on experience
with an emerging technology and prepares them to enter a global market place.
They can actually convert their CAD design to three-dimensional objects that
will be analyzed for form, fit, function, and assembly. This new ability holds
students accountable for their designs. The RP machine also gives the PI and
CoPI the opportunity to develop national curriculum models for use by other
institutions of higher learning when the RP equipment becomes common place in
both industry and education.