* 9551902
* Addition of Fluorescence Spectroscopy to an Upper Division  Unified Laboratory Sequence
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Henry Altmiller, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 07/31/1997
* USD 9,000.00

Henry Altmiller DUE 9551902 Saint Edward's University FY1995 $9,000 Austin, TX
78704-6489 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Chemistry Title: Addition of
Fluorescence Spectroscopy to an Upper Division Unified Laboratory Sequence As
part of a recent curriculum revision, the St. Edward's Chemistry Department has
instituted a three semester sequence of upper division unified laboratory
courses. In contrast to past practice, these courses are not connected with a
particular lecture course. The first semester course consists of an introduction
to chemical instrumentation. As the student progresses through the three
semester sequence, the experiments increase in complexity and sophistication
until in the third semester the experiments consist of projects that typically
take several weeks to complete. The Chemistry Department has a variety of modern
instrumentation available for undergraduate instruction and research. However,
there are some substantial gaps in the instrument collection that limit the
types of experiments that can be undertaken. The purpose of this project is to
incorporate Fluorescence Spectroscopy into the laboratory sequence. This
technique will be used for quantitative analysis, for measurement of basic
physical properties, and for study of reaction mechanisms. This wide variety of
applications will result in a substantial increase in educational quality.