* 9551273
* Library for Interactive Studies in Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* James White, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 07/31/1998
* USD 249,998.00

James E. White DUE 9551273 U of NC Chapel Hill FY1995 $ 249,998 Chapel Hill, NC
27514 ILI - Leadership in Laboratory Development: Interdisciplinary Title:
Library for Interactive Study of Mathematics This project addresses the problem
of how to use the new information technologies, and in particular, the World
Wide Web on the Internet, to make new tools available to teachers, to use those
tools to enrich the quality of mathematics instruction at the undergraduate
level, to more effectively reach larger sectors of the student population, and
to expand pedagogy with new technology- supported styles of teaching and
learning. The project addresses the need to make existing interactive materials
easily available, to extend them, and to create new materials focused on the
level and the abilities of the students users. The Library for Interactive
Studies in Mathematics and Science, based at the Institute for Academic
Technology of the University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, is being built on
the World Wide Web over a two year period. The library contains interactive
workbooks on topics commonly encountered in undergraduate mathematics, from
college algebra and pre-calculus through multivariate calculus, differential
equations, and mathematical modeling. The library makes available to instructors
all over the country a wide variety of interactive workbooks that they may
freely use and distribute to their students. Workbooks, together with the
program necessary to read them, are provided over the Internet instantly, and
free of charge. The initial library holdings are 45 of the most effective
experimental workbooks created for the MAA-sponsored Interactive Mathematics
Text Project (funded by IBM and NSF, ILI-LLD grant USE-9150272). All needed
information about the library is disseminated electronically via e-mail and
discussion lists, as well as through presentations and workshops. The goal is to
show teachers what can be done, to get them interested in experimenting, and to
teach interested faculty how to build their own interactive workbooks. Faculty
are invited to join an initial core group of 8 knowledgeable authors whose
colleges are participating by piloting and testing materials. Materials are
provided and a workshop is held to prepare 16 new teacher/authors. An integral
part of the development process is feedback from an editorial board directed to
the authors.