* 9551546
* Improvement of Undergraduate Education in Computer Aided    Digital System Development Process
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* John Linder, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Chalmers F. Sechrist
* 08/31/1997
* USD 34,097.00

This project improves the undergraduate education in Computer- Aided Design
(CAD) application in Digital System Development Process (problem formulation,
design, implementation, and testing) in the Department of Electrical Engineering
and Computer Science. The objectives of this project are being achieved through
a structured laboratory development plan with a rotational experiment at the end
of each category of experiments. Three categories of laboratory projects consist
of introductory, medium, and advanced experiments. In a rotational experiment,
student teams rotate the project during system development process. During time
T(i+l) team X that formulated and designed the project during T(i), will
implement the design of team X-l. During time T(i+2) team X tests the design of
team X-2, which was implemented by team X-l. This development plan will be
implemented in two courses. The application of CAD methods in course project
work and laboratory projects in the undergraduate logic design of digital
systems, integrated-circuit-based system design, application, and testing is
being increased over what is presently offered. Major pieces of equipment and
software being purchased include six IBM PC 486 or compatible along with
operating system software, six Workview educational CAD systems from Viewogic
Inc., six Xilinx core CAD (XACT) systems, Xilinx to Workview interface (DS391),
six HP 1651B logic analyzers, two Alpro logic programmers, and one Labview class
package. All the software and equipment is being used in a laboratory setting.