* 9551430
* The Development of Laboratory Courses in Experimental       Psychology, Including Use of a Shared Computer              Laboratory Facility
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Louis Porter, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1997
* USD 35,422.00

Michael J. Renner DUE 9551430 West Chester U of Pennsylv FY1995 $ 35,422 West
Chester, PA 19383 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Psychology Title: The
Development of Laboratory Courses in Experimental Psychology, Including Use of a
Shared Computer Laboratory Facility Although psychology is an empirical
discipline, there are too few opportunities for psychology majors at West
Chester University to obtain direct, hands-on experience with psychological
principles. The proposed project will implement a laboratory component in each
of four core courses within experimental psychology. Development of laboratory
courses is underway, and inauguration of the new courses will coincide with the
department's acquisition of a newly renovated building. NSF support is requested
for equipping a shared computer laboratory,with appropriate instructional
software,and acquiring some of the basic equipment for establishing these
teaching laboratories. This equipment includes one rack of cage housing for
laboratory rats, an operant conditioning apparatus, and a general purpose video
tracking system. The shared computer laboratory would consist of 25 student
workstations and an instructor's station (which will act as file server for a
peer-to-peer local network within the laboratory), capable of projecting video
or computer images for viewing by the entire class. Group data collection, data
analysis, and tutorials are facilitated by the video projection system. The
shared computer laboratory would also serve as a re.source for independent
student research and other courses, including statistics, research design, and
cognitive psychology.