* 9551404
* Improving Undergraduate Biology Laboratory Experiences by   Using a Computer Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,10/31/2000
* Grant Balkema, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 10/31/2000
* USD 53,000.00

This project updates and improves the curriculum and instrumentation in the
biology teaching labs at the college. Five years ago, a three-phase plan was
initiated to accomplish this goal. Phase 1 provided a high-speed network in
biology. Phase 2 developed faculty resources and provided a pilot lab for
testing the feasibility of this project. Phase 3 provides 50% of the teaching
labs with a minimum of one workstation per two students. The Biology Department
has been successfully implementing Phases 1 and 2. This project provides
resources for Phase 3. The hardware and software obtained by this project enable
students to engage in hands-on experiments, reduce the amount of time spent on
equipment setup, analyze data more effectively, work collaboratively in pairs,
and use modern three- dimensional anatomical software to extend their knowledge
of human anatomy. This project enables development a dual-purpose computer dry
lab/wet lab with computer workstations that are networked by high-speed
Ethernet. All workstations use a product, Timbuktu, that allows each workstation
to observe the instructor's workstation or other student's workstations; all AV
workstations share a common audio/visual feed allowing images (microscope, VHS
tape deck) to be broadcast to each workstation; and workstations have a
pedestal-based computer stand that allows the computer lab to be used either as
a wet or dry lab.