* 9551251
* Geophysical and GPS Equipment for Inquiry-Oriented,         Integrated Laboratories in Introductory Geology, GroundwaterGeology and Environmental Geophysics
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Robert Newton, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1997
* USD 28,350.00

The geology department is completely revamping laboratories in introductory
geology and coordinating laboratories in groundwater geology and environmental
geophysics to provide a series of integrated, inquiry-oriented, field-based
experiences addressing interrelated, local geological problems and stressing the
need for multidisciplinary approaches. These laboratories focus on the geology
and environmental problems of the local area, which depends on a confined
aquifer for its water supply. Contamination of this water by agricultural
pesticides and industrial waste has occurred to varying degrees. Purchase of
modern equipment with improved data acquisition and digital data-transfer
capabilities makes it possible to undertake meaningful problems during course
laboratories, even at the introductory level. Introductory geology laboratories
include a refraction seismic survey to define aquifer thickness, a resistivity
survey to continue monitoring a leachate plume, a magnetic gradiometer survey of
old industrial sites to search for potential contamination sources, measurement
of water levels in observation wells to map the potentiometric surface, and
determination of aquifer transmissivity and storativity to assess groundwater
movement rates. Combined laboratories in groundwater geology and environmental
geophysics complement this effort, thereby building on the introductory
experience. Additional activities include seismic reflection profiling to map
sediment stratigraphy and advanced groundwater analysis to assess possible plume
migration paths. GPS information together with all field data from all courses
can be added to an extensive GIS database for production and evaluation of
derivative maps that students evaluate.