* 9551148
* Integration of Physics Experiments into the Life-Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Hans Bozler, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1997
* USD 30,000.00

Hans M. Bozler DUE 9551148 U of Southern California FY1995 $ 30,000 Los
Angeles, CA 90089-0484 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Physics Title: Integration
of Physics Experiments into the Life-Sciences The purpose of this laboratory
development project is the design and implementation of a new physics laboratory
curriculum for students of the life sciences. The reason for such a new
laboratory is to transform the laboratory into one of a greater creativity,
student involvement, and relevance. The course is a one year non-calculus based
physics course for students with prehealth and life science majors at the
University of Southern California (USC). This course has high attendance with an
annual enrollment greater than 330 students increasing at the rate of 10% per
year. While this course attempts to present physics in an interesting way, the
experiments are classical and are not particularly related to the primary
interests of our students. This lack of relevance impedes the learning process.
The new laboratory program has three components: new mechanics experiments with
increased student participation and involvement, fluid mechanics experiments due
to their importance for life sciences, and electrophysics measurements on living
systems, primitive animals and finally the students themselves. The new
laboratory, which is highly relevant to the primary interest of the students,
will be designed to achieve high student participation and interest in physics.
It will be instrumented with high accuracy sensors and their accompanying
electronics. The training of the students in the use of such devices will be
beneficial to them in preparing for their professional careers.