* 9551910
* Development of a Quantitative Research Laboratory for       Undergraduate Education in Sociology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Charles Cappell, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 07/31/1997
* USD 31,136.00

This project funds a networked personal computer laboratory for sociology. This
pedagogical approach premises that sociology is becoming an applied information
science. The new Quantitative Research Laboratory for sociology helps to define
sociology as an information-based laboratory science. It serves as the hub of
the department, housing large quantities of data, integrating several
methodological as well as substantive courses, and orienting students to the
more scientific aspects of sociological inquiry. The technological hub
integrates methodological training by providing a common platform for all
methods courses. Several substantive courses, as well as the methods courses,
are further integrated by a community area study. Treating sociology as an
applied information science with an emphasis on laboratory-based training
improves undergraduate education of sociology majors in several ways: (1) it
improves the statistical analysis skills of students; (2) it defines and
portrays an undergraduate curriculum that more closely resembles the training
and orientation of graduate studies and the work performed by professional
sociologists; (3) it trains undergraduate students on the types of equipment and
software applications they are likely to encounter in the workplace; and (4) it
creates a stronger position for sociology as an undergraduate major in the
postindustrial economy.