* 9551064
* Mathematics Multimedia Computer Classroom/Lab
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Mark McCombs, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/1997
* USD 49,495.00

This project attacks two problems that involve teaching high school mathematics.
(1) College Algebra is the first math course for students with a wide range of
mathematical skills. They have all seen the material before, and many did
poorly, so some are bored, others flounder, and many become discouraged and
reinforced in their dislike of math. This project converts this course into a
multimedia computer lab course, where students work individually or in small
groups on interactive workbooks that may contain focused exploratory
environments, video clips, simulations, explanations, and exercises. These books
are being written using ToolBook and the computer algebra system MathKit and put
on CD-ROMs. Instead of lecturing, instructors are available in the lab for
individual help and guidance. Students are able to work on modules at their own
pace, taking proficiency exams when they are ready. (2) The University also
trains future teachers of school mathematics, and among the courses they take
are Geometry and Teaching Math in the Secondary Schools. Before this project,
such preservice teachers had very little experience with using computers, except
as word processors. But proficiency with using a computer as a tool for learning
math is strongly endorsed by the NCTM Standards and is now expected by state
education agencies. Both of these courses are being renovated and offered in a
multimedia computer classroom, making extensive use of tools such as Geometer's
Sketchpad, LOGO, TIM, ToolBook and MathKit. To support these reforms, the
university is purchasing 29 networked multimedia computers with a server and
several machines for instructors who are developing materials for these
innovative courses.