* 9551214
* Development of an Undergraduate Program in Evolutionary     Biology:  A Molecular Approach to the Study of Genomic      Variation
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Margaret Hoey, Fitchburg State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 08/31/1997
* USD 6,981.00

Within the Biology curriculum a series of experimental laboratories are using
molecular approaches to the study of genetic variation and evolution. These
laboratories give the students an opportunity to perform experimental techniques
and ask theoretical questions about material they formerly learned mainly
through lectures of dry-labs. The laboratories improve the teaching of
evolutionary concepts, broaden the exposure to molecular techniques of both
majors and non-majors and finally, prepare undergraduates for research projects
that use molecular approaches to understanding evolutionary questions. Targeted
courses include the General Biology Introductory course for majors, a non-majors
Life Science course, and the Evolution course. Investigative topics include
evolution of genomes, DNA fingerprinting, Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium,
phylogenetic analyses, advanced population genetics, plastid DNA variation and
divergence. The non-majors Life Science Course is crucial in the science
training of elementary and middle school education majors. Improvements in this
course correspond to changes in the elementary and middle school teacher
preparation curriculum supported by a grant from the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts (Partnerships Advancing the Learning of Mathematics and Science,
(PALMS) to restructure the college's teacher preparation program in mathematics,
science and technology education.