* 9551659
* Implementing an Interactive Computer Laboratory to Support  Discovery-Based Statistics Courses for Liberal Arts         Students and Future Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Anne Sevin, Framingham State University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 05/31/1997
* USD 29,941.00

More than half of the students concentrating in mathematics at the college are
in one of three teacher-preparation programs. It is critical that the
Mathematics Department curriculum prepare these students for the classrooms they
will enter, in terms of both mathematics content and pedagogy. There are many
areas of mathematics that are taught more effectively through technology-
assisted approaches. Statistics especially is an area in which computers,
coupled with teaching strategies that allow students to construct their own
knowledge through hands-on, exploratory activities, can greatly enhance student
learning. This project funds a 20-station computer laboratory that provides at
least eight faculty members with a means to use newly developed laboratory
experiences in introductory statistics courses. An estimated 400-450
undergraduate students can benefit each year. First and foremost, the new
laboratory provides a technology-rich environment in which faculty can teach
using a pedagogy that both enhances the learning of all students and models
instructional methods important to those students preparing to be teachers. It
also provides an alternative approach--individualized and interactive--which
helps reduce withdrawal and failure rates in the introductory statistics course
for the many full-time students majoring in social sciences, home economics, or
food and nutrition. In addition, it can be of benefit to other part-time
students pursuing undergraduate degree programs in the Continuing Education
Division, as well as to majors taking the mathematical statistics sequence.
Finally, it can improve the preparation of all these students for workplace
applications.