* 9551758
* An Activity-Based Physical Science Course
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Walter Wesley, Minnesota State University Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1997
* USD 19,125.00

This grant equips an activity room to provide improved physical science
instruction, primarily to elementary education majors. The course expansion from
one term to a year-long sequence offers increased course content with a balanced
mix of laboratory experience, physical science concepts, and pedagogy. The
course models approaches and methods of teaching science, based on the belief
that new teachers rarely try methods that they have not directly experienced.
Consequently, the course upgrade centers around an activity-based, guided-
inquiry format that relies heavily on teaching tools developed and tested by
leading researchers in physics teaching and on experience with the Workshop
Physics mode in algebra- and calculus-based courses. Previous course
requirements for the elementary education program have been such that they can
be satisfied by enrolling in traditional large sections of biology and astronomy
with little or no laboratory component. The department has offered an activity-
based physical science course since 1990. However, it has been available to only
24 students, typically one quarter per academic year, because of the lack of
space and equipment. Continued success with this limited physical science
offering, proven track record with other activity-based physics courses, and in-
service teachers workshops have led to a serious discussion about the need for a
year-long physical science course. A fully implemented course can lead to
improved physical science instruction for preservice elementary teachers and
serve as a model for other institutions.