* 9551442
* Integrated Physical, Mathematical and Computer Modeling     of Simple Dynamical Systems:  Constructing an Understanding of the Earth
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Alexandra Moore, Hartwick College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 13,404.00

Through this project, the laboratory experiences in two classes, an introductory
earth systems science course and an upper-level geochemistry course, are
redesigned. Both courses emphasize the behavior and interrelationships of
natural systems and demonstrate to students the power of a quantitative approach
to problem-solving in science. By combining simple physical models with
mathematical modeling (for upper-level students) and simple computer modeling
(both levels), students not only gain a deeper understanding of the particular
system they've studied, but gain insight into an entire class of problems with
many practical applications. In the intro-level course, students build identical
physical and computer models of a one-box dynamical system. This approach has
several advantages: (1) Students gain confidence in computer modeling by working
with a system that they already understand well. (2) Computer modeling is
creative, students both analyze a situation and design its solution. (3) The
one-box model is a flexible system, easily adapted for study of a wide variety
of natural phenomena. (4) With appropriate software, model building can be
carried out by introductory-level students. (5) The mathematical description of
a one-box model is well within the grasp of students with basic calculus skills,
and geology majors can gain experience in applying mathematical techniques to
problems of practical interest. This exercise is open-ended. Students begin on a
firm platform of observation and are armed with theory and computer skills, thus
allowing them to explore a range of problems whose solutions require creative
and critical thinking. This project provides seven new PowerMacintosh computers,
two printers, modeling software, and network hardware.