* 9551027
* Separations and Structures Throughout the Chemistry         Curriculum:  GC/MS
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1995,04/30/1997
* James George, DePauw University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 04/30/1997
* USD 27,816.00

The concepts of separations and structure are enhanced in the chemistry
curriculum at all levels by the purchase of a GC/MS. The GC/MS allows the study
of more interesting and relevant topics (such as pesticides in the environment
or drug testing), making chemistry more accessible to a wider range of students.
Use of the GC/MS provides chemistry majors with experience in an increasingly
important technique. These goals are achieved by beginning with simple
experiments in General Chemistry that are designed to provide the students with
training on the GC/MS while demonstrating the power of its analytical
capabilities. Students analyze compounds extracted from candy or chewing gum and
identify the major flavorants. The concepts of atomic structure are reinforced
by studying the natural distribution of isotopes. In Organic Chemistry, students
use the GC/MS in a more sophisticated manner when they obtain data to study the
linear free energy relationship in the fragmentation of substituted
benzophenones and acetophenones. This experiment reinforces the concepts of
inductive and resonance effects that are discussed in class. They also use the
GC/MS to obtain kinetic data for the free radical chlorination reaction. These
experiments underscore to the students and help them better understand the
importance of kinetics and thermodynamics in the study of organic reaction
mechanisms. In Analytical Chemistry, students learn the special consequences of
using a hyphenated technique to quantitatively analyze trace levels of organics.
Students continue to use the GC/MS in upper-level courses to study the structure
of compounds, to study the separation of complex mixtures, and to obtain data
for the study of reaction mechanisms. The instrument enhances special topics
courses and student research projects.