* 9551465
* Learning About Computer Automation in the Context of        Intermediate Level Experimental Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Wayne Wright, Kalamazoo College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1997
* USD 31,217.00

Computer-automated data acquisition and automated experimental control have
revolutionized physics and engineering laboratory methods over the past two
decades. The widespread use of the technology and the recent development of
powerful, user-friendly software packages justifies and enables the effective
teaching of these techniques at the sophomore/junior level. This project
implements a curriculum that combines the teaching of simple computer automation
techniques with conventional intermediate level courses in electronics and
modern physics. A sound pedagogical marriage can be achieved, so that the
students gradually learn about the "tool" that the computer represents, while
making increasingly sophisticated use of that tool to learn about experimental
physics. Students learn about the tool in a structured and pedagogically sound
manner that encourages interactive learning and confronts the student with a
series of questions of increasing complexity. The gradually acquired skills are
used to increase the efficiency of data collection in the modern physics and
electronics laboratory, and this allows the students to spend more time focused
on the meaning of the results. The acquired skills help students to participate
in meaningful, career-building internships in the middle of their undergraduate
years and to become effective undergraduate researchers as they near graduation.
The project is being implemented primarily with LabVIEW software, and with
electronic meters and sources interfaced through IEEE-488 based hardware.