* 9551536
* Creating Effective Meterology Laboratory Modules to Improve Curriculum and Enhance Student Transition into              Upper-Division Coursework
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Paul Sirvatka, Community College District 502
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1999
* USD 305,000.00

Paul L. Sirvatka DUE 9551536 College of Du Page FY1995 $ 305,000 Glen Ellyn, IL
60137 ILI - Leadership in Laboratory Development: Geosciences Title: Creating
Effective Meteorology Laboratory Modules to Improve Curriculum and Enhance
Student Transition into Upper-Division Coursework The operational and research
activities within the field of meteorology are undergoing unprecedented and
rapid change. An effective meteorological laboratory curriculum must reflect the
latest innovations and theoretical applications of the users of the science.
This project is developing a lower-division undergraduate laboratory curriculum
that prepares freshmen and sophomores for upper-level study, provides these
students adequate time to begin learning their chosen field of study, and
supplements the existing curriculum by providing a balanced and necessary
foundation in understanding the tools used for meteorological study. The
specific objectives of the project are to: Design lower division course work in
meteorology. Create a laboratory manual consisting of computer programs and
forecasting techniques to be used in lower division courses. These laboratories
also are designed for maximum flexibility and expanded use in upper-division
courses. Provide students with skill for an easier transition from sophomore to
junior year. Encourage other community colleges to develop programs in
meteorology. Encourage students who are not adept at mathematics to become
interested in weather. Motivate students to take higher mathematics and physics.
The project is producing approximately 20 new computer-based laboratory
curriculum materials. The modules provide the foundation for the development of
courses in weather analysis and forecasting and create new computer-based
laboratory opportunities for existing courses in atmospheric science. The
backgrounds of community college students who will benefit from the proposed
project include meteorology majors, educators, aviators and people with an avid
interest in meteorology. Self- paced meteorology modules encompassing new
technologies with standard universal concepts allow for individualized
instruction of meteorology fundamentals. The modules contain lessons in
understanding numerical models, forecasting techniques and data acquisition and
manipulation, are portable to different types of forecasting laboratory
environments, give students an opportunity to begin to understand the broad
implication of meteorology by piecing together the atmosphere's subtle nuances,
and may encourage students to expand scientific literacy by taking mathematics
courses that they otherwise would not have considered. With the rapid change in
workforce needs, students of the future will be prepared to enter the workplace
only if the evolution of educational practices parallels that of the field of
study itself. The project is designed to provide such preparation to freshman
and sophomore level college students with an interest in continuing their
studies in meteorology at the upper division.