* 9551240
* Project PreEMPT Tech:  Preparing Effective Mathematics      Preservice Teachers with Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Michael Plantholt, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 06/30/1997
* USD 45,780.00

Roger Day DUE 9551240 Illinois State University FY1995 $ 45,780 Normal, IL
61790 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Mathematics Title: Project PreEMPT Tech:
Preparing Effective Mathematics Preservice Teachers with Technology Computer
technology impacts upon both the discipline and teaching of mathematics.
Technology's capacity for graphical, symbolic, and numerical manipulations
signals a change in what it means to do mathematics. Technology provides new
resources for learning. In a laboratory setting, technology can foster
investigation and exploration of students' ideas. Future mathematics teachers
must be able to use technology as a tool for both doing and teaching
mathematics. Project PreEMPT Tech provides a technology rich learning
environment to support the development of secondary mathematics majors. The
project builds upon several initiatives within the department - a new course for
preservice teachers, integration of reform calculus materials and teaching
methods, a new emphasis on data analysis in statistics-have laid the foundation
for comprehensive use of that environment. Because ISU prepares more secondary
mathematics teachers than any other institution in the state of Illinois, this
unified effort in curriculum and technology advancement promises to have great
impact.