* 9551935
* Improving the Senior Research Experience in Physics at West Virginia Wesleyan College:  Laser/Atomic Spectroscopy
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Joseph Wiest, West Virginia Wesleyan College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 06/30/1997
* USD 17,655.00

Joseph E. Wiest DUE 9551935 WV Wesleyan College FY1995 $ 17,655 Buckhannon, WV
26201 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Physics Title: Improving the Senior
Research Experience in Physics at West Virginia Wesleyan College: Laser/Atomic
Spectroscopy To support its senior research requirement for physics majors,
newly expanded from a one semester course to a full year, Wesleyan will purchase
research-grade equipment in laser/atomic spectroscopy. The college will purchase
an external grating tunable diode laser, a wavemeter, a lock-in amplifier, and
an optical chopper with controller. This equipment will supplement
instrumentation which is of teaching but not research grade for undergraduates.
Instruments were selected to provide flexibility in the choice of research
topics for seniors over the next five years. The instrumentation will permit
senior students to do experimental studies in Doppler-free saturated absorption
spectroscopy, optogalvanic spectroscopy, wave mixing, the Zeemann Effect, and
frequency doubling. Students will be able to collect accurate data with very
high resolution, to do mathematical calculations with the data, and to compare
results with physical models. Project objectives are to teach students to use
current research equipment, to teach current methods of research, and to teach
proper methods of data analysis. The project will demonstrate a new research
technique for advanced undergraduate students: that the external grating tunable
diode laser and associated equipment enable research-grade studies in atomic
physics.