* 9551765
* Computer Control of the Stull Observatory 32 inch Reflector
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* John Stull, Alfred University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/1997
* USD 16,000.00

The Stull Observatory is a unique facility for the teaching of astronomy to
undergraduate students. Equipped with telescopes ranging from 9 inches to 32
inches in aperture as well as CCD's and computers for image processing, the
observatory is presently providing an excellent exposure to astronomy for
nonscientists and beginning science students. This program enhances the
equipment and course offerings for the more advanced students. As part of these
efforts, computer control is being added to the 32-inch telescope, improving the
observing aspects of the program. This retrofit reduces the amount of time
needed to acquire astronomical objects, enables rapid changing between fields,
and facilitates assembling mosaics of larger regions of the sky. In turn, these
abilities increase the number of objects that can be observed on a given night,
allow improved photometry, and facilitate rapid response to unusual targets of
opportunity such as supernovae and events first detected outside the visible
wavelengths. This new system benefits the advanced students in the upper-level
laboratory course, their research and senior projects, and the research projects
they share with faculty. In addition to the more advanced students, we
anticipate that the telescope automation can also benefit the beginning lab,
physically disabled students, and area high schools.