* 9551950
* Promoting Investigative Learning in Biology Laboratories    Using Computer-Based Data Acquisition Systems
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Daniel Udovic, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 07/31/1998
* USD 39,083.00

Daniel Udovic DUE 9551950 U of Oregon Eugene FY1995 $39,083 Eugene, OR 97403
ILI - Instrumentation Project: Life Sciences Title: Promoting Investigative
Learning in Biology Laboratories Using Computer-Based Data Acquisition Systems
Teaching labs should be the intellectual catalysts of a curriculum, where
students experience all aspects of the scientific endeavor, where they are
challenged to confront their misconceptions about the natural world, and where
they learn to construct explanations and meaning rather than find the "right"
answers. In many undergraduate labs the equipment used to collect data acts as a
barrier to student learning and participation. Often laboratory protocols force
students to focus on the technical aspects of data collection while de-
emphasizes the underlying scientific principles being presented. To be
intellectually involved student must participate in investigations, that is,
they must be involved in the design of experiments and the interpretation of
results. The equipment requested in this proposal will make it possible to
enhance student learning in biology teaching labs by replacing current analog
devices, such as oscilloscopes and chart recorders with computer-based tools for
data acquisition. The development of customized user interfaces and curricular
materials designed to take advantage of the computer-based equipment will:
emphasize the use of critical thinking skills by giving students the tools to
quickly analyze their data; break down obstacles to learning by allowing
students to focus important scientific concepts rather than instrumentation per
se; and bridge the gap between teaching lab experiences and independent research
opportunities by encouraging investigative lab activities. Materials necessary
to equip two lab rooms (serving 48-60 students) with systems for electronic data
acquisition and analysis will be purchased. The equipment will be general enough
to be used in a wide variety of courses serving both biology majors and non-
majors.