* 9551033
* Introduction of Surface Chemistry Using Fourier-Transform   Infrared Spectroscopy and Incorporation of FT-IR into       Upper Level Undergraduate Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Donald Linn, Purdue Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 07/31/1997
* USD 17,788.00

Experiments are being developed to introduce students to surface chemistry and
the usefulness of FT-IR as a surface analytical tool. These experiments probe
the interaction between thin films and reflective metal substrates using
infrared reflection-absorption spectroscopy. The thrust of the experimental work
focuses on investigating parameters such as film thickness, nature of the
substrate material and its relationship to the magnitude of frequency shifts,
and the effect of thermal processing of the films on FT-IR spectra. Industry
applications, such as thin film coatings on computer hard disks and on food or
beverage cans, are also being studied. In addition, introductory experiments
focus on the basics of FT-IR, to facilitate its use in analytical, organic, and
inorganic laboratories. Experiments published in the Journal of Chemical
Education, and elsewhere, are evaluated, developed to fit local needs, and
incorporated into labs. These experiments, serve as takeoff points for designing
undergraduate research projects dealing with topics such as environmental
analysis (automobile exhaust and air pollution studies), IR spectra of solids
and nonvolatile liquids, kinetic methods of analysis based on FT-IR spectra, and
FT-IR reflectance studies combined with thermogravimetric analysis (a
combination useful for studying polymers).