* 9551480
* Improvement of Undergraduate Education in Advanced CNC and  CAD/CAM Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Moheb Boghos, San Diego City College
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 06/30/1997
* USD 27,485.00

The college has recently upgraded its science, engineering, and technology
courses to offer students comprehensive Associate Degree and certificate
programs in advanced machine tool and manufacturing technologies. Because
defense industry downsizing is forcing manufacturing and machine tool firms into
new markets (e.g., biomed, biotech, electronics), CNC operators and CAD/CAM
technologists are needed who can use advanced technology to design and produce
small, complex parts. To supply graduates for these jobs, the college is
developing its undergraduate Machine Technology program into an Advanced CAD/CAM
&amp; CNC Technology curriculum. The college and an industry partner are funding
new CAD/CAM software delivering advanced surface modeling capability to DOS and
NT platforms; this project purchases machine tool components needed to add 4th
and 5th axis movement to the College's 3-axis vertical machining center (VMC).
Corresponding improvement of Introductory/Advanced CAD/CAM courses let students
use the CAD/CAM software to model and verify advanced CNC surface programs; in
improved Introductory/Advanced CNC Vertical Machining &amp; EDM courses, they
learn to set up and operate the 5-axis VMC needed to machine their programs. In
a new 200 series, Advanced VMC, students use the software and 5-axis VMC to
design and execute sophisticated surface models for applied research and
industry applications.