* 9551581
* Mathematical Interactive Network Design (MIND)              a Computer Labortory for Developmental Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* John Pool, Amarillo College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/1998
* USD 32,602.00

Kathryn C. Wetzel DUE 9551581 Amarillo College FY1995 $ 32,602 Amarillo, TX
791780001 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Mathematics Title: Mathematical
Interactive Network Design (MIND) A Computer Labortory for Developmental
Mathematics The Mathematical Interactive Network Design (MIND) project is a
computer laboratory designed for intensely interactive, but easily constructed,
multi-media instruction in developmental mathematics. The laboratory will
consist of 20 Hewlett Packard 486 computer work stations networked via Novell
software through an existing local file server. Using Visual Basic multimedia
software and object oriented programs developed by supervising instructors, a
central user interface allows access to, and control of, the various
instructional media. Functions and rules, designed to be independent of subject
mater, are implemented using a decision table processor. A combination of
interactive digitized video and audio is integrated with graphics and text
presentations. The students are provided with lecture, drill, problem solving,
open ended questions, review, and testing as deemed beneficial or necessary. The
computer guides each student through an individualized tutorial session. The
route taken by the student is based upon that particular student's activities.
Therefore, each student participates in a unique tutorial session geared to his
specific requirements and cognitive style. Students who have already utilized
two of the currently available MIND mathematics sessions responded positively to
correction of their errors in judgment and reasoning. The ability of MIND to
provide constructive, instructive feedback creates a mentoring atmosphere
dramatically different from other developmental mathematics tutorial softw are.