* 9551319
* Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry in Undergraduate       Chemistry and Science
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Michael Milligan, SUNY College at Fredonia
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 30,864.00

Through this project, funds are provided for the purchase of a gas
chromatograph/mass spectrometer (GC/MS). The acquisition of GC/MS capabilities
greatly increases laboratory and research experiences for undergraduates in the
growing field of environmental chemistry and science. This instrument bolsters
the undergraduate course curriculum in environmental, analytical, and organic
chemistry and provides new research topics in environmental chemistry for
undergraduate students. Students benefitting from the strengthened environmental
chemistry curriculum gain new experiences in the following areas: environmental
sampling, sample preparation, fate and transport of trace organic compounds in
the environment, gas chromatography, and mass spectrometry. Students integrate
laboratory skills developed in prior courses into the analytical methodologies
and techniques required for environmental analysis. Emphasis is on development
and testing of modern analytical techniques employing GC/MS. Class and research
projects include sampling of on-site monitoring wells for pesticide and
herbicide contamination of local groundwater resources, an evaluation of the
persistence of anthropogenic chlorinated organic compounds in the environment,
measurement of octanol-water partition coefficients of a variety of compounds,
and analysis of zebra mussels in Lake Erie for bioaccumulation of trace organic
compounds. The hope is that many nonmajors are attracted to these projects,
particularly biology, environmental sciences, and geosciences students.