* 9551637
* FT-IR in the Introductory Chemistry Lab
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Margaret Hill, Central Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 08/31/1997
* USD 28,354.00

Introduction of Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) instrumentation and analysis
have great educational benefits for both non-science- and science majors. All
students need to have a realistic awareness of the potential and limitations of
at least some of the technologies that underlie current scientific research.
Since non-science-majors may take as few as one formal science course during
their 4 years as an undergraduate, it is critical that institutions provide them
with exposure to chemical technologies relevant to their future. Science majors
additionally need an early introduction and continued exposure to modern
instrumentation since usage of such instrumentation is the norm in the
scientific research community. The university has chosen FT-IR instrumentation
as a way of addressing these broad educational goals for all introductory
chemistry classes. Non-science-majors learn how infrared spectroscopy may be
used for chemical identification in the context of environmental and
pharmaceutical applications. Science majors strengthen their understanding of
principles of bonding and molecular structure through FT-IR. Students are also
shown how spectroscopy is the result of bonding phenomena and, conversely, how
the interpretation of spectroscopic phenomena yields information about bonding
and structure. Furthermore, students learn quantitative applications of FT-IR so
they may apply this technique to both qualitative and quantitative tasks of
analysis.