* 9551046
* Instrumentation for an Undergraduate Spatial Data Analysis  Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Louis Scuderi, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 06/30/1997
* USD 40,000.00

Louis A. Scuderi DUE 9551046 University of New Mexico FY1995 $ 40,000
Albuquerque, NM 87131 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Geosciences Title:
Instrumentation for an Undergraduate Spatial Data Analysis Laboratory The
Geography Department at the University of New Mexico (UNM) has a long tradition
of teaching and research in the spatial sciences. Over the past decade, with the
maturing of Geographic Information Systems, Remote Sensing and Digital Image
Processing, and significant advances in computer modeling, the Department, and
the discipline in general, has seen a dramatic shift in teaching requirements
from traditional geography courses to those which in- corporate these
technological elements. Geography is currently in the process of restructuring
its offerings in these areas. UNM has recognized the importance of these
critical areas and has designated Geography as the primary focal point for the
development and teaching of these technologies. To achieve this restructuring
the department is currently in the process of upgrading and developing its
existing laboratory facilities. The support requested in this proposal will form
the core of teaching in the refocused Department of Geography. The equipment
will be used to improve a. Geography Instruction: The SDAL would become the
focal point for 14 existing or proposed courses. A conservative estimate is that
over 280 students would have instruction in the SDAL annually. UNM's Minority
Institution designation insures that protected groups would be served. b.
Interdisciplinary Instruction: Currently GIT is also utilized in Anthropology,
Biology, Geology and Planning at UNM campus. The SDAL would serve as a
centralized instruction location as well as providing the resources for inte
rdisciplinary teaching in the physical sciences.