* 9551715
* Developing a Micropropagation Training Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Charles Tarrants, SUNY College of Technology Delhi
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/1997
* USD 32,644.00

This project establishes a Micropropagation Laboratory for training future
horticulture technicians. As micropropagation is an asexual method of producing
large quantities of genetically identical plants, the lab is a practical
application of the concept of Toti potency (i.e., each somatic plant cell
contains all necessary information to create an entire new plant). It is
technologically intensive, and until recently was not practical on a
large/commercial scale. Current advances are allowing the process to see ever-
greater use in the horticulture industry. Yet the supply of technicians trained
in this technique is not adequate for the industry's demand. A curriculum
providing systematic training in techniques currently used by industry is being
developed to help introduce new innovations from research institutions.
Providing such a curriculum is an innovation for the industry. Micropropagation
requires a sterile and carefully controlled environment. Students must learn the
more rigorous demands of working with plants in such an environment. This
project provides the equipment needed to train horticulture students in the
micropropagation of a selected assortment of herbaceous and woody plants. The
requested laboratory equipment also serves as the foundation of an expanded
horticulture curriculum, offering an option concentrating on micropropagation
techniques.