* 9551531
* Intelligent Tutor for Concepts in Molecular Genetics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Elizabeth Stuart, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 273,459.00

Shiladitya DasSarma DUE 9551531 U of Massachusetts Amherst FY1995 $273,459
Amherst, MA 1003 ILI - Leadership in Laboratory Development: Life Sciences
Title: Intelligent Tutor for Concepts in Molecular Genetics This project is
developing a computer laboratory fop tutoring undergraduate students in
fundamental concepts of molecular genetics. The topics covered include (a) DNA
structure and replication, (b) RNA transcription, translation, and splicing, (c)
genetic recombination, repair, and transposition, (d) genetic engineering and
recombinant DNA technology, and (e) modern genomic analysis and societal
implications. The major challenges in teaching these fundamental genetic
concepts to undergraduates are (1) transmitting the visual imagery of dynamic
molecular processes, (2) providing a solid intellectual framework to explore
interrelationships between genetic processes, and (3) at more advanced levels,
conveying the experimental basis for evolution of genetic principles. The
project exploits recent advances in computer hardware (increased memory size and
data storage) and software (intelligent tutoring systems) to develop a
multimedia tutorial package which conveys the visual imagery, conceptual
relationships, and experimental basis of molecular genetics in a deeper and more
effective manner than currently possible through lectures or textbooks. The
electronic tutor, named "MOLGENT", is being tested during its developmental
phase, in a variety of undergraduate classes, including introductory biology,
microbiology, and molecular and cellular biology courses, and an innovative
senior-level course entitled "Concepts in Molecular Genetics" at the University
of Massachusetts at Amherst. The effectiveness of tutorials is being monitored
and improved through student discuss ion groups. Once developed, the prototype
software will be promoted via demonstrations at the educational section of
meetings of biological societies (e.g. American Society for Microbiology,
Genetics Society of America, and American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology) and distributed broadly via publishers.