* 9551874
* A Digital Technology Network for Improving Laboratories in  Biology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Mary Kot, Mercer University
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 07/31/1997
* USD 54,600.00

Through this project, the university is creating a Digital Technology Network
(DTN), which is a hands-on laboratory facility for undergraduate biology majors
and nonscientists, in lower- and upper-level courses. The backbone of the DTN is
a local area computer network adapted to the needs of cmurses in each curricular
area. Instead of a traditional experience in which students are passive
recipients of faculty knowledge and expertise, the DTN promotes the development
of experienced practitioners of science. In introductory courses, the DTN is
used in group problem-solving activities that enhance computer literacy and
analytical skills while promoting critical thinking, collaborative interaction,
and understanding of biological concepts. The DTN is becoming part of the normal
student laboratory routine. Lecture and laboratory are coordinated in an
iterative framework designed to make progressively greater demands on incipient
skills. From simple beginning exercises with simulation and physiology, students
progress to complex, open-ended exercises. In upper-division courses, students
construct and manipulate analytical spreadsheets and population projection
matrices. They collect and analyze gene sequences in Internet databases. They
plan and execute physiology experiments that draw on their accumulated skills in
computerized data collection and analysis, generation of hypotheses and
experimental designs, collaboration with colleagues in the lab and on the
Internet.