* 9551622
* Field Instrumentation and Infra Structure Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1998
* Thomas Zimmie, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 11/30/1998
* USD 70,000.00

This project is creating an upper-level undergraduate laboratory emphasizing
real-time, non-destructive, field data-acquisition and interpretation for civil
and environmental engineering (C&amp;EE). The campus serves as the laboratory
bench. Student teams place sensors (e.g. strain, pressure, conductivity, flow)
on chosen features such as a bridges, wells, storm drains and retaining walls.
Teams then interface that equipment with computer data-acquisition systems,
calibrate and maintain the data, and monitor responses to changing environmental
conditions. Thus, structural behavior under load, traffic flow and intensity,
air pollution loading, stormwater and groundwater flow, and quality is recorded,
analyzed and displayed using GIS and visualization tools. This educational
thrust builds practical experience in the infrastructure while addressing
traditional weaknesses in many C&amp;EE curricula. Students encounter large,
practical data sets in a radical departure from conventional pedagogy. By
fostering interdisciplinary work using tools and techniques from traditional
electrical, systems, and chemical engineering fields, C&amp;EE students are
trained to manage information flows in "noisy" environments and to use those
flows in flexible operational strategies. Restructuring of the curriculum
stressing interactive learning along with a blurring of traditional disciplinary
boundaries makes this innovative course timely. By serving as a practical
"capstone," with an emphasis on problem definition as well as resolution, this
lab prepares C&amp;EE students for the expanded demands of the workplace and its
focus on the collection and management of information.