* 9551435
* On Bridging the Theory-Research Gap for Sociology Students: NSF-ILI-IP Support for the Role of a Micro-Computer         Laboratory in Cedar Crest College's Sociology Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Andrew Ziner, Cedar Crest College
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1997
* USD 27,731.00

For undergraduate students enrolled in Cedar Crest College's Introduction to
Culture and Society, Research Methods and Design, and Evaluating Human Service
Organizations courses, analyzing the interrelationship between human social
organization and behavioral processes takes on both theoretical and applied
(i.e., "real world") dimensions. Though traditional pedagogical techniques
(e.g., textbooks and class discussion) explore this important connection,
without "hands-on" experience, students are left to wonder how generalizations
offered by sociology (and all social sciences) are developed. Such suspicion
affects the very foundation of their learning experiences and may prevent the
integration of course lessons in their personal and, ultimately, professional
lives. To address this critical need for linkage and hands-on experience, three
computer-assisted instructional (CAI) programs with a history of reliability and
classroom use, Data Happy! (Carter, 1995), Survey Research: A Computer-Assisted
Introduction (Bainbridge, 1989) and SPSS/PC+ Studentware (Norusis, 1991), will
be integrated within Introduction to Culture and Society, Research Methods and
Design, and Evaluating Human Service organizations micro-computer classroom
labs, based on funds made available through NSF's ILI-IP Award and Cedar Crest
College. The role that each CAI program plays in course labs is threefold.
First, to enhance the students' understanding of key theoretical concepts and
their importance in sociology by examining how these concepts have been used in
sociological research. Second, to provide exercises on elementary or advanced
data analysis and its connection to the problem of establishing causality in
order to facilitate a working knowledge and critique of sociological frameworks.
Finally, to challenge students to continue to use real data and explore, test,
and apply the insights of sociology to social conditions and circumstances in
their communities.