* 9551615
* Integration of Laboratory Exercises in Development and      Neurobiology Courses Using the Xenopus Oocyte Expression    System
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Carole Browne, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/1997
* USD 44,000.00

Carole L. Browne DUE 9551615 Wake Forest University FY1995 $ 44,000 Winston-
Salem, NC 27109 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Life Sciences Title: Development
and Neurobiology Courses integrated Using the Xenopus Oocyte Expression System
Portions of the Development and Neurobiology courses are being integrated with
collaborative laboratory exercises. The laboratory exercises involve the use of
the Xenopus oocyte expression system to study the function of specific membrane
receptors and voltage-activated channels. Poly(A)+mRNA for brain proteins are
injected into Xenopus oocytes, and the oocytes are assayed for expression of
brain proteins. Patch clamping is used to determine whether the expressed
proteins are functional in the oocyte system. The proposed project is innovative
in its interdisciplinary and collaborative approach to undergraduate teaching,
and in its use of highly sophisticated molecular biological and biophysical
techniques in the undergraduate teaching laboratory. Students learn first hand
how these techniques have been used to achieve a new level of understanding of
both development and neurobiology. The laboratories are investigative, in that
students must design experiments based on their knowledge of receptors and
channels and then carry out those experiments using the oocyte expression
system.