* 9551345
* Equipping a New Oceanographic Vessel for Students at Inland Universities
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Julie Ambler, Marine Science Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1998
* USD 24,095.00

A complete oceanographic Conductivity-Temperature-Depth (CTD) instrument
package, a winged current meter, and two computers equip a new vessel at the
consortium. With this new oceanographic vessel, the instruments are used for
undergraduate courses in oceanography during summer sessions and weekend field
trips. The basic unit in the new instrument package is a CTD logger, which is
battery powered and records data in solid-state memory. The CTD measurements
provide depth profiles to identify density differences between the surface
photic layer and bottom layer in local coastal waters. Biological and chemical
variables are measured simultaneously by adding sensors to the CTD for dissolved
oxygen, turbidity (by optical backscattering), photosynthetically active light
(PAR), and chlorophyll biomass (by in vivo fluorescence). To measure tidal water
exchange through Chincoteague Inlet and thus determine fluxes of chlorophyll,
nutrients, and zooplankton biomass, the consortium uses a Niskin winged current
meter. One laptop computer initializes the CTD instrument package and provides
data transfer at sea, and one desktop computer interfaces winged current meter
and data analysis. With these instruments, students learn state-of-the-art
research techniques to prepare them for graduate school or employment as
research technicians. This project enhances the marine science program at the
consortium, through which students at inland institutions are able to gain first
hand field experiences in oceanography.