* 9551133
* Undergraduate Laboratory and Field Experiences in           Environmental Geochemistry and Hydrogeology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* David Long, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 12/31/1997
* USD 36,214.00

There is a need to train undergraduates in environmental global-change issues
that range from the microscale (e.g., pollutants in groundwater) to the
macroscale (e.g., CO2 and global climate change) within the context of natural
Earth processes. At the heart of this training is laboratory experiences,
particularly those that involve field work. This project provides funds to
develop and upgrade laboratories for two fundamental courses in the
Environmental Geosciences Program: Environmental Geochemistry and Hydrogeology.
Environmental Geochemistry addresses the origin, occurrence, distribution, and
flow of chemicals in the water cycle. This is a relatively new course offering
at colleges and universities and one for which there are few textbooks or
laboratory exercises. With these funds, one of the first series of laboratory
exercises in this discipline is being developed. Hydrogeology addresses the
origin, occurrence, distribution, and flow of water. This laboratory is being
upgraded. A unique and exciting feature of this project is that these two
laboratory courses are highly integrated. Integration is facilitated through the
study around a common theme -- the hydrologic, chemical, and physical dynamics
of a local watershed. These laboratories give the student hands-on experience in
data collection, analysis, and interpretation. Students use equipment and
technologies in field and laboratory settings that will be useful to them in
graduate study or in industry. After these labs have been offered for a few
semesters, students can study temporal changes in the watershed by comparing
their results to those from previous years.