* 9551564
* A Multidisciplinary Environmental Undergraduate Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Kenneth Hubbard, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 06/30/1997
* USD 44,190.00

George E. Meyer Due 9551564 University of Nebraska-Lincoln FY1995 $44.190
Lincoln, NE 68583 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Interdisciplinary Title: A
Multidisciplinary Environmental Undergraduate Laboratory The Departments of
Biological Systems Engineering, Civil Engineering, and Agricultural Meteorology
at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln will equip a multidisciplinary
Environmental Undergraduate Laboratory (EUL). The EUL will facilitate curricular
change to address new teaching emphases for these departments. Our goal is to
establish a learning environment that allows students to explore uses of state-
of-the-art equipment to solve environmental problems. The five computer
workstations and data acquisition systems, along with sensors to monitor
environmental variables, including water quality, will encourage cooperative
learning, problem-solving among small teams of students, and provide realistic
experiences to prepare students for careers in research and industry. Laboratory
sessions for four courses (two in BioSysE, one in AgMet, and one offered jointly
in CivilE and BioSysE) will undergo significant revision. These revisions will
emphasize use of laboratory exercises to build on mathematical descriptions of
physical and chemical relationships introduced in lecture sessions and
facilitate the understanding of thermodynamic and energy state relationships for
environmental systems. The new exercises will permit "hands-on" experimentation
using modern equipment including automated monitoring using data acquisition
systems; sensor types, applications, design, testing and calibration; computer
methods for data analysis; and error analyses for these systems. The EUL will
also be used for exercises or demonstrations to enhance at least thirteen other
undergraduate courses from three other disciplines. Laboratory manual s for the
revised courses will be developed. Interactive televised sessions, using
equipment from the EUL, will be presented via AG*SAT, a national agricultural
television network.