* 9551883
* Computer-Assisted Data Acquisition in  Introductory Physics Laboratories at the University of Kansas and Haskell Indian Nations University
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Francis Prosser, University of Kansas Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/1997
* USD 49,856.00

Alice L. Bean DUE 9551883 U of Kansas Main Campus FY1995 $ 49,856 Lawrence, KS
66045 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Physics Title: Computer-Assisted Data
Acquisition in Introductory Physics Laboratories at the University of Kansas and
Haskell Indian Nations University The University of Kansas Department of Physics
and Astronomy and the Haskell Indian Nations University will collaborate on the
development of several computer-aided experiments for their introductory physics
laboratories. These experiments will bolster the instruction of concepts in
mechanics, electrostatics, and thermodynamics by allowing students to relate
classroom formalism directly to laboratory observations. In developing the
experiments, which will be done by students enrolled in an advanced design
laboratory at the University of Kansas, an emphasis will be placed on the
pedagogy offered by the measurements. The unique situation, which has the
nation's foremost Native American college located next to a major research
university, will be utilized by initially introducing the experiments that are
developed at Kansas in the Haskell setting, where the class sizes are small and
individualized instruction is possible. After the experimental procedures are
optimized at Haskell, the experiments will then be incorporated into the Kansas
sequence. In addition to strengthening the courses at both institutions, this
partnership should help Haskell students who wish to transfer to other
institutions through a better coordination of their syllabus with that at
Kansas. At present, Haskell is unable to offer a baccalaureate degree in the
sciences. Greater cultural diversity in the sciences will be achieved at Kansas
by attracting interested students from the Haskell program.