* 9551562
* The Mathematics Center Computer Classroom Development       Project at Queensborough Community College
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Clara Wajngurt, CUNY Queensborough Community College
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/1998
* USD 35,000.00

Sylvia Svitak DUE 9551562 CUNY Queensboro Cmty Col FY1995 $ 35,000 New York, NY
11364 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Mathematics Title: The Mathematics Center
Computer Classroom Development Project at Queensborough Community College This
project will facilitate and extend the implementation of mathematics curriculum
reform. The immediate goals are to provide the technological support required by
our calculus curriculum reforms and to make available computer assisted
instruction (CAI) as one of the alternative modes of instruction for our
remedial programs. Pilot projects in calculus using such computer algebra
systems as Derive and Converge have been and are being conducted by the faculty.
The expected outcome of this research will be the addition of a computer
laboratory component to all of the pre-calculus and calculus courses. Students
in the pilot projects have been actively exploring mathematical concepts
analytically, graphically and numerically through computer assignments and
projects developed by our instructors. To a greater degree than ever before,
they have been able to delve sooner and more deeply into the how and why of
mathematical theory. Our aim is to extend the benefits of such instruction to
all our students. The goals of our reforms will be accomplished through the
establishment of a computer classroom as part of the ongoing development of our
Mathematics Learning Center. The classroom will have sufficient hardware and
software to extend the innovative modes of instruction. from our pilot projects
to all our calculus courses and eventually to all our other course sequences.