* 9551254
* Enhancement of the Community College Organic Chemistry      Curriculum with FT-IR
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Raymond Fong, City College of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 9,361.00

The goal of this project is to enhance the chemistry curriculum by incorporating
the theory and practice of FT-IR analysis in organic chemistry courses. Out-
dated dispersive IR spectrophotometers are lacking in the capabilities necessary
to perform the desired experiments and IR techniques. Incorporating an FT-IR
instrument will enhance the organic chemistry curriculum by reinforcing lecture
topics, upgrading existing experiments, and introducing new experiments. The FT-
IR is the MIDAC Prospect. This state-of-the-art IR not only allows rapid
acquisition of spectra and improvements in spectra quality, but also provides
undergraduate students with the opportunity to gain hands-on experience in the
operations of this instrument which is widely used in universities and industry.
Lectures include more discussion of FT-IR methods and their applications.
Through this project, lecture topics are reinforced by studying mechanistic
details of reactions, such as kinetics and intermediate formation. Additionally,
students will gain experience in sample preparation, analyzing spectra,
fundamental operations of the instrument, and analysis techniques such as
spectral subtraction. The use of Fourier transform instruments makes this
possible. The FT-IR instrument makes significant contributions to the chemistry
education and helps bring computer-controlled instrumentation to undergraduate
students.