* 9551669
* Electric Vehicle Laboratory (EV Lab)
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Peter Voltz, Polytechnic University of New York
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 06/30/1998
* USD 14,686.00

This project relates to the development of an undergraduate electric vehicle
(EV) laboratory program. One of the key features of this particular program is
the organization of students and industry and faculty advisors in an industrial
type matrix organizational structure, called the Technology Team. This structure
simulates the realities of a functioning company environment within the
university. Engineering students and their advisors hold positions on the
Technology Team. The Team decides on projects to pursue, specific to the
development of electric vehicle technology, and then budgets, plans, schedules,
designs, and manufactures the finished EV product, analogous to real-world
corporate operations. The project manager positions are filled by seniors who
apply their work towards senior project credits and cooperate with their
associated undergraduate team members within the organization to complete their
projects. Junior and sophomore students learn as they work with the seniors,
industry advisors, and faculty members, so that by the time they reach their
senior year they will be ready to take a leading role and earn their own senior
project credits. This EV program consists of an ongoing and evolving set of
student projects. As the program develops, new students utilize knowledge gained
from previous projects as they move up within the structure, to continually
build a mature and evolving knowledge base in EV technology.