* 9551820
* A Laboratory Technique to Demonstrate the Significance of   Stress History on the Engineering Properties of Clay Soils
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1997
* Timothy Tyler, TRINE UNIVERSITY, INC
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 04/30/1997
* USD 12,100.00

Civil engineers perform analyses and make design recommendations for many types
of structure including buildings, bridges, dams, highways, water treatment, and
waste disposal facilities. A significant aspect of analysis and design is the
proper understanding and evaluation of the stress history of the soils upon
which these structures will be built. Current classroom teaching methods do not
fully demonstrate how different stress histories affect the engineering
properties of clay soils. This project implements a laboratory method that
physically demonstrates the significance of the stress history of clay soils to
undergraduate civil engineering students. A clay soil is mixed with enough water
to produce a slurry. This material is then consolidated in four separate batch
consolidometers to four different consolidation pressures. Thus, four quality
samples are produced from the same slurry having the same classification and
mineralogy but having different stress histories. The samples are then removed
from the batch consolidometers and tested in standard l-D consolidation,
unconfined compression, and triaxial test equipment to evaluate the
consolidation and shear strength parameters. The data from these tests, along
with the analyses of problems using these test results, demonstrate the
significance of stress history on the engineering properties and performance of
the clay soil.