* 9551776
* Computer-Aided Data Acquisition and Control for Photonics   Education
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Randy Linebarger, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 07/31/1997
* USD 27,435.00

Randy S. Linebarger DUE 9551776 Oregon Inst of Technology FY1995 $ 27,435
Klamath Falls, OR 976018801 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Engineering Title:
Computer-Aided Data Acquisition and Control for Photonics Education Within the
last decade there has been a significant increase in the role of computers in
the photonics laboratory. The use of computers to perform data acquisition and
control of laboratory optical instrumentation, optical image processing,
modeling, simulations, numerical analysis and presentation capability, is now
standard procedure within the photonics industry. The Laser Optical Engineering
Technology (LOET) program has been utilizing computers to accomplish a very
small subset of the above mentioned tasks in a number of LOET laboratory classes
and with senior projects with only three (3) Macintosh computers for laboratory
use by the entire cadre of LOET students. Important experiments that are
absolutely essential to a well-rounded optics education simply cannot be
performed due to the lack of sufficient computers, data acquisition hardware,
and software. Currently, no capability exists to do any optical image
processing. The objective of this grant request is to acquire additional
computers, CCD cameras, and data acquisition hardware and software that will
allow the LOET program to expand its capability to run meaningful lab
experiments which routinely use such equipment. In addition, this grant would
also allow the LOET students to be exposed to experiments and techniques in
optical image processing, an important topic in modem optical engineering. The
equipment requested by this grant would be configured within the existing LOET
laboratory computer network in such a manner as to be portable from one LOET
laboratory to the next. This hardware/software would be utilized in many of the
existing LOET laboratory courses, solely for the purposes of undergraduate
education in photonics. The results obtained from student laboratory experiments
using the above mentioned equipment will be disseminated at both national and
regional ASEE and SPIE conferences, as well as in the ASEE Journal of
Engineering Technology.