* 9551208
* An Electronic Lab Book for an Introductory Programming      Course
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Bill Swafford, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 06/30/1997
* USD 61,215.00

In Fall 1994 changes were made to ACS 168 Structured Problem Solving Using the
Computer. These changes included a move from a mainframe to a personal computer
environment, a change in language to C, and the addition of a 2-hour weekly lab.
These changes have provided students with the opportunity to use more
sophisticated software development tools, fostered more interaction with
students, and enabled the provision of innovative experiences that are
interactive, use graphical user interfaces, use multimedia presentations, and
are closer to the student's previous experiences. Laboratory modules to support
the lab sessions, about half of which have multimedia components, were also
developed and implemented. The prototype modules use only the graphics
capabilities of the authoring tool (Multimedia Toolbook). The principal
investigators seek support to extend the modules to include audio, scanned
images, and video clips. This grant is funding the development and use of an
electronic CD-ROM lab book for ACS 168. There are two versions of the lab book:
(1) the instructor's version, containing lab modules complete with runtime
versions of the multimedia components, the source code for labs, the multimedia
help facility, answers to lab activities, the instructor's lab manual, and the
automated grading system, and (2) the student version, containing lab modules
complete with runtime versions of the multimedia components, the source code for
labs, the multimedia help facility, and ancillary documents.