* 9551252
* Introduction of Modern Laser Techniques into the            Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Clifford Creswell, Hamline University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 05/31/1997
* USD 18,593.00

Clifford J. Creswell DUE 9551252 Hamline University FY1995 $18,593 Saint Paul,
MN 55104 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Chemistry Title: Introduction of Modern
Laser Techniques into the Undergraduate Chemistry Curriculum The equipment
purchase will allow us to introduce laser technologies into our chemistry
curriculum. Hamline University will acquire lasers, light detecting components,
a monochromator, signal processing equipment, and data acquisition equipment.
Laboratory experiments will be introduced for the study of laser-induced
fluorescence spectroscopy using single photon absorption and two photon
absorption. Experiments involving excited states of Ru(II) coordination
complexes will be introduced to demonstrate methods for handling and evaluating
kinetic events in the nano to millisecond time range. All experiments have an
open-ended quality to them which allows students to explore other aspects of
laser spectroscopy. Students in our general chemistry course will also be
exposed to this technology through demonstrations/seminars presented by their
upper-division peers. These seminars will enable a safe interesting preview of
some exciting concepts in chemistry. The requested equipment will also be used
in undergraduate research projects such as in a comparison of the electron
transfer ability of Os(II) complexes to that of the analogous Ru(II) complexes.