* 9551337
* Discovering Mathematics with In-Class Computers
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/1995,03/31/1997
* Robert Biagini-Komas, College of San Mateo
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 03/31/1997
* USD 40,000.00

This project uses the computer as a learning tool during in-class instruction on
a continuous basis, beginning with the critical "gateway" courses Intermediate
Algebra, Statistics, Trigonometry and Calculus/Analytic Geometry. Students will
use computer software to explore concepts as they occur during instruction, to
perform arduous computation, and to produce graphs and numerical tables quickly.
They collaborate on real world problems and create written and graphical
presentations for understanding mathematics. Project students construct
mathematical meaning, learn to monitor and control their own learning, have the
benefits of social interactions, and move back and forth between symbolic,
graphical and numerical representations of mathematical problems and concepts. A
dedicated technological mathematics classroom will be created during the summer
of 1995. It will be equipped with 20 powerful networked student workstations
running sophisticated software; an instructor's workstation; a capable
fileserver; an overhead projector and LCD display; and Mathematica, Maple,
Geometer's Sketchpad, and other useful math software. Team members will evaluate
the project by analyzing student performance data, surveying student attitudes,
and studying further math course-taking by these students. They will disseminate
their findings through papers, presentations at conferences, and hands-on
workshops in the laboratory for high school and community college colleagues in
math and other scientific and technical disciplines.