* 9551166
* Acquisition of Instrumentation to Enhance Genetic and       Molecular Biology Laboratories and Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Michael Campbell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Saundra H. Oyewole
* 06/30/1997
* USD 22,453.00

During the past decade, biology has been revolutionized by new molecular
procedures. This revolution in how biological systems are studied also requires
changes in how the biological sciences are taught. The development of molecular
techniques has been so widespread that the training of future scientists must
include the principles, methods, and applications of these procedures. In order
to provide biology students with the best and most current experience possible,
the faculty are in the process of modifying the curriculum to increase student
exposure to molecular biology. This project funds the purchase of equipment
packages to expand the molecular topics addressed in sophomore and advanced-
level biology practicums and undergraduate research. The equipment provides a
realistic exposure to the techniques of modern molecular biology. This technique
minimizes the use of prepackaged kits that serve to facilitate an understanding
of molecular biological concepts but are limited in experimental scope and do
little to increase student understanding of DNA technology. The university can
now expand the current repertoire of molecular techniques to include cloning,
sequencing, and use of molecular markers in population analysis. In addition to
its use in structured laboratory exercises, this equipment can be used to
provide students conducting independent research with a strong background in DNA
analysis. The intent is to enhance the university's already strong undergraduate
program by instituting a program including molecular and population genetics.