* 9551711
* Software and Thinkware:  Generating Analytical Skills in    Biology Laboratories Through Computer-Assisted Data         Acquisition and Small Group Interactions
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Beth Leuck, Centenary College of Louisiana
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1997
* USD 19,446.00

Laboratories, where students work in small groups, are ideally suited to
enhancing students' analytical skills. Therefore, this project (1) improves the
quality of data gathered by students in physiology and animal behavior
laboratories, (2) increases computer competency, and (3) improves critical
thinking skills by placing students into small discussion groups to decide
experimental protocol for each laboratory exercise. The majority of students
affected by this project are majors in biology and applied science, an
interdisciplinary program that prepares students for graduate programs in allied
health fields. This project funds the purchase of eight notebook computers
together with inkjet printers and appropriate software so that students can
collect and analyze data on physiological phenomena such as skin temperature,
lung volumes, muscle contraction, heart rate/pulse, and small animal metabolism.
In one senior-level class, Animal Physiology, the computers and printers can be
checked out to the students for the semester to use in individually designed
research projects. In animal behavior laboratories, the portability of the
notebook computers facilitates data collection in the field. Because notebook
computers are so easily transferred among laboratory rooms, it is expected that
up to 200 students in 35 laboratories in 7 different courses may benefit from
the equipment.