* 9551283
* An Interdisciplinary Undergraduate Laboratory for the Designand Manufacture of Surface Mount Printed Circuit Assemblies
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Aydin Ungan, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 07/31/1998
* USD 44,705.00

This project is developing a state-of-the-art, interdisciplinary undergraduate
laboratory component for an existing three-credit course, "Design and
Manufacture of Printed Circuit Assemblies." Previously, student hands-on
experiences had been limited to simulations with APTOS software, without a more
meaningful laboratory experience needed for students to be better prepared for
careers in this area. The course, with its new lab component, is intended for
seniors in electrical engineering and mechanical engineering, and design
projects are formulated so that students are able to focus on aspects that are
commensurate with their major. Students fabricate their designs immediately at
the Electronic Manufacturing Productivity Facility and test and evaluate their
products in the new laboratory. Major equipment purchased for this laboratory
includes six Sun SPARCstations, a networkable PADS-PERFORM CAD system for UNIX-
based workstations, and a color plotter. This equipment is used for the layout
design and analysis of surface mount printed circuit assemblies. Additional
equipment includes two function generators, two digital storage oscilloscopes,
and two logic analyzers used for testing the final products. This project is
significant because it brings the theoretical study, laboratory design, and real
product manufacturing of surface-mount printed circuit assemblies as a whole to
undergraduate education. In addition, it provides a model for the cooperation of
educational institutions and manufacturing companies to provide state-of-the-art
technical training for senior students, and emphasizes interdisciplinary group
work for students from different disciplines.