* 9551864
* Active Learning: Visualizing: Astronomy, Calculus, Computer Science, Earth Science, and Organic Chemistry with          Multimedia Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1998
* Geoffrey Jones, El Camino College
* Standard Grant
* Iraj Nejad
* 09/30/1998
* USD 80,000.00

Geoffrey Jones DUE 9551864 El Camino College FY1995 $80,000 Torrance, CA
905060001 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Interdisciplinary Title: Active
Learning: Visualizing: Astronomy, Calculus, Computer Science, Earth Science, and
Organic Chemistry with Multimedia Technology El Camino College, a community
college of 23,000 students, is encountering less-prepared incoming students,
while course work in mathematics and science becomes even more complex. The
college seeks new methods, curriculum, and teaching strategies to retain and
prepare students for transfer to four-year institutions. The approach the
Departments of Astronomy, Chemistry, Mathematics, Earth and Computer Sciences in
this project is to provide a greater amount of active learning through the use
of "hands on" computer simulations of projects that previously were lecture only
topics. The subject matter chosen for active learning are abstract topics and
three dimensional presentations that require some "visualization". Greater
"visualization" is now possible through the use of computers using complex
graphical, animation, and simulation programs that allow for the examination and
presentation of math and science topics in ways that never before existed. By
introducing "visualization" in a variety of courses and assignments, the faculty
believe that greater understanding, appreciation, and retention of course
material will occur. Each of the five departments have described, and in some
cases pilot tested, projects and subject matter for "visualization". The
departments will share a single multi-disciplinary, multimedia computer
laboratory with both Macintosh and IBM capability. The goal is to increase the
number of students completing their bachelor degrees within the next five years.
Since two thirds of all El Camino students are minority students, a greater
transfer and graduation rate of El Camino students will add to the pool of
minority mathematicians and scientists. Evaluation of retention and comparison
of test score data will be examined. Significant results will be published in
professional journals as well as presentations to regional professional
organizations.