* 9551439
* Multi-Media Software Design Studio
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1998
* Susan Wiedenbeck, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 05/31/1998
* USD 60,000.00

The proliferation of computing systems in nontechnical domains has created a
critical need for understanding principles of software system design that
incorporate human factors. The increasing demand for good software designers,
coupled with the lack of formalized knowledge about what constitutes good
software design principles, demands apprenticeship-like training methods in
which students engage in active learning by designing systems and receiving
feedback on those designs. The Computer Science and Engineering Department has
offered courses in Human-Computer Interaction, Software Engineering, and a
Senior Project program that prepare students for the growing demand for software
designers with knowledge of human factors. This grant is funding an innovative
laboratory program to establish a Multimedia Software Design Studio in which
students learn by actively designing and observing the designs of others. The
studio uses multimedia technology to demonstrate design principles. The
laboratory program gives students the opportunity to design and evaluate their
own work, as well as the work of others. In order to provide a quality Software
Design Studio that supports active learning through design projects and
multimedia technology, the university is purchasing 14 computer systems with
multimedia capabilities and supporting software and hardware. Plans have been
made to disseminate this work to the computer science community.