* 9551661
* Mathematica Computer Laboratory Instruction in Calculus and Applied Mathematics
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Anita Salem, Rockhurst University
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 07/31/1997
* USD 70,000.00

The university is creating two Mathematica Laboratories: a Calculus Laboratory
to support its continued involvement in testing materials for the Duke
University/Bowdoin College Project CALC program and an Applied Mathematics
Laboratory to expand the use of laboratory materials to mathematics majors. The
goals of the project are as follows: (1) Construction of an optimum
hardware/software teaching environment for a Mathematica Calculus Lab where
materials can be tested and modified and where supplemental teaching materials
can be developed. (2) Construction of an optimum independent study, Mathematica
Applied Mathematics Lab for use by mathematics majors, in which new materials
can be tested. This lab is also used by science and mathematics students already
trained in the use of Mathematica. (3) Dissemination of information, regarding
issues of teaching and learning mathematics in a laboratory environment, to
colleagues at the collegiate and pre-collegiate level. (4) Strengthening
partnerships with two area high schools (one that enrolls 90 percent minority
students and one all-women institution) to encourage the development and
implementation of mathematics reform curricula at the pre-collegiate level.
Evaluation will occur by continuing Student Attitude Surveys and by the
university participating in the Duke University evaluation process: "A
Comparison of Reformed and Traditional Calculus." Dissemination plans, beyond
those associated with the university's role as a test-site for Project CALC,
include summer workshops, presentations, and publications.