* 9552950
* Making Sense of Complex Phenomena Through Building          Computational Models.
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Uri Wilensky, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1996
* USD 49,371.00

9552950 Wilensky This proposal is to develop two plans: research and education
plans geared to providing Connected Mathematics experiences for students from
middle school through graduate school. The content area of the research plan is
learning about "complexity". Complexity is the study of systems in which
phenomena or global behaviors arise from the interactions of simpler parts. Many
everyday phenomena exhibit complex behavior: the growth of a snowflake crystal,
the perimeter pattern of a maple leaf, the advent of a summer squall, the
dynamics of the Dow Jones or of a fourth grade classroom. These are all systems
which can be modeled as composed of many distributed but interacting parts. They
all exhibit non-linear or emergent qualities which place them well beyond the
scope of current K-12 mathematics curricula. The research goals of this plan are
1) To understand how learners make sense of complex phenomena; and 2) To design
tools and activities that foster the building of intuitive conceptions of
complexity. The research hypothesis is that: learners, through building their
own computational models using modeling environments, can build intuitions about
complexity and make sense of complex phenomena. Even learners not usually
considered good at mathematics and science can build models that demonstrate a
qualitatively greater level of mathematical achievement than is usually found in
mathematics classrooms. In contrast to the prevailing view, probability and
statistics is an example of a complex domain in which learners can develop
intuitions. The target population for this research is primarily high school
students, though some research will be conducted with younger and older students
and pre-service teachers as well. Several content domains will be used as the
source of phenomena to be modeled in the proposed research. A particular focus
will be using probability and statistics as tools to understand complex
phenomena, and in so doing Building intuitive conceptions of both the
probabilistic tools and the complex phenomena. ***