* 9552344
* A Signal Integrity Laboratory for Instruction in High Speed Digital VLSI and Electromagnetics
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Arthur Uhlir, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 08/31/1997
* USD 31,690.00

This laboratory uses the concept of Signal Integrity to augment the curricula in
electromagnetics and high-speed digital design (both at the VLSI and board
levels) for junior and senior level students in computer and electrical
engineering. The proliferation of high-speed (&gt; 50 MHz) digital designs
requires that computer engineering students develop a sophisticated
understanding of the electromagnetic effects of signal propagation in various
media. The experiments performed in this lab describe the use of time-domain
reflectometry (TDR) and time-domain transmission (TDT), in conjunction with
simulation and analysis, for identifying, measuring and solving signal integrity
problems. The experiments serve both to illustrate the course material in
electromagnetics and to educate the students as to its usefulness. This
applications-oriented laboratory also serves to increase interest in the
electromagnetics curriculum, particularly amongst computer engineering students.
Mixed-signal (analog/digital) circuits have come into their own for wireless
networks and can be expected in avionics and intelligent highway applications,
as well both personal and commercial navigation. A funded program for retraining
in the design of mixed-signal integrated circuits may draw upon this laboratory
as a remedial resource, and will serve as an object lesson to current
undergraduates about the broad relevance of electromagnetics fundamentals.
Educational objectives include the concept of wave transmission and reflection,
impedance matching in digital/mixed signal systems, understanding the problems,
possibilities, and techniques of high-speed measurements, and an introduction to
fast digital oscillography. The laboratory will also serve as a resource for
generating and evaluating realistic design exercises in high-speed circuit
fabrication.