* 9552492
* A Partnership for Curriculum Integration of Technology
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* William Spitzer, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven L. Funk
* 09/30/1996
* USD 599,633.00

9552492 Feldman The recent national reports establishing Standards in
mathematics and science education. Current technology hold the promise of
helping us to achieve this long-sought goal, which has eluded earlier
generations of school reformers. Students and teachers now can have access to
tools that communicate, work with data, model, visualize data, and retrieve
information; to multimedia composition tools that enable them to express
themselves creatively; and to intelligent tutors and content-focused software
that assist them in efficiently mastering certain skills and information.
Telecommunications networks have the potential to break down the traditional
classroom limits and provide access to peers, experts, and information locally
and globally. The potential for the technology to impact on the process of
teaching and learning is immense, and the DoDDS proposal offers a well-designed
situation to demonstrate this potential. The barriers to effective
implementation of technology will be systemically addressed; access, technical
support, and institutional commitment are part of the environment that DoDDS and
the NSF are establishing. TERC proposes to address the issues of technology
selection and professional development by mobilizing a partnership of TERC and
national experts-leaders who have successfully introduced technology in schools
similar to the DoDD schools-with DoDDS district staff and school staff. We will
address technology selection through tapping the experience of this partnership
to select the most appropriate technologies and specific applications. We will
address professional development by designing and implementing a program that
focuses on teachers learning new models to organize teaching and learning using
technology. The goal of the project is to implement a range of technologies and
pedagogies towards the goal of high student achievement in mathematics and
science. To reach this goal ove r the three years, we will: * Mobilize a
partnership of TERC, national experts and leaders in the field, and DoDDS *
Develop effective Implementation Teams at each school * Select technology to
support inquiry-based learning * Create and implement a plan of professional
development for each school, coordinated across schools * Measure and monitor
progress towards the goal of using technology to improve mathematics and science
education The outcome of our work will be innovative models for excellence in
mathematics and science education and effective strategies for the use of
technology to implement these models. The example of the three Demonstration
schools in developing and demonstrating these models will give us the research
basis to understand better the role of technology in school reform, and options
for DoDDS in scaling these changes to the full DoDDS system. ***