* 9552586
* PPD/SP-Conference:  Invitational Conference on Learning     Disabilities and the Teaching of Science and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Virginia Stern, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Standard Grant
* None
* 10/31/1996
* USD 73,298.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) will convene a
conference to set an agenda for research and future activities for teaching
science and mathematics to K-12 students with learning disabilities (LD).
Conference participants will be invited from three groups of experts: teachers
who have successfully taught science and mathematics to precollege and post-
secondary students with LD; neuroscientists; and cognitive scientists.
Neuroscientists will explain the physical workings of the human brain in the
context of learning and conscious knowing, how the brain bypasses dysfunctional
pathways, and new technologies that help us understand the brain. Cognitive
scientists will explain how people generally learn and how people with LD learn
differently. Teachers will discuss the tests that measure various learning
limitations and the successful strategies they use in teaching science and
mathematics to K-12 students with those limitations. Participants will be
directed to develop the agenda for the future. The primary goals of the
conference are: 1) identification of barriers that prevent K-12 students with
learning disabilities from fully participating in science, mathematics,
engineering and technology (SMET) educational opportunities; 2) the development
of an agenda for research and future activities to remove the barriers; 3) the
dissemination of the collective expertise of conference participants to
interested staff at NSF and AAAS, to each other, and to other leaders in the LD
education community. Secondary goals include: 1) a contribution to efforts to
assure equal access to science and mathematics learning for students with
learning disabilities by fostering a cross-disciplinary approach to the
underlying problems; 2) creation of a core group of experts to address the
educational needs of students with LD over a long period of time in the future.