* 9552222
* Enhancement of a Research-Based Curriculum Through          Microscopy and Imaging
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Karl Wirth, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1997
* USD 19,364.00

Recent progress toward a research-based curriculum in geology emphasizes the use
of optical microscopy and the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with
matter in the study of geological problems. This project enhances these
curricular changes with the implementation of a research-grade petrographic
microscope that includes 35-mm photography and video capabilities. Improvements
resulting from this project include enhanced demonstration capabilities
throughout the course curriculum; greater comprehension of scientific methods
and principles by non-science-majors and potential science majors in
introductory courses; the exposure of undergraduate majors to modern
petrographic techniques that previously were not possible; and the enhancement
of independent research projects. The microscope and video/photographic system
makes the study of rocks and minerals more appealing to non-science-majors and
facilitates the application of rock and mineral studies as a means to
understanding the composition and evolution of the Earth, environmental
problems, and the origin and evolution of life in introductory courses. Use of
the imaging capabilities to demonstrate optical techniques to students in
Mineralogy enhances the comprehension of optics theory and techniques resulting
in increased student use of optical methods as investigative tools later in the
course and in other upper-level courses. The microscope/imaging system is also
being used to involve students in interactive laboratory projects in courses in
mineralogy, petrology, structural geology, economic geology, sedimentology, and
paleontology. Finally, the research-grade petrographic microscope with modern
imaging capabilities enhances the quality of undergraduate research
publications, presentations, and reports resulting from independent projects,
honors projects, and senior capstone projects that are now required for
graduation.