* 9552132
* GC-MS in Undergraduate Organic and Analytical Teaching      Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Margaret Merritt, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 05/31/1997
* USD 39,242.00

Creativity in the design of laboratory experiments requires access to
appropriate techniques for the analysis of the results. When students are given
responsibility for the design of experiments to explain phenomena, the need for
advanced instrumentation is even greater. This project incorporates a GC-MS into
the organic teaching laboratories. This instrument enhances the instrumental
analytical capabilities for use in the Analytical Chemistry courses. A GC/MS,
and a GC with a capillary column and an FID detector for method development,
allows Organic Chemistry students greater creativity in their experimental
design as they investigate competitive reactions and equilibrium environments.
Analytical Chemistry students can gain a strong working knowledge of this
essential instrumentation. The instrumentation can also be used for
undergraduate student research. This project serves to enhance the education of
women scientists and encourage them to pursue further scientific studies. If
student participation is encouraged in the design of their experiments, a
greater intellectual involvement and a greater willingness to adopt experimental
methodologies to solve problems are promoted. The enthusiasm and intellectual
growth engendered by these processes results in the production of better
students and positively influences their decisions to pursue graduate study and
scientific careers.