* 9552141
* A Modeling and Simulation Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* John Pierce, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 08/31/1997
* USD 60,409.00

A modeling and simulation laboratory that will contain a network of 25 Pentium
90MHz microcomputers equipped with C++, MATLAB and the simulation language
SIMSCRIPT is being established. A computer-based approach to teaching
mathematical modeling is being developed with special emphasis on computer
simulation using a simulation language. The laboratory and new teaching approach
revitalizes the applied mathematics program. It represents a departmental effort
to improve the education of ethnically diverse students and, in the process,
makes them better prepared for employment. A new introductory course is being
developed that is designed to help students become comfortable with the use of
personal computers to solve quantitative problems and discover principles and
concepts via experimentation. Students use interactive software, including
MATLAB, as well as write programs of their own. The course prepares students for
the revised 2-course sequence in modeling. The first of these courses focuses on
deterministic models. Models of systems, particularly ones that are difficult
mathematically, are introduced in class, and software implementing the models is
ppovided. Students will then use the computer to draw conclusions about the
model and the system they are studying. The second course in the modeling
sequence introduces computer simulation of stochastic systems and covers
techniques of effective simulation modeling. It also covers the implementation
of these models on personal computers using the industry-standard simulation
language SIMSCRIPT. All three of these classes are held in the laboratory.
Instructors demonstrate the software and models by broadcasting computations to
workstations. They are also able to view work in progress at any of the
computers in the network. A computer is available for each student. Students
will experiment with models, explore their ramifications, contrast results with
the system they are studying, and modify models as required. They will also be
able to easily generate professional quality reports and present their results.
In the process, students will gain experience that will serve them well in their
future careers. It is expected that several other courses, particularly those in
numerical analysis and statistics, will be taught in the laboratory with similar
beneficial results.