* 9552312
* Strengthening the CS/IS Curriculum with a Client/Server Lab
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* David Haglin, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Theodore J. Sjoerdsma
* 08/31/1997
* USD 86,489.00

The single largest obstacle to the development of client/server networks and
applications is the lack of qualified personnel. This project constructs a
client/server laboratory for the use of computer science and information science
students. The project has two major objectives. The first objective is to ensure
that each student has a firm grasp of the fundamentals of client/server
technology and associated software development. The second objective is to give
each student a substantial amount of hands-on experience working with a
client/server network. Courses in four interrelated subject areas--networking,
databases, software engineering, and client/server applications--are being
redesigned. Each course provides additional coverage of client/server concepts,
along with laboratory exercises and experiments to reinforce these concepts.
Networking courses emphasize design, construction, and testing of client/server
networks. Database, software engineering, and client/server applications courses
stress the software side of heterogeneous client/server development and its
associated tools. The project is enriching the education of many undergraduate
students with client/server experience and instruction. These students can then
provide technological leadership to industry.