* 9552987
* Career Access/Spec. Proj.: Strengthening Underrepresented   Minority Mathematics Achievement Through a Consortium of    Middle School and High School Intervention Programs (SUMMAC)
* EDU,ESR
* 05/01/1996,05/31/2000
* William Anthony Hawkins, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/2000
* USD 159,192.00

HRD-9552987 Hawkins, William The Mathematical Association of America, through
its Strengthening Underrepresented Minority Mathematics Achievement (SUMMA)
Program, will develop a second phase of its national SUMMA Consortium (SUMMAC)
of mathematics-based pre-college intervention projects in order to strengthen
the known projects directed by mathematicians which reach more than 15,000
minority students each year. This three-year project will increase these 157
projects by at least 75 by 1998. This network of mathematicians (collegiate
faculty, school teachers, and others) who conduct projects which focus on
minority students will engage in activities which include workshops,
conferences, publications, visits to each others' projects, technical
assistance, sharing curricula and mentoring. The mechanisms used to develop
SUMMAC are intricately connected to the structure of the 30,000-member MAA:
regional workshops; minority graduate students from MAA student chapters as
counselors; presentations at the Joint Mathematics Meetings. Utilizing the
leadership that developed in SUMMAC during the first phase (1992-1995), regional
coordinators who SUMMA grantees will lead the workshops in their area of the
country and make site visits to new projects after receiving training from the
SUMMA staff. The publications that were begun during the first phase will
continue: the Project Director's Handbook; an annual Directory of Mathematics-
based Intervention Projects; and a quarterly SUMMAC Forum newsletter. Two
invitational conferences will be held each year: one is for both experienced and
novice directors. The second, supported through cost-sharing, will help novice
directors design projects and learn proposal writing techniques. ***