* 9552137
* Development of a Laboratory in Electronics Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,11/30/1997
* Gregory Tonkay, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Halil Nisanci
* 11/30/1997
* USD 28,292.00

Electronics manufacturing will have a major impact on future products. Almost
all automobiles, appliances, computers, and telephones contain printed circuit
boards, chips, or electronic modules. In the future, significantly more
electronic components and modules will be required. Many of these assemblies
will be designed in the United States. However, if past trends continue, a large
portion of these electronics assemblies will be produced overseas. There are
many reasons for this, one of which is that most undergraduate engineers never
learn about the processes required to produce electronic assemblies. They do not
understand the processes and are therefore less likely to fight to keep them
local. This project is continuing to develop an existing Electronics
Manufacturing Laboratory by developing laboratory exercises and acquiring
equipment to allow engineers in all disciplines to study electronics
manufacturing processes. All industrial engineering students and a portion of
the other engineering undergraduates benefit from this project. Two introductory
experiments have been introduced in IE 115/116, a required junior-level course
in the major. A new senior level course with five laboratory experiments has
been developed and is open to all engineering students. Specifically, the
equipment provides students with the opportunity to perform experiments such as
thick-film hybrid production, printed circuit board production, printed circuit
board assembly using surface mount technology and through hole technology, and
inspection and testing. Students familiar with these processes are to enter the
workforce and persuade their employers that more electronics manufacturing
should be performed in the United States.