* 9552465
* Mathematics and its Applications in Engineering and Science:Building the Links
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2003
* Mark Holmes, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 09/30/2003
* USD 4,000,000.00

William E. Boyce DUE 9552465 RPI Requested $5,420,454 Troy, NY 12180-3590 Math
Initiative Title: Mathematics and its Applications in Engineering and Sciences:
Building the Links The division of courses into many different departments often
makes it difficult for students to grasp the intimate connections that exist
between mathematics and its applications in engineering and science. To make
these connections clearer we propose to develop a library of hypertext documents
that will link important mathematical topics with contemporary interesting
applications in various fields of engineering and science. This library will
cover the mathematical areas normally studied by undergraduate students in
engineering and science, including calculus, differential equations, mechanics
and linear systems, advanced mathematical methods, and probability and
statistics. The library that is created initially will constitute the basis for
a constantly expanding resource that will support a growing movement, at
Rensselaer and elsewhere, to move away from a lecture-dominated mode of
instruction to what we call a workshop or studio mode. The development of these
materials will involve a collaboration among faculty at Rensselaer and at a
number of other institutions, including the University of Delaware, Siena
College, Virginia Polytechnic Institute, Central State University, Hudson Valley
Community College, and the University of Maryland. By means of Visiting
Professorships, faculty at several other institutions will also become involved
as the project develops. After careful testing and evaluation, the library of
hypertext documents will be made available on the World Wide Web, on CDs, and in
printed form. Among the added benefits to Rensselaer and the other institutions
directly participating in the project is a much enhanced level of cooperation
among faculty who teach related courses in many different a cademic departments.