* 9552324
* Undergraduate Instructional Laboratory in Digital Signal    Processing
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Thomas Holton, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 08/31/1997
* USD 18,573.00

This project establishes a teaching laboratory for undergraduate instruction in
digital signal processing (DSP). The laboratory gives students practical, hands-
on training in DSP concepts and techniques using modem hardware and software
design tools that complement the more theoretical approach of a lecture course
in DSP. The laboratory uses PC-type workstations with add-on DSP processing
boards and a complement software to provide both non-real-time and real-time DSP
environments for algorithm development and testing. The new laboratory course
consists of a dozen laboratory exercises, about one per week during the
semester, each emphasizing a particular topic in DSP (for example, convolution,
sampling, filter design, and Fourier transformation). In the laboratory,
students program non-real-time simulations of common DSP procedures using MATLAB
and compare the results of these simulations with theoretical predictions. They
then implement these same DSP procedures in real time using a hardware/software
system that allows them to graphically program a DSP coprocessor card. Students
have the opportunity to visualize and hear the results of applying real-time DSP
procedures to real-world signals such as speech and music. The proposed
laboratory augments and enhances offerings in the School of Engineering and the
Department of Computer Science in digital signal processing, control and
robotics, computer music, and multimedia.