* 9552104
* Introduction of GC and GC-MS into First and Second Year     Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1997
* Peter Wickham, Coe College
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 04/30/1997
* USD 26,434.00

The purpose of this project is to incorporate gas chromatography and gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry in the first 2 years of coursework. Students
are introduced to chromatography and mass spectrometry through a series of three
experiments in the first semester general chemistry course. The final experiment
in this set involves sample collection, extraction, and analysis of herbicides
from local lakes, streams, and rivers. Students in a new interdisciplinary
Environmental Analysis course use gas chromatography to measure methane
production from different types of soils and incorporate their results into a
simple global climate change model. Organic Chemistry students make extensive
use of gas chromatography for assessing purity of reaction products, and GC-MS
to determine the identity of products and by-products. Analytical Chemistry
students utilize deuterated internal standards and selected ion monitoring to
measure the concentration of polyaromatic hydrocarbons in local lake sediments.
Analytical students also utilize the GCs and GC-MS in mini-research projects of
their own design. By acquainting students with the principles of chromatography
and the unique problem solving capabilities of GC-MS early in their chemistry
experience, the project (1) creates excitement in lower division courses; (2)
gives students confidence in their ability to utilize sophisticated
instrumentation; (3) allows upper level courses to focus on problem solving
capabilities of the instrumentation, rather than on details of operation; and,
(4) allows students to pursue student-initiated research.