* 9552499
* Policy Study on Rural Access
* EHR,DRL
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* William Wright, International Telecomputing Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 07/31/1997
* USD 99,568.00

9552499 Wright Two consortia, the International Telecomputing Consortium (ITC)
and Organizations Concerned about Rural Education (OCRE), propose to join forces
to: * Stimulate and assist policy makers and leaders of rural school communities
to consider and resolve problems involved in providing their communities with
practical, active, and productive access to the National Information
Infrastructure (NII); and * Present those policy makers with direct familiarity
wit effective models of rural community access to the NII and with comprehensive
information about the operation and effectiveness of such models, particularly
those developed or applied in projects supported by the Networking
Infrastructure for Education (NIE) and the Rural Systemic Initiative (RSI)
programs of the National Science Foundation (NSF); * Provide telecommunications
access and support to a user community open to inclusion of NSF/NIE grantees,
others nominated by NSF/NIE and OCRE/ITC constituents. In this common endeavor,
OCRE and ITC will review proposals and accomplishments of projects sponsored by
NSF that offer improved access to telecommunications resources for policy
makers, administrators, teachers and leaders of rural school communities. In
addition to conference discussions, telecommunications access to this project's
file server will inform local leaders about what has been tried and what has
been accomplished by NSF projects. They will benefit from experience-based
knowledge of working strategies for accessing the NII and using
telecommunications technologies in rural communities. The two organizations will
work to advance NII access for rural schools in four ways: 1. In consultation
with NSF/NIE program managers, they will examine NSF proposals and reports from
active projects to describe a range of concepts about rural infrastructure that
hold promise for rural school communities. For example, they will look at
alternative methods of access (e.g. via power companies, microwave) and
community cost-share. 2. They will conduct panel reviews and discussions focused
on project experiences to learn about strategies used to build a sustainable
infrastructure for NII access. A national panel of OCRE members will a)
participate in review of selected NSF\NIE and RSI proposals and reports and b)
develop agenda for (and participate in) rural focus groups convened at national
meetings of the Rural education association, other OCRE member groups (e.g. the
National School Board Association, school administrators associations, the
Triangle Coalition) and the technology conference of the National Education
Association. 3. With OCRE collaboration, ITC will develop and operate a
telecommunications file server to provide project participants (e.g. rural
leaders, NSF/NIE and RSI grantees) with: * Internet mailing lists on priority
topics (e.g. rural access to the NII); * Gopher and WOrld-Wide Web access to
reports on rural education policy issues; * Interactive referral to relevant
information databases (e.g. the Rural Datafication project of CICNet, Web sites
that provide PUC rulings or universal service options). 4. A summary project
report will help rural communities and boards of education make policy decisions
about local access to the NII and other telecommunications. This report will,
itself, be designed for telecommunications applications. ***