* 9552497
* Policy to Practice: Telecommunication Implementation at the School Level - A Regional Study
* EHR,DRL
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* Louis Tornatzky, Southern Techological Council
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 07/31/1996
* USD 97,581.00

9552497 Tornatzky A key premise of this proposal is that telecommunication and
allied information technologies have the potential to significantly improve the
performance and enhance the restructuring of K-12 schools, as well as to impact
national and regional issues of educational equity. However, we also feel that
the potential of these technologies is blunted or frustrated at the school level
by ineffective implementation, particularly related to issues of planning,
strategy, training, technical support, logistics, acceptance, and administrative
or community support. Simply stated, teachers and school leaders lack proven and
practical strategies, tactic, and practices to affect the process of
technological and organizational change. At the same time, implementation in
schools is enacted in a multi- level policy context. That is, teachers and
administrators charged with the responsibility of technology implementation are
confronted with a confusing array of district, state, and federal policies and
programs, all presumably designed to enhance the transition to a technology-
enriched classroom. These include various administrative directives, funding
programs, goals and standards, demonstration programs are designed and launched
with no empirical evidence on their impacts on actual technology implementation
at the building level. To rectify this problem, we propose a policy research
project which will systematically gather data from teachers, principals, school
districts, and state administrators on their practical experiences and advice in
implementing educational technologies and the facilitating and /or inhibiting
role that policy has played therein. Results of the project will be packaged in
a form that will be readily usable by practitioners and policy makers alike. A
regional dissemination effort, consisting of report distribution and briefings,
and the launching of a regional telecommunications network of exemplary
implementation practioners are proposed. ***