* 9552053
* Computerized Data Acquisition and Management in Freshman    Chemistry Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Edmund Shearer, Fort Hays State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 06/30/1997
* USD 42,200.00

Edmund C. Shearer DUE 9552053 Fort Hays State Univ FY1995 $ 42,200 Hays, KS
67601-4009 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Chemistry Title: Computerized Data
Acquisition and Management in Freshman Chemistry Laboratory Students are being
exposed to the pedagogically sound use of computers in those laboratory tasks
they traditionally perform. The objectives are: more expeditious use of
laboratory time, timely feed-back about the quality of data being gathered,
opportunities to engage in "what if" exploration of the laboratory information,
and broadening of student experience beyond the familiar use of computers while
retaining the familiar approachability of the personal computer. Methods already
used in our laboratories in the instruction of science majors are being extended
to non-majors. All beginning chemistry students, majors and non-majors alike,
have the benefit of computer-assisted data gathering and manipulation, affecting
approximately half of their laboratory experiences in newly constructed
laboratory facilities designed explicitly for this purpose. Data collection is
being done using the Labworks interface, using "scripts" easily understood and
constructed by the experimenter. Computer-generated report guidance reflects
students' own tasks of data manipulation and also announces measures of the
quality of the individual data set.