* 9552055
* A Cost Effective-Method for Using the Microcomputer Based   Laboratory in Teaching Physics to Engineering, Science and  Architecture Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1995,01/31/1998
* Maria Vaz, Lawrence Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1998
* USD 81,836.00

This project addresses (1) how to make Priscilla Law's Workshop Physics (WP)
applicable and cost-effective at the university with a large number of students
taking physics and (2) how to enhance learning in the physics laboratory for the
average student, particularly Science, Engineering, and Architecture majors. For
these objectives, new equipment establishes networked Microcomputer-Based
Laboratories in two physics laboratories. The university is using the "Motion
and Force Evaluation Test" of Ronald Thornton's Tools for Scientific Teaching
(TST) project as a screening device to determine which students should take an
Introductory Physics course before taking the University or College Physics
courses. This Introductory Physics course is being run like WP. Those students
who actually need intensive training get it, but those who do not go on to the
standard College or University Physics courses, thus educating the students in a
cost-effective way. All the students also use the computer tools in a Physics
Lab course which most of the students at the university must take. About 600
students, primarily Engineering and Architecture majors would be exposed to the
TST microcomputer-based lab each year. Since the experiments have been developed
primarily for Science and Engineering majors, new experiments are being
developed for the Architecture majors, to suit their interests and profession.
This pilot program can have national significance by establishing a model for
those universities who have a large number of physics students and limited lab
space.