* 9552420
* A Comprehensive Laboratory Program for an Environmental     Engineering Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Gary Litton, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Rogers E. Salters
* 07/31/1997
* USD 18,000.00

This laboratory enhancement project is developing instructional capabilities in
four environmental engineering courses: "Introduction to Environmental
Engineering," "Environmental Biochemistry," "Aquatic Chemistry for Environmental
Engineers," and "Groundwater Protection and Remediation." The project is
introducing nine new experiments to the laboratory sections that supplement
these courses. These exercises are specifically designed to give students an
opportunity to simulate physical, chemical, and biological processes that take
place in natural and engineered environments. Quantitative data collected during
these experiments are applied toward solving realistic engineering analysis and
design problems. A total organic carbon analyzer and a scanning
spectrophotometer are the major equipment components used in this project. This
instrumentation also serves to further expose students to the capabilities and
limitations of modern equipment commonly found in research environmental
laboratories but often absent from undergraduate facilities. An environmental
degree option was offered for the first time by the school's Department of Civil
Engineering in 1993. As part of this program, an environmental engineering
laboratory was developed and put to use in early 1994 for a new aquatic
chemistry course. This project is further enhancing the capabilities of the
laboratory by providing students with exercises designed to synthesize the
concepts offered within the environmental curriculum. Many of the new
experiments are unique to undergraduate environmental engineering laboratories,
and provide undergraduates with the opportunity to apply their results directly
toward solving realistic engineering problems.