* 9552308
* Integration of Basic Experimental and Multimedia Research   Training in Psychology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Edward O'Brien, Marywood University
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 06/30/1997
* USD 24,000.00

This project integrates basic research training in psychology with student
involvement in multimedia projects that analyze stress and coping research.
Basic psychology research training involves courses in seven required and four
elective courses. Basic science issues addressed in these courses involve
student training in conducting and interpreting statistical analysis of data,
utilizing appropriate research designs, developing critical analysis research
skills, and developing capabilities to complete independent and honors research
in psychology. Students complete a graded series of increasingly advanced data
analysis and experimental design projects that fit into a competency growth plan
for training students in the scientific approach to psychology. Multimedia
projects are located in one required course (theories of personality) and four
elective courses in which students are involved in creating multimedia
visualizations of concepts related to stress, coping, and emotion. This project
upgrades the computer lab to enhance capabilities in both basic research and
multimedia training. This project allows continued development of student
projects that enables them to visualize the interactions among behavioral,
physiological, and cognitive aspects of stress and coping. Involvement of
students in multimedia projects attempts to build upon Chute's "Classroom 2000"
model in which students directly experience and work with course materials in a
multimedia format to enhance active learning.