* 9552587
* 'Bill Nye, the Science Guy' (Television Series)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* William Nye, KCTS Television
* Continuing Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 07/31/1998
* USD 2,297,157.00

9552587 Brock ABSTRACT: KCTS Television is producing 20 new programs for the
third season of "Bill Nye the Science Guy." The series, which has received an
enthusiastic public response, will continue to be on PBS stations during the
week and syndicated to commercial stations on weekends. The twenty topics for
Season range from earth science, to physical science, to life science, to
technology and include programs on such diverse subjects as spiders, time, life
cycles, inventions, flowers, architecture, computers, probability,
invertebrates, and forensics. Outreach activities for the third season are
designed an emphasis on reaching out to new audiences, especially girls and
children of color. The Season III outreach components consist of: o "The Big
News of Science" - a newsletter distributed through youth serving organizations
as well as being mailed directly to viewers at home o An at-home science kit -
an easy to use kit that enables children and their families to perform science
experiments together at home. Two-thirds of the kits to be distributed directly
to youth and one-third will be distributed to children participating in
afterschool and community programs. o Teacher's Kit - to be distributed to
fourth grade teachers nationwide. o Special appearances - As Bill Nye's schedule
permits, he will present a live, traveling science demonstration show in
selected urban communities. The programs will be based at science museums,
community centers, or similar venues and will include an explanation about the
science content of the series, and demonstrations of science experiments where
children are invited to participate. o A PBS station outreach kit - This
material will provide PBS outreach and education staff with programs, tips for
developing local science outreach projects, and a list of informal science
resources. The staffing for Season III will remain basically the same as it has
been for Seasons I and II. Bill Nye will remain as Chief Writer and Host,
Elizabeth Brock will continue as Executive Producer, and James McKenna and Erren
Gottlieb will remain the series producers.