* 9552941
* RIMI: Special Project:  The 1995 Leadership Alliance        Symposium at the NAS, Summer 1995, Washington, DC
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1996
* James Wyche, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Bobby L. Wilson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 30,550.00

9552941 Wyche The Leadership Alliance is a committed group of colleges and
universities that have joined forces to improve the status of underrepresented
students and faculty at various stages of the educational pipeline. By working
as a consortium, members of the Alliance hope to effect change in the culture of
American education. The Alliance intends to address the problem of institutional
barriers that inhibit access to the crucial educational resources that determine
success and leadership in academia. The purpose of this symposium is to provide
200 Leadership Alliance undergraduate and graduate students with a forum of
encouragement that will reinforce their aspirations to complete advanced studies
in mathematics, science, engineering and the social sciences--as well as gather
the tools to prepare for and enter careers in these areas. There will be poster
sessions, several nationally and internationally recognized speakers, workshops,
a reception and at least one major social activity. The symposium will also
serve as an opportunity to provide detailed information on the current climate
of academia and industry, with emphasis on scientific/technical specialties;
practical information on how undergraduate science/engineering studies differ
from graduate studies and how science/engineering career paths can be varied,
and pointers on how to survive and succeed, especially in predominately non-
minority settings. Most importantly, the symposia will provide the students with
a sense of community and a feeling psychological optimism that comes out of
being part of a "critical mass" of serious students and mentors--where everyone
understands the struggles to be faced as we approach the 21st century and can
offer moving personal testimonials and advice on how barriers have and can
continue to be overcome. ***