* 9552562
* Hispanic Role Model and Science Education Outreach Project
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/2000
* Gilbert Sanchez, Self Reliance Foundation
* Continuing grant
* Sylvia M. James
* 07/31/2000
* USD 2,131,539.00

95-52562 Salazar ABSTRACT: The Self Reliance Foundation in association with the
Hispanic Radio Network over a five year period will produce and distribute a
variety of daily Spanish-language radio programs on science education topics and
follow-up outreach services to network listeners on science education and career
opportunities. The applicants will add two science related episodes each week to
Buscando La Belleza, the four-minute daily radio series for families that
focuses on social issues, work issues, women's rights, and educational and
career opportunities. It is carried on 100 stations with a weekly cumulative
audience of 2,567,000 listeners. The new episodes will include: 52 role model
interviews with Hispanic men and women who have careers in science, mathematics,
and technology from technical positions not requiring a college degree to
Ph.D.'s engaged in cutting edge research; 26 family involvement episodes with
suggestions for parents to build their confidence in helping their children with
homework, doing simple science activities with their children at home,
encouraging their older children in their studies, and working with schools and
community organizations; and 26 academic and career resource/success stories
highlighting Hispanic students who have been successful in their pursuit of
careers in science, mathematics, and technology. The second series included
under the grant is Salvemos Nuestro Planeta, a two-and-a-half minute series that
focuses on environmental issues. It currently is carried on 89 radio stations
twice a week with a total weekly cumulative audience of 2,494,300. The producers
will expand the series to seven original episodes per week with five episodes
focusing on science, mathematics, and technology themes: general science
literacy, environmental management and technology, computers and information
technology, environmental activities for youth, and SMET career opportunities.
Outreach will consist of a national Spanish language toll free phone number that
will refer listeners to resources related to opportunities for scholarships in
science and engineering, activities and resources for parents and children in
science education, etc., and in some cases, connect callers to the subject of
that days interview. The PI will be Roberto Salazar who has been chief assistant
to Vicente Llamas at the Comprehensive Regional Center for Minorities. He has
been involved in numerous science education project for Hispanics and has a
background in radio. The Executive Producer will be Jeff Kline. Major science
consultants will be Vicente Llamas, Director of the Comprehensive Regional
Center for Minorities, and Estrella Triana, Hispanic Science Education Director
for the American Association for the Advancement of Science.