* 9552593
* A Testbed for Collaborative Interactive Remote Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1995,03/31/1997
* Kurt Maly, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 03/31/1997
* USD 100,065.00

9552593 Maly Building on its expertise in networking, computer supported
collaborative work, and remote learning, Old Dominion University will prepare to
build a statewide highly Interactive Remote Instruction (IRI) testbed based on
networked workstations. Technology and pedagogical methods developed in testbed
will be integrated into TELETECHNET, a state funded program in which Old
Dominion University and community colleges will provide four-year programs. The
first two years will be taught at the community colleges with the last two being
provided by Old Dominion University to remote community college campuses via
networked and televised course instructions. The project will consist of a one-
year preparatory phase, covered by this proposal, and a three-year phase of
research, development, and implementation to be covered by a follow-on proposal.
Significant contributions of the proposed one-year project include: 1) refining
an existing IRI prototype to provide an open-ended teaching/learning environment
with a set of basic features easy to use by students and faculty of all
disciplines; 2) developing the basic concepts of new instructional methods to
exploit the interactivity of the system in support of higher domains of
learning; and 3) preparing to bring together a consortium of government,
industry and academic individuals who are dedicated to innovative approaches to
education for the 21st century. This will lay the foundation in providing
Virginia with a cost-effective method of delivering high quality education
remotely in support of some of the 50,000 additional students expected to enroll
in Virginia's public colleges and universities by the year 2001. The proposed
hardware/software architectures use existing technologies but anticipate the
wider availability of a high-speed Information superhighway and multimedia
workstations in the near future. The architecture provides an open environment
in which many types of teaching materials and inst ructional software can be
incorporated. The prototype provides two-way video to remote sites; shared
operation of X-window tools and applications; interactive note-taking; a VCR-
like replay of past classes and ancillary material and a full motion video
window which can display the instructor, a classroom demonstration, or any PC,
Macintosh or X-window application. This instructional capability goes beyond
traditional TV courses and traditional classrooms by enabling instructors and
students to access multimedia generated from a variety of sources and to use
group collaboration tools for interaction between two participants, among small
groups, or entire classes. The system will provide audio-visual interaction and
allow faculty and remote-site students to share the manipulation of software
tools, such as spreadsheets or chemistry models. While the elements of IRI are
currently technically feasible, a major portion of the project's efforts are
directed to the developing of new student-centered teaching methods and
paradigms which take advantage of the environment and to refining the hardware
and software through experience of actual instructional needs. Key to the
success of our approach is an interface which students and faculty from all
disciplines can use with intimal training. This system will provide access to
higher education, not only for traditional students, who for personal or
financial reasons choose not to reside at a four-year institution. IRI will
promote effective use of network and computer technology for all participating
students and faculty. Exposure to technology-enabled interaction will help
prepare students for the challenges of increased global competitiveness. Old
Dominion University will consider the total project a success in developing a
long-term self-sustaining system if half the TELETECHNET courses use IRI within
five years, both faculty and students accept and benefit from this mode of
teaching as demonstrated with such metr ics as cost satisfaction and there is an
increase in the number of students completing four-year degrees. We will
consider the one-year phase successful if we shall have used a version of the
IRI system in a real class environment and identified the problems in that
version. ***