* 9552837
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Macromolecular Structure  and Plant Biology
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Stephen Mayfield, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 450,000.00

GER-9552837 Beachy One of the great challenges in biology today is to determine
the functions of proteins and other macromolecules in the context of their
three-dimensional structures. This challenge defines the frontier of research
for a variety of biological questions, including many in plant biology. To train
the next generation of scientists in this multidisciplinary area, a research and
training program has been created at The Scripps Research Institute. We are
requesting support to provide training for PhD students pursuing research
problems in macromolecule structure in Plant Biology as a formal component of
this PhD program. An integral portion of the training program will be the
identification of qualified students of underrepresented minorities through
established linkages with two campuses in the California State University
system, i.e., Los Angeles and San Diego State University, and with the San Diego
Plant Science Center. These students will participate in research programs that
include structural and functional analyses of macromolecules involved in key
aspects of plant biology. Our faculty includes a diverse group of innovative
plant biologists whose research requires collaborations with leading experts in
the analysis of molecular structure by x-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy.
The Fellows sponsored by this program will enable these collaborations.