* 9552549
* GREEN TECHNOLOGY
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Richard Thomas, Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications Association
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 06/30/1998
* USD 1,108,789.00

95-52549 Thomas ABSTRACT: The Greater Washington Educational Telecommunications
Association (WETA) is producing and disseminating "Green Technology," a
multimedia project that promotes active learning about environmentally
beneficial technologies for the home, the workplace, and the community. The
objective of the project are to change or consolidate the public's concepts
about the fundamental relationships between the environment and technology at
the grassroots pocketbook level, to enhance their understanding of the pertinent
science and technology, and to provide them with practical information about how
to take action for oneself and in the fulfillment of a wider civic
responsibility. The components of the project include: o Three one-hour prime
time television programs o Community Outreach through the National Community
Education Association and their affiliates in 40 states. o Development of
community education material including a 30-minute highlight tape to serve as a
discussion springboard with accompanying discussion and resource guides. o A
Viewer's Newsletter for each program which will include short articles on the
basic science and technology explored in the program and a "What You Can Do"
section. o A CD-ROM for use by parents and children at home and by students in
school. o On-line information clearing house the SOLSTICE, the digital library
of energy and environmental resources operated by the Center for Renewable
Energy and Sustainable Technology. o Teacher enhancement materials and
activities for middle schools to be disseminated through the Teacher Educator's
Network of the Association of Science-Technology Centers. o The National Academy
of Engineering will identify engineers who can serve as "on-line consultants" to
students and teachers involved in examining specific environmental issues.
Richard Thomas, previously Executive Producer for "Mystery of the Senses" and
"The World of Chemistry," will be PI and Executive Producer. Principal Content
Advisory will be S. William Gouse, chief scientist and President of Energy
Systems and Technology at MITRE. William McDonough, Dean of the School of
Architecture at the University of Virginia, will be the host of the television
series.