* 9552338
* A Thin Film Materials Physics Course for Southwest Texas    State University
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Victor Michalk, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1998
* USD 50,000.00

Carlos J. Gutierrez DUE 9552338 Southwest Texas State U FY1995 $50,000 San
Marcos, TX 78666 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Physics Title: A Thin Film
Materials Physics Course for Southwest Texas State University An upper-division
Materials Physics Laboratory (MPL) course will be established in the Department
of Physics at Southwest Texas State University (SWT) which will be the
culmination of a newly organized and focused "materials physics" curriculum
track whose on-going development was initiated by changes in the introductory
physics sequence four years ago. The new "materials physics track" is a coherent
response to regional market-place pressure for thin film science and technology
education recognized by an independent and broad Industry Advisory Panel. This
newly-organized and focused curriculum track will culminate with the proposed
MPL course, and offer a curriculum option at SWT which addresses a national need
for changes in undergraduate physics education aimed towards improving
baccalaureate marketability for private sector opportunities in marketable
materials science-related areas. In addition, this proposal will also have a
direct impact on the existing Modem Physics II course (part of both the
"traditional" and new "materials physics" tracks). The laboratory components for
both the MPL and Modern Physics II courses will familiarize students with
"hands-on" critical analysis skills utilizing new instruments (atomic force
microscopy, four-point probe apparatus) and course-upgraded existing instruments
(scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive spectroscopy, high vacuum
magnetron sputtering, x-ray analysis, and magnetometry) which are commonly found
in private sector thin film-related industries (i.e. the semiconductor
fabricatio n industry). These skills will be learned in a supervised mock
research team environment focusing on recently published research themes found
in the professional literature. The proposed resources will be included in plans
for outreach programs involving minority physics majors, and high school
students (and their teachers). Additional capital equipment and undergraduate
human resource enhancement tools (internships, scholarships) will be sought in
conjunction with SWT's Industry Advisory Panel.