* 9552189
* Jefferson State Community College Physics/Physical Science  Laboratory Enhancement Project
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Ali Yazdi, Jefferson State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 05/31/1997
* USD 12,167.00

The goal of this project is to improve student understanding of physics
concepts, attract interest, and improve retention through the use of computer
technology. Having tested the concept (as a pilot project) taken from Ron
Thornton and Priscilla Laws during the past 2 years, this investigator and cal-
based Physics 213 students have demonstrated the advantages of the
microcomputer-based laboratory (MBL) method. Students can be actively involved
in lab activities and can experiment with different data. The success of the
pilot project causes this investigator to expand MBL into physics and physical
science courses. This enhanced lab provides students with effective learning
experiences to support lecture theory. In addition to increasing learning,
exposure to new lab instrumentation and technology makes the students more
competitive with peers upon transfer to a senior college or entrance into the
workforce. Partial implementation of the Conceptual Exercises/Overview Case
Study (CE/OCS) method has begun and is being expanded into others. The project
provides support for six workstations equipped with Mac Quadra 630 computers,
appropriate software, and supplementary lab equipment to implement redesigned
and newly developed lab experiments. Up to 24 students per course in 6 different
courses can benefit and be better prepared for the technologies of the twenty-
first century.