* 9552464
* Middle Atlantic Consortium for Mathematics and its          Applications throughout the Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 09/15/1995,06/30/2001
* Gerald Porter, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 06/30/2001
* USD 1,867,040.00

Dennis DeTurck DUE 9552464 University of Pennsylvania FY1995 $ 598,206
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6395 FY1996 $ 599,181 FY1997 $ 499,653 FY1998 $
499,653 Mathematical Sciences Title: Middle Atlantic Consortium for Mathematics
and Its Applications Throughout the Curriculum This project is designed to
promote a climate in which faculty from all disciplines view themselves as being
jointly responsible for the scientific, mathematical, and technical education of
undergraduates, rather than clients and servers. To help accomplish this, a
consortium comprised of the University of Pennsylvania, Villanova University,
Polytechnic University, Community College of Philadelphia, two Philadelphia
public schools, and the Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics (SIAM) is
planning to undertake this major initiative to integrate research and real-world
applications from various disciplines into the mathematics curriculum, and to
achieve more effective integration of advanced mathematics and computing into
the curricula of disciplines that use mathematics. To begin a process to achieve
this overall goal, this project consists of four parts: I. Creation of
application modules for mathematics courses and mathematics modules for other-
discipline courses. II. Development of basic and advanced interdisciplinary
courses that integrate mathematics with specific application areas. III.
Development of applications and laboratory-oriented courses for mathematics
majors. IV. Development of materials for students in courses such as business,
economics, psychology, and liberal arts and humanities courses that focus on
mathematical literacy issues. Topics are chosen from a broad range of discipline
areas, including biological and social sciences, as well as engineering,
business, and physics modules. These modules involve many different important
mathematical topics and techniques. The two different types of modules which are
planned allow for multiple levels of student backgrounds. They impact multiple
points of the curriculum ranging from courses for majors in fields which have
traditionally used little or no mathematics to those for lower division students
in mathematics and mathematically oriented disciplines to those for upper
division mathematics majors. Several interdisciplinary courses are being
created, including one incorporating mathematics, physics, and chemistry as well
as one in geographiometry. A team of faculty are also developing a two-semester
course for mathematics majors that surveys industrial uses of mathematics via
applications. SIAM is proving expertise both in the development of the
interdisciplinary modules and courses and in broad dissemination of materials
through conferences, workshops, and products. Distribution of materials is
through World Wide Web sites at the University of Pennsylvania and SIAM as well
as by commercial publication.