* 9552147
* A Laboratory Classroom to Support an Alternative            Technology-Based Mathematics Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Elias Deeba, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 05/31/1997
* USD 42,993.00

The purpose of this project is to equip a laboratory classroom with PCs and
upgrade a previously existing classroom of PCs so as to support an alternative
technology-based mathematics curriculum that any technical major could pursue.
The courses affected by this project include three standard lower-division
sequences: College Algebra and Applied Calculus for business majors;
Precalculus, Calculus I and II for physical science majors; and Linear Algebra
and Discrete Math for math and computer science majors. These sequences form the
three branches of a "technology track." Courses in each branch are coordinated
to ensure continuity of instructional delivery, classroom activities, testing,
and software. The design framework being used to create the courseware is shaped
by current mathematics education reform efforts and includes laboratory
experiences, lean and cohesive syllabi, an emphasis on realistic and meaningful
applications, and a fundamental reliance on modern software technology's
capabilities for interaction and visualization to illustrate, interpret, and
explore diverse dimensions of mathematical concepts and techniques in ways not
possible by other means. Mathematica and Maple serve as the computational
platforms for this project. The goal of the project is to measure the true long-
term impact of technology and lab experiences on mathematical literacy and
retention at urban commuter schools.