* 9552050
* Expanding the Presence of Geographic Techniques in the      Geography Undergraduate Curriculum at Illinois State        University
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* Daniel Hammel, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/1997
* USD 25,000.00

The tools of doing geography are changing dramatically, but the need for good,
rigorous geographical thinking is a constant. Varying levels of preparation
among students and the gaps revealed by the geographic diagnostic exam are the
motivation for changing the techniques courses. Geographic Techniques, the new
foundations course, is the focus of this new approach. The objective is to
introduce basic concepts and skills as students move through the program. This
goal is not to see how many techniques can be taught to students but to build a
functional base. The new computer-based laboratory is a major instrument in
achieving the goals of the new introductory course as well as an important
instrument in the following techniques courses. Sophomores and juniors intending
to major in geography are directed to Geographic Techniques after having
completed a minimum of three introductory geography courses. This course is the
prerequisite for all of the traditional techniques courses in the department. As
students complete this course they should be comfortable working in the computer
lab; able to use e-mail and move about the Internet; have the beginnings of the
vocabulary of geographic techniques; have an integrated exposure to content of
the various techniques used in geography; be aware of the nature of geographic
data and how to get such data for local questions or global questions; and have
some experience in using a word processor, spreadsheet, and the Idrisi GIS
package. The impact of building this foundation can be realized in all
subsequent techniques courses as well as in the preparation of the students as
they move into their internship and ultimately into the work place or on to
graduate school.