* 9552401
* Cost Effective Spectrum Analysis for Introductory Musical   Acoustics
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Kevin Riggs, Stetson University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 05/31/1997
* USD 11,350.00

With the recent introduction of relatively inexpensive Digital Signal Processing
(DSP) cards for PCs, a large number of sophisticated and innovative acoustics
experiments involving digital fast Fourier transform (FFT) spectrum analysis
become possible at a considerable savings compared with stand-alone FFT
analyzers. This grant remedies the lack of equipment to perform FFT spectrum
analysis in the laboratory of the introductory musical acoustics course, The
Science of Music. The labs had been based on stand-alone digital storage
oscilloscopes. The lack of FFT capability is a serious pedagogical deficiency in
light of the enormous importance of harmonic spectra to the understanding of the
physics of sound and musical instruments. Fourier analysis is often a difficult
concept for students to understand in the abstract. They need to be provided
hands-on laboratory experiences to enhance their understanding. This grant
equips eight previously purchased computer lab stations in the acoustics lab
with DSP cards and software required to perform FFT analysis. In addition, one
unit is being placed in the PC dedicated to the acoustics lecture room,
facilitating in-class demonstrations and discussions. Additional utilization of
the new equipment occurs the form of senior research projects, advanced
laboratory experiments (for physics majors), and use in a new course in Physical
Acoustics for majors.