* 9552206
* Microcomputer Based Measurement and Simulation for          Introductory Acoustics
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* John Smedley, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/1997
* USD 17,471.00

This program utilizes microcomputers to measure and record time- resolved
acoustical signals and to model standing and propagating acoustic waves in real
physical systems. New laboratory experiments and simulations are being developed
for two acoustics courses open to non-science-majors, entitled Musical Acoustics
and Physics of Electronic Sound. The new equipment includes six microcomputers
with sound cards, a networked laser printer, and six computer-interfaced,
digitally synthesized function generators. In laboratory experiments, steady-
state and transient sound signals are recorded and analyzed with microcomputers.
Software is being developed to calculate and display wave oscillations in
simulations of real physical significance, such as standing waves inside wind
instruments and mechanical vibrations of strings and membranes. Sophisticated
function generators are interfaced to microcomputers to facilitate frequency-
dependence measurements, such as tests of loudspeakers and amplifier response.
The program extends a highly successful introductory acoustics laboratory that
incorporated fast Fourier transform spectrum analyzers to frequency analyze
musical sounds. Students can benefit from the ability to study with equal
precision and accuracy important acoustical phenomena from the complementary
perspectives of time and frequency.