* 9552543
* Rain Forest Trail and Living Treasures of the Congo Gallery
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* John Gwynne, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Barbara H. Butler
* 08/31/1996
* USD 145,786.00

9552543 Gwynne The Wildlife Conservation Society will use this one year award to
move forward their planning for the "Rain Forest Trail and the Living Treasures
of the Congo Gallery." This is the first phase of an ambitious $29M, 6 acre
outdoor exhibit area focusing on the Congo Rain Forest and an indoor
Environmental Education Complex. The Wildlife Conservation Society (WCS)
conducts extensive field research in a number of central African sites and has
an important living collection of tropical African wildlife in the New York
facility. The Congo Rain Forest/Environmental Education Center will include
three major interpretive areas and an educational resource area. NSF is being
asked to support two components of the Congo Rain Forest complex which are the
Rain Forest Trail and Living Treasures of the Congo Gallery. The Rain Forest
Trail, with both indoor and outdoor elements, will be a total immersion exhibit
where visitors will be surrounded by a replication of an African rain forest and
will have the opportunity to encounter a variety of its living inhabitants, and
experience how its ecosystem functions. They will have the experience of making
scientific observations thus gaining insight into how scientists work. The goal
of this design technique "is to move beyond the limited scope of traditional zoo
exhibits (which simply portray the 'animal as object')", toward a presentation
of animal and plant communities as they interact within an ecosystem. The Living
Treasures Gallery will be a 4000 sq. ft. space which is dedicated to the
introduction of the diversity of rain forest inhabitants, their environmental
adaptations, and complex interrelationships. The gallery will be divided into
four areas: Adaptations for Survival, The Forest of the Megavertebrates, The
Interconnected Forest, and Seeing the Unseen. Numerous interactive devices will
be developed to engage the visitor in hands-on activities and materials will be
developed that link the themes of the exhibit with the agenda of formal
education for both teacher and students.