* 9552297
* Enhancing Instructional Program and Training Lab Facility   in Visual Anthropology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Joseph Nevadomsky, California State University-Fullerton
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 08/31/1998
* USD 48,286.00

The Department of Anthropology's Visual Anthropology Lab (1) enhances innovative
instructional undergraduate training in representing culture and behavior
through visual media and (2) supports student projects in visual anthropology
and other anthropology labs by providing upgraded facilities for documenting
archaeological sites, observing and recording primate behavior, recording
skeletal remains, and providing visual materials for museum displays.
Specifically, this project funds photographic, video, audio, and specialized
computer equipment to support a revised undergraduate Program in Visual
Anthropology that fosters student understanding of filmic and ethnographic
photography, ensures practical competency in film and/or photographic
production, and provides instrumentation for student projects. The department
expects to renovate existing lab space vacated by other science departments and
establish an integrated lab facility for all the field of anthropology including
osteology (forensic and primatological), archaeology, ethnographic analysis, and
visual anthropology. The lab facilities and equipment are envisioned as an
integrated unit, such that student projects in archaeology, primatology,
osteology, and cultural analysis have access to the Visual Anthropology Lab
facilities and vice versa.