* 9552840
* Excellence = Maine Coastal Collaborative (E=MC2) Planning   Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Judy Lucarelli, Cape Elizabeth School District
* Standard Grant
* Emma L. Walton
* 08/31/1996
* USD 50,000.00

*** 9552840 Lucarelli This project is for a one year planning grant to develop a
project in three districts in the state of Maine. The plan is for the three
districts to develop a professional development infrastructure. The communities
are diverse, consisting of the blue collar community, professionals, and many
socioeconomic groups. The focus of the planning and the core of the work is to
create an infrastructure that directly enables and suppmrts the vision, to share
resources, and serves all teachers K-12. The project will plan a program of
collaborative strategic action to address the needs identified. The
collaborative will: identify existing capacities, connections, services and
resources: maximize existing human and institutional capacities, connections,
service and resources; and create and find new capacities, connections, services
and resources. The project will work closely with Maine's SSI, using the SSI's
science and mathematics curriculum framework. A cross-district inquiry approach
to planning will be used which will build on the prior initiative of the Maine
Center for Educational Services. Educational technology will be an important
tool for those involved in the project. Educators in all three sites will be
able to send and receive email, connect with MaineNet information services, and
communicate with Internet users world-wide through the use of MaineNet's
statewide electronic information network. Cost sharing will be 80% The project
requested $50,000 from NSF. ***