* 9552556
* Promoting Science Literacy for All Americans, including     Culturally and Linguistically diverse Students: Keeping the  Promise
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Sandra Fradd, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/1998
* USD 655,201.00

; R o o t E n t r y F a C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t * O b j e c t P
o o l a a 4 @ ! " # $ % &amp; ' ( ) * F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; This 36 month project will implement an integrated
intervention that promotes literacy development and science learning with three
ethmolinguistic groups ... with a focus on limited English proficient students.
The intervention integrates four components: (a) science learning, (b) language
development, (c) instructional strategies, and (d) cultural and linguistic
understanding. The application of these components together makes the
intervention developmental both for the teachers and the students. The PI s will
collect and compare baseline data with the results of the intervention and focus
on oral and written language-for-learning skills centered on specific science
content units. Additional data will compare bilingual and monolingual
teachers/classrooms. ; Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT This 36
month project will implement an inte S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n (
grated intervention that promotes literacy development and science learning with
three ethmolinguistic groups ... with a focus on limited English proficient
students. The intervention integrates four components Sadie R. Jones Sadie R.
Jones @ q a @ @ q a @ e Microsoft Word 6.0 1 ; e = e * j j j j j j j v 1 X T / v
j v j j j j ~ j j j j 1 This 36 month project will implement an integrated
intervention that promotes literacy development and science learning with three
ethmolinguistic groups ... with a focus on limited English proficient students.
The intervention integrates four components: (a) science learning, (b) language
development, (c) instructional strategies, and (d) cultural and linguistic
understanding. The application of these components together makes the
intervention developmental both for the teachers and the students. The PI s will
collect and compare baseline data with the results of the intervention and focus
on oral and written language-for-learning skills centered on specific science
content units. Additional data will compare bilingual and monolingual
teachers/classrooms.