* 9552225
* Enabling MS-Windows and Windows Based Mathematical Software in Current Computer Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Howard Kaplon, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1998
* USD 39,657.00

Howard S. Kaplon DUE 9552225 Towson State University FY1995 $ 39,657 Towson, MD
21204-1010 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Mathematics Title: Mathematical
Software in Current Computer Laboratories The Mathematics Department at Towson
State has made a firm commitment to the "Reform Calculus" philosophy and is
scheduling its Calculus classes in a Computer Classroom. In addition, many of
the statistics classes are being taught in this Classroom. Consequently this
Computer Classroom is currently being utilized almost entirely for classroom
teaching. Lack of open access to this Computer Classroom by students makes the
use of the computer technology and useful mathematical software primarily for
demonstration purposes only in calculus and statistics courses, and also
discourages faculty teaching other mathematics courses from incorporating
innovative computer based instruction and projects. This project is extending
calculus and other mathematical reform efforts at Towson by helping prepare an
open computer laboratory for students use for projects and assignments outside
of mathematics classes. This is allowing students to use mathematical computer
software programs outside of their class meeting time. This open laboratory is
also being used by students taking other courses such as Numerical Analysis,
Linear Algebra, Differential Equations, Mathematical Models and Concepts of
Mathematics for Elementary Teachers to complete computer assignments and
projects as well to use commercial and faculty authored interactive text
material to enhance their comprehension of the material. In summary, this
proposal will ensure that the computer technology and use of mathematical
software becomes an integral part of the curriculum.