* 9552847
* Mesa Systemic Initiative
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1995,12/31/2001
* Debra Duvall, Mesa Unified School District #4
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 12/31/2001
* USD 5,578,192.00

9552847 Sprague This project is for five years with the overall goal for the
improvement of instruction for all K-8 students in science and mathematics.
There are over 2,000 teachers at 46 elementary and 12 junior high schools.
Building upon over twenty years of experience in hands-on curriculum, this
project is designed to move Mesa teachers into the next level of professional
growth. The plan to accomplish this is to combine individual master teachers,
school-level leadership and cross-district support to create site-based learning
communities. All elementary and junior high mathematics and science teachers
will participate in extensive professional development which will include a
range of staff development components. There will be an emphasis on new teachers
to help them teach in the overall program. There will be a design for a program
which will move teachers in their understanding of teaching to a higher plane.
The intent is to include high level rigorous courses/study groups for the
teachers who are ready for intellectual growth. This teacher enhancement model
recognizes that teachers at different levels of professional development require
different methods and tools. In collaboration with Arizona State university,
multiple strategies for teacher growth will be provided through both site-based
and cross-district support systems. Special emphasis will be placed upon four
critical need areas: 1.) new teacher support, 2.) cross-district leadership
development, 3.) moving beyond mechanical use of curriculum, and 4.) supporting
diversity and equity in special populations. This project further extends Mesa
Public School's history as a model for other districts which are planning to
develop an elementary hands-on/minds-on science and mathematics program. The
Mesa Public School's elementary science program has provided written materials,
a place to see a comprehensive program that is working and a model for other
districts as they are moving into curriculum reform. Through this project, the
project will extend their history of testing and revising plans to reflect what
they learn and to serve as a dissemination center to other districts around the
country. Cost sharing will be 46%.