* 9552496
* Impacts of the Education-Related Network-Based Projects
* EHR,DRL
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1996
* Robert Kozma, SRI International
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Sanchez
* 10/31/1996
* USD 124,577.00

Kozma 9552496 The goals of this policy study are to provide the National Science
Foundation's Networking Infrastructure for Education program with: (1) a
conceptual framework for studying the impacts of NIE investments in network-
based projects, (2) policy options for resource allocations, and (3)
recommendations for approaches to evaluating the impact of the NIE program and
its projects. These options and recommendations will be useful both to NIE and
to other agencies funding network-based projects. An analysis of the
distribution of the NIE funds across types of programs and in relation to other
NII projects can reveal redundancies, gaps, and emerging needs. An assessment of
the nature of the NIE portfolio within the larger NII context can illuminate
potentially powerful partnerships for leveraging NIE's investments in pursuit of
education reform. Evaluation recommendations will help NIE program staff advise
proposers on their evaluation plans, assess the quality of proposals, and
monitor the execution of projects. Improved plans for formative and summative
evaluation of projects will also increase the likelihood of project success and
make it more efficient and inexpensive to assess the impact of NIE, when it
comes time to evaluate that program. These goals will be accomplished in the
following seven steps: (1) SRI staff will meet with the staff of NIE and other
related programs to identify policy and evaluation issues and identify a panel
of national experts that will work on the project; (2) SRI staff will propose
and refine a conceptual framework that describes the ways in which networkbased
projects can affect educational reform and provide NIE staff with information on
the distribution of their resources across the framework relative to the
investments of other federal programs and those of the private sector; (3) SRI
staff will formulate different evaluation criteria an methodologies for NIE
projects with different goals and activities; (4) on th e basis of these
analyses, SRI staff will make preliminary recommendations regarding funding
alternatives and evaluation guidelines; (5) these recommendations will be
reviewed and modified by a panel of experts in science, education technology,
policy, and program evaluation; (6) a national Policy Conference will be
convened to review and discuss the recommendations; (7) on the basis of these
discussions, SRI staff will write up the final recommendations to NIE staff. ***