* 9552864
* Teacher Enhancement Through An Elementary Science Education Partners (ESEP) Program
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Robert DeHaan, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Joyce B. Evans
* 08/31/2001
* USD 5,982,398.00

9552864 DeHaan This Local Systemic Change project will enhance all fifteen
hundred and seventy nine, teachers from grades K-5, in the 78 elementary schools
in the Atlanta Public School district (APS). Inservice professional development
for teachers will consist of four day-long, instructional sessions and a 50 hour
summer institute, focused on the PALS (Packaged Activities for Laboratory
Science) curricular materials. The materials have been adapted from notable kit
based curricula such as FOSS, GEMS, Insights, and Science and Technology for
Children. Summer Institutes will be held at Georgia State, Moorhouse and Emory
and will be open to 300 teachers (100 per campus). The preparation that teachers
receive will enable them to apply guided discovery instructional methods in
teaching science and mathematics in their classrooms. To support the teachers
the ESEP program will: * supply the PALS kit based materials to all the schools
* assign undergraduate science majors, trained to help with hands-on materials
using inquiry based instructional strategies, as partners. These undergraduate
students will be selected from Emory University and five collaborating colleges
(Clark-Atlanta, Georgia State, Morehouse, Morris-Brown and Spelman * assign each
teacher-student partnership (TSP) a faculty- science mentor * have resource
teachers available to provide support to teachers in the schools. The request is
for $5,699,850 for 5 years with cost sharing estimated as $7,254,837.