* 9552836
* Environmental Biology:  Conservation of Biodiversity
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Michael Rex, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 578,500.00

GER-9552836 Rex NSF support is requested to develop a graduate training program
in Conservation of Biodiversity as part of our recently established doctoral
program in Environmental Biology. The proposed program has a required core
curriculum in advanced ecology, conservation biology, statistics and public
policy. An innovative feature of the program is that it focuses on integrating
genetic and ecological approaches and interactions across population, community
and landscape levels. Furthermore, the program stresses the importance of
variation in temporal and spatial scales in approaches to solving environmental
problems. Students will acquire first-hand practical experience by doing two
semester- long rotations in faculty laboratories that conduct research on levels
of organization outside their dissertation topic. These laboratory internships
will be augmented by trips to study sites where students will learn about
sampling techniques and the challenges of field biology. The program encompasses
extensive training in other important skills including the use of modern
population genetic techniques, and of geographic information systems, to
quantify and analyze spatial relationships in ecosystems. Students will have the
opportunity to learn a variety of analytical methods including population
modeling and ecosystem simulation. Team-taught case-study seminars, focusing on
such topics as the recent collapse of the New England fisheries, will give
students an historical perspective on environmental management. Together, these
components will provide students with (1) a conceptual framework to understand
the mechanisms responsible for the evolution and maintenance of biodiversity,
(2) field experience in both terrestrial and marine ecosystems at temperate and
tropical latitudes, (3) a mastery of practical skills for filed sampling,
statistical analysis, genetic determination of population structure, and spatial
mapping and (4) an apprecia tion of the different roles played by scientists,
managers, politicians and the public in the development and implementation of
environmental policy. The proposal outlines the research activities of nineteen
participating faculty in the following areas of Environmental Biology:
Spatiotemporal patterns in biodiversity; Population dynamics, metapopulations
and community structure; Biogeochemical cycles and community structure;
Measuring genetic variation; Breeding systems and fertility; Germplasm resources
in wild, captive and domesticated species; and Systematic. Faculty members
involved in the training program have extensive funding for research from a
variety of external sources. Their research transcends traditional boundaries of
several subdisciplines within conservation biology, integrates findings emerging
from various levels of biological organization and deals with a range of spatial
scales from local to global. The collaborative organization of the traineeship
program encourages students to work with professors in the Biology,
Environmental Science and Geography departments, as well as with scientists at
the New England Aquarium and the Franklin Park Zoo. We have an unusual
opportunity to translate this broad expertise into a coherent training program.
The University of Massachusetts Boston is an urban university with a diverse
student body and a strong commitment to recruiting underrepresented minorities
and to academic excellence. The Biology Department has extensive experience
fostering the development of minority and women undergraduate scientists through
our McNair Achievement program in the Science and our summer Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) in Ecology and Conservation Biology. These programs,
along with our contacts at the New England Board of Higher Education and several
science minority programs at other universities, will greatly facilitate our
recruiting efforts. At least two of the five traineesh ips requested in this
proposal will be awarded to underrepresented minorities. The University has
devoted major resources to the development of graduate level environmental
programs. The Boston campus Administration has agreed to provide additional
funds for special seminar series, workshops, and visiting appointments. These
activities will complement the traineeship program, and make the education
benefits available to the community and the public at large.