* 9552379
* The Golden West College Multimedia Classroom-Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* John Wadhams, Golden West College
* Standard Grant
* Tina H. Straley
* 07/31/1997
* USD 35,204.00

John H. Wadhams DUE 9552379 Golden West College FY1995 $ 35,204 Huntington
Beach, CA 92647 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Mathematics Title: The Golden
West College Multimedia Classroom-Laboratory This project converts two
traditional classrooms into Multimedia Classroom-Laboratories each equipped with
two large screen monitors and a computer capable of running Macintosh and DOS
software. This project also expands the Mathematics Department's existing
Mathematica Computer-Lab from 16 to 25 stations in order to accommodate the
anticipated increased usage. In addition to the initial target group of
Precalculus and Calculus students, the use of the lab will be expanded to
include Linear Algebra, Discrete Math, Statistics, and Math for Elementary
Teachers. The use of cooperative learning activities and projects are the
catalyst to transform students from observers to active learners capable of
using technology to solve mathematical problems and implement mathematical
models. Transforming the traditional classroom into the Multimedia Classroom-
Laboratory addresses the need to use appropriate technology, projects, and
increased student involvement on a daily basis to: modify the role of the
student from observer to active learner; increase the effectiveness of learning
activities by reducing student frustration in interfacing with the computers;
enhance communication with both native and non-native English speakers; improve
student problem solving and modeling skills; modify the instructor's role from
lecturer to coach. Evaluation and dissemination include the formation of an
advisory board for evaluation and a video tape for dissemination. An advisory
board consisting of faculty in mathematics and other disciplines;
representatives of High School, four year schools, selected local industries,
and students will provide feedback on the appropriateness and effectiveness of
the changes in the curriculum. The video tape is to demonstrate the Multimedia
Classroom-Laboratory in action and is intended to communicate results to the
teaching community.