* 9552183
* Improvement of Instruction Using an Advanced Mobile         Technology Laboratory
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1995,11/30/1997
* Paul Kennedy, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 11/30/1997
* USD 56,291.00

The primary purpose of this project is to provide the equipment necessary to
prepare prospective secondary mathematics teachers to teach effectively using
technology, as recommended by the National Council for the Accreditation of
Teacher Education (NCATE) and the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics
(NCTM). This is accomplished through the provision of the equipment necessary to
create the Mobile Mathematics Laboratory (MML), which can be transported from
school to school and set up inside the classrooms of prospective mathematics
teachers undergoing the student teaching experience. The equipment is chosen so
that the laboratory can be set up quickly using the existing furniture, no
retrofitting of the classroom is required, and no wires are running across the
room. Because prospective mathematics teachers will need to be familiar with
using the machines in the MML and will need to be taught mathematics using
computers, the Advanced Mathematical Laboratory (AML) is also being created. The
AML, which is used to teach computer-intensive mathematics, will be stocked in
virtually the same arrangement as the MML because using these machines prepares
the prospective mathematics teachers for using the MML and the absence of wires
and the low profile and small footprints of the notebook computers are very
desirable.