* 9552526
* SET CAREERS: Science, Engineering, and Technology Careers Exhibits
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Stephen Rabin, Educational Film Center
* Standard Grant
* Hyman H. Field
* 07/31/1998
* USD 1,168,421.00

9552526 Rabin ABSTRACT: The Educational Film Center will complete production of
a science, engineering, and technology careers exhibit and informal science
education project for use in science museums, libraries, schools, and community
locations. The twelve additional interactive and linear career profiles to be
produced under this grant will bring the total number of careers available in a
fully interactive mode to thirty-two. Users will be able to explore each of
these careers with first person video profiles of people in science and
engineering and animated/reality video simulations of work experiences in these
fields. The exhibit also with provide guidance to help users make decisions
about education and career choices and will include a database of information
about approximately 200 additional science and math-based professions. The
project also will undertake the development and testing of eight permanent model
Family Outreach Science Career Education Centers in eight cities. These centers
will be based on and will expand upon the experience the project had in their
earlier model Parent Outreach Science Career Program. Utilization support will
be provided through special target leader guides, presentations and workshops at
national and regional meetings of user organizations and groups, and a SETQuest
bulletin board and e-mail network for the exchange of user science career
programming. This project is a collaborative effort among four organizations:
The Educational Film Center (EFC) is responsible for management of the project
and for the development of production of the software and the documentary video
profiles; COMAP is responsible for selecting and hiring content consultants, for
formative and summative evaluation, and will jointly market and distribute the
material with EFC; The New York Hall of Science is responsible for the exhibit
kiosk and graphics, the design and development of the workbook and museum
installation print components of the project, and will serve as principal test
site for the exhibit; and the AAAS is coordinating the design, implementation,
and testing of parent outreach program. All of the organizations will be
involved in presentations and dissemination of project information to the
informal and formal education communities.