* 9552234
* Enhancing Physical Science Curricula Through                Computer-Assisted Instruction and Data Image Processing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Gustavo Morales, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 07/31/1997
* USD 20,327.00

Gustavo Morales DUE 9552234 Valencia Community Coll FY1995 $ 20,327 Orlando, FL
328023028 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Interdisciplinary Title: Enhancing
Physical Science Curricula Through Computer-Assisted Instruction and Data Image
Processing Valencia Community College has a long history of providing a wide
selection of comprehensive and high-quality academic programs designed to
prepare students to meet changing work force requirements. The College currently
faces the challenge of continuing to fulfill this mission by incorporating
appropriate technology into education and training programs for a student body
that has become increasingly diverse. This challenge is perhaps greatest in the
sciences. Through the project proposed in this request to NSF, Valencia will
target six courses in the physical sciences by infusing computer-assisted
learning experiences and data image processing into the curricula. In planning
this project, faculty examined several possibilities for incorporating the use
of computers into the laboratory setting for the following courses: Earth
Sciences, Physical Geology, Historical Geology, Meteorology, Astronomy, and
Oceanography. The decision was made to carry out a project based on the
successful curricula developed by the Center for Image Processing in Education
in association with the University of Arizona. Image processing provides a
powerful medium to excite students about science, especially students from
minority groups and others whose needs have not been met by traditional ways of
teaching these subjects. Using professional-quality software on microcomputers,
students will explore a variety of scientific data sets, including earth remote
sensing and meteorology data and planetary exploration im ages. While these
courses will develop inquiry and research skills for all students, the project
will also encourage more students to pursue professional science careers and
provide them with the appropriate training in subject matter and the use of up-
to-date technology for the respective fields. Valencia requests the NSF's
support for the purchase of microcomputers, software, and databases to
incorporate new curricula and pedagogy into the targeted courses.