* 9552248
* Stereolithography (Rapid Prototyping) Apparatus for the     Polymer Processing and Computer Integrated Manufacturing    Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1995,04/30/1997
* Winston Erevelles, Kettering University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 04/30/1997
* USD 69,500.00

This project enriches the educational experience in three facets of the
Manufacturing Systems Engineering and the Mechanical Engineering curricula. The
addition of a Stereolithography Apparatus allows Polymer Processing, Computer
Integrated Manufacturing (CIM), and Metal Casting Processes students (among
others) to participate actively in multiple phases of a manufacturing system.
Part design information along with mold design requirements, derived and
gathered by Polymer Processing students, is fed to students of Computer
Integrated Manufacturing. Working with the Polymer students, and equipped with
SLA requirements, CIM students develop appropriate solid models for prototyping.
Finally, metal casting students are provided with prototypes useful in
developing permanent molds. Use of the new equipment extends through all levels
of secondary and postsecondary education. Junior and senior level Mechanical and
Manufacturing Systems Engineering students are provided with experiences
integrating all aspects of rapid prototyping technology. The addition of SLA to
GMrs Polymer Processing/Computer Integrated Manufacturing laboratories provides
exposure manufacturing systems engineering to the students of GMI and
inspiration in the area of Manufacturing Systems Engineering to young people
considering further education in this field.