* 9552199
* Computerized Experiments in the Physiology and Biology      Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Nancy Rauch, Peralta Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 08/31/1998
* USD 23,937.00

Nancy Rauch DUE 9552199 Peralta Cmty Col Dist Off FY1995 $ 23,937 Oakland, CA
94619 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Life Sciences Title: Physiology and Biology
Experiments in a Computerized Laboratory This project is allowing community
college biology students to study and analyze physiological functioning of the
human body and other biological phenomena with the use of computers.
Commercially obtained software programs is being used to study, record and
analyze electrocardiograms, lung function, somatic reflexes,
electroencephalograms, and simulated muscle physiology. Students are able to
save data to disc and analyze their own readings and class data as well. They
are gaining knowledge of basic physiology and also becoming more computer
literate at the same time. These exercises are being incorporated into the
laboratory schedule and becoming a part of the standard curriculum for the Human
Physiology, General Biology and Anatomy/Physiology courses at Merritt College, a
two-year community college in Oakland, California. Other colleges in the Peralta
Community College District, of which Merritt College is a part, are being
introduced to the software. Laboratory experiences with the computers and
programs are being shared with these colleges at joint staff development
meetings. Demonstration sessions are also be held for Merritt College
instructors so that this equipment can be incorporated into most of the biology
classes offered at Merritt College. As a result of this new technological
capability in our undergraduate laboratories, our students have a better
understanding of basic physiological and biological principles, as well as an
increased level of computer skill and confidence.