* 9552329
* The Earth Systems Laboratory:  An Interactive Tool to       Improve Introductory Geoscience Courses
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Karen Grove, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Gene G. Wubbels
* 06/30/1997
* USD 37,127.00

This project creates in the Department of Geosciences a new interactive computer
laboratory--the Earth Systems Laboratory (ESL)--dedicated to the visualization
and analysis of Earth features. The project addresses two curricular needs in
the highest enrollment courses of general education curriculum: Introduction to
Oceanography lecture and laboratory. Two important, but difficult-to-acquire
skills are developed: first, the ability to visualize the structure and
evolution of three-dimensional Earth phenomena with different time and space
scales; second, the capacity to understand the process of scientific inquiry as
an exploration and evolution of ideas, not a static collection of facts. In the
ESL, students are not passive observers, but active participants in the
observation, description, interpretation, and integration of Earth data. The ESL
provides the essential hands-on experiences that make the scientific discovery
process come alive for our nonmajors students. Computers are being connected to
campus and global networks, thereby giving students access to many of the
resources available to professional scientists. The project provides them a
guiding path for their access to data and manipulating software by using Mosaic-
type browsing software to identify resources and to create documents that link
these resources to menu items that can be selected by students. The project is
being implemented through the creation of new exercises made possible through
the acquisition of hardware and software for the ESL.