* 9552856
* Asset Teacher Enhancement Project
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1995,05/31/2002
* Alfred Bortz, ASSET Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Rowena S. Douglas
* 05/31/2002
* USD 4,371,780.00

*** 9552856 Davison Fifteen of Allegheny County's 43 school districts, including
53 schools and over 1,020 teachers, have been collaboratively developing a
strategy for systematically reforming science education in their elementary
schools. To support this activity, Allegheny Schools Science Education and
Technology (ASSET) Inc., a local non-profit consortium of bus iness, education,
and community leaders committed to reforming science education, was initiated in
1993 through the leadership of Miles Inc., (now called Bayer Inc.) a Pittsburgh-
based company with major businesses in health care, chemicals, and imaging
technologies. The plan for reform includes: the development of a comprehensive
curriculum for each district based on FOSS, STC, and Insights units; the
creation of a regional materials support center; the selection and preparation
of coalition resource teachers (one per 200 teachers) responsible with
scientists for inservice and the support of teachers district-wide; the
development of lead teachers in each building; regular classroom teac her
training; the creation and use of student assessments; connections to the
informal science centers, the improvement of preservice education; and organized
community involvement. To accomplish this wide-range of activities, ASSET has
brought together an impressive set of partners. The Carnegie Science Center,
industry, private and corporate f oundations and the Allegheny Intermediate Unit
are collaborating in the development and support of the Materials Center. The
Learning Research and Development Center (LRDC) of the University of Pittsburgh
will support the use of student authentic assessment. The Carnegie Science
Center will coordinate the National Aviary, the Pittsburgh Zoo, Bee chwood Farms
Nature Preserve, and the Carnegie Museum of Natural History, as they offer
learning opportunities for teachers and students. Bayer Inc. will coordinate the
training of professional scientists who will work with lead teachers and will
take the lead in developing the commun ity outreach and communication effort.
The school districts will be responsible for the education and support of all
teachers, the selection and support of the instructional materials, and the
design for the institutionalization of the project. The cost sharing for the
project will be 70% of the NSF portion. ***