* 9552293
* Enhanced Instruction of Molecular Biology:  Incorporation   of Electrophoresis and Related Techniques into the Biology  Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Holly Downing, University of Wisconsin-Whitewater
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1997
* USD 19,807.00

This project funds laboratory equipment that enhances the quality of instruction
in the areas of cell and molecular biology. Electrophoresis and related
techniques are widely used in many areas of biology. A firm understanding of
these processes is essential for all of the university's students, but
especially those who plan to go to graduate school in cell and molecular
biology; those who hope to get jobs in cell, molecular, or physiology
laboratories; or even those who plan on teaching middle or high school. The most
effective instruction in the sciences is in the laboratory, where students gain
hands-on experience and can learn to understand what is involved and potential
problems that can arise at more than a theoretical level. By incorporating gel
electrophoresis exercises in the Introduction to Genetics and Cell Biology
courses, faculty can ensure that all majors graduate with a solid understanding
of how proteins and nucleic acids can be isolated based on molecular weight and
electrical charge and how the variability in proteins can be related to genetic
differences for population studies. Advanced laboratories involving polymerase
chain reaction and techniques such as Western blotting are being included in
upper- division courses such as Microbiology, Plant Physiology, Molecular
Biology, and Cell Biology and used in independent study projects and faculty
research. In addition, the new equipment is being used to demonstrate
electrophoresis and DNA fingerprinting in Introduction to Criminology for the
Criminal Justice minor offered by the Sociology Department and possibly in a
science and math summer enrichment program for minority students and teachers.