* 9552337
* Laser Based Experiments in Chemistry and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/1995,05/31/1997
* David Guerra, McDaniel College
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 05/31/1997
* USD 24,735.00

David V. Guerra DUE 9552337 Western Maryland College FY1995 $24,735
Westminster, MD 21157 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Chemistry Title: Laser
Based Experiments in Chemistry and Physics Western Maryland College will add the
significant component of laser physics and laser spectroscopy to its Physical
Chemistry, Instrumental Techniques, and Optics Laboratories. In addition, three
introductory courses, two of them for non-science majors, will be enhanced by an
experience with lasers. Although lasers have become ubiquitous in post-graduate
research, a lack of adequate instrumentation currently prevents any meaningful
"hands-on" experience for our students. Through the addition of several assorted
laser systems and peripheral equipment such as a monochromator and digital
oscilloscope, we plan to introduce students to the physical basis of modern
optics and to advanced spectroscopic principles. In Physical Chemistry and
Instrumental Techniques, many important spectroscopic techniques, such as Raman,
pulse-probe, and luminescence decay, will become integral parts of our modern
laboratories. Those topics are currently limited to an inappropriately small
role in our classroom discussion. The proposed equipment is especially relevant
in Instrumental Techniques where students will assemble their own
spectrophotometers from the individual components, i.e., light source, sample,
monochromator, and detector. In Optics, students will construct lasers from
individual components (i.e., gain media, end-mirror, output-coupler, and tuning
element) and examine the role of each component in the overall operation of the
system. That exercise will complement theoretical discussions of longitudinal
and transverse modes and optical gain and losses. In General Physics, a mong
other laser experiments, students will use a pulsed nitrogen laser and a digital
oscilloscope to determine the speed-of-light. The background of our Chemistry
and Physics students, most of whom go on to graduate or professional schools,
will be greatly enhanced by the curricular modernization supported by this
project.