* 9552294
* Workstation Infrastructure for Teaching Engineering Science
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Harvey Silverman, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Chalmers F. Sechrist
* 12/31/1997
* USD 81,000.00

Computer workstations perform calculations and display graphics fast enough to
make real qualitative improvements in teaching engineering. This project is
using 18 SUN SPARC 20 Model 61 Workstations to bring computer-aided design and
scientific simulation into our core courses. Freshmen and sophomores in all six
engineering programs take a common core, lasting through part of the third year,
that gives a broad background in physics and engineering science. The new
machines make possible three things: first, students will have four years'
exposure to a uniform set of UNIX tools, allowing expertise to develop; second,
computer-aided design will begin in the earliest courses as a better basis for
later study; finally, engineers will develop improved insight into the
engineering sciences by simulation of fundamental exemplary problems.
Traditionally, simple examples that can be solved by hand are the main tool for
teaching introductory science. Many suitable problems that could extend one's
physical intuition are neglected because they are hard to compute or draw, a
difficulty that workstations can overcome. For example, one such problem in
electricity and magnetism is the electrostatic focusing of a beam of electrons
in a CRT. The actual lens is just three concentric tubes set end to end at
different potentials. Its analysis shows potential theory, electric field
visualization, and particle dynamics in an economically important context. This
project is developing software with simple interfaces for a suite of such
examples as a new teaching tool.