* 9552227
* Industrial Applications of Dynamic Data Acquisition and     Analysis, A Multi-Disciplinary Laboratory Projects Course
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1997
* Sally Anne McInerny, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 07/31/1997
* USD 45,095.00

This project funds a multidisciplinary, applications-oriented laboratory course
providing hands-on experience in the acquisition and analysis of dynamic data.
Although the Mechanical and Electrical Engineering Departments have been
providing courses in noise control, dynamic systems analysis, vibrations,
electronic signals and systems, and communications, their laboratories are not
sufficiently equipped to demonstrate and reinforce the principles taught in
these courses and students have had little or no exposure to industrial
applications of dynamic data acquisition and analysis. This new lab course
remedies these deficiencies, strengthens existing curricular strands, and
provides students with the training necessary to pursue more sophisticated
projects in their Capstone design courses. The new course initially is divided
into five modules, each centered around specific applications of signal analysis
such as speech encoding and enhancement, machinery sound power, and machine
condition monitoring/diagnostics. The modules can be modified and more modules
added as technology and industrial needs change. Representatives from industry
are being asked to assess the contents and methods of the course. The course
directly affects 70 - 100 engineering students a year. A laboratory manual with
instructor's supplement is also being developed.