* 9552374
* Restructuring the Physics Lab: A Remote Interactive         Approach
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Stephen Hanzely, Youngstown State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth H. Howes
* 08/31/1997
* USD 19,388.00

William G. Sturrus DUE 9552374 Youngstown St University FY1995 $ 19,388
Youngstown, OH 44555 ILI - Instrumentation Project: Physics Title: Restructuring
the Physics Lab: A Remote Interactive Approach Traditional introductory physics
laboratories require the student to take specified data and perform specified
calculations. While this is an efficient method for introducing large numbers of
students to science in the brief time allotted to laboratory study each week, it
omits important aspects of scientific research, including preliminary analysis
of a problem, design of methods for probing the problem, group interaction and
discipline, and discovery by the student. It is planned to restructure the
mechanics laboratory, the first in a three-course laboratory sequence for
beginning students. The current nine traditional experiments will be replaced by
three, each focusing on one of the three fundamental approaches to mechanics:
force and motion, energy, and momentum. Each experiment will continue over a
period of three weeks, during which students will target their own conceptions
of the topic through an initial computer-assisted assessment, will then decide
how best to test their conceptions using portable data collection hardware
outside of the idealized classroom setting, will perform their tests using
subjects and environments familiar from everyday experience, and report back to
the laboratory to analyze results and repeat the assessment of their
conceptions, comparing initial conceptions with final conclusions. Such student-
initiated comparisons, coupled with evaluations of corresponding performance in
lecture courses, will provide a basis for examining the effectiveness of the
approach. While students will work in groups of three, interaction among groups
will be facilitated using data from one group to challenge the others to provide
interpretations. This new remote-interactive approach to the beginning
laboratory is designed to produce meaningful thought by the student rather than
learning by rote, and is expected to increase student understanding of basic
physics as well as produce in the student a better appreciation both of physics
in particular and the scientific approach in general.