* 9553453
* Globilization and Democratization:  A Graduate Research     Traineeship Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* John O'Loughlin, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9553453 Ward The Globalization and Democratization training program is a new
interdisciplinary graduate training and research effort which focuses on how
transformations of the global economy affect the practices and prospects of
democracy in different societies. This program builds upon our individual and
collective teaching and research interests, and the strengths of the Research
Program in Political and Economic Change in the Institute of Behavioral Science
at the University of Colorado. It will forge a strong program of training and
research aimed at producing a top-flight cohort of interdisciplinary social
science scholars who will be trained in behavioral science approaches that
emphasize both globalization and democracy. These scholars will have training in
individual disciplines as well as training that transcends contemporary
departmental structures; they will be integrated into ongoing interdisciplinary
research projects on a variety of level of social organization, ranging from the
workplace to the international system; some will work actively on developing new
and innovative curricular spin-offs on the topics of globalization and democracy
at the graduate and undergraduate levels; and some will also be involved in
international exchanges. A separate research proposal on the manner in which
democratic norms and practices have spread since 1815 is appended to this
training grant proposal.