* 9553905
* Metro Nashville Public Schools Systemic Initiative To       Improve Science Achievement For All Students
* EHR,DRL
* 06/01/1996,07/31/2003
* Richard Benjamin, Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patricia K. Freitag
* 07/31/2003
* USD 5,145,000.00

9553905 Nye This is a five year Local Systemic Change project to improve science
education for all 1715 K-5 teachers in 84 elementary schools in Metro Nashville
Public Schools District. This will be accomplished by providing intensive summer
institutes and continuing school year collaborative sessions. The District and
Tennessee State University (TCU) will collaborate to initiate and sustain the
reform through a partnership by creating site-based and cross-district learning
communities with an enduring infrastructure to sustain the reform. Leadership
development will be a component of the project. There will be 11 Teachers in
Residence to assume the role of professional development for a cluster of
schools (each cluster will serve seven or eight elementary schools) and there
will be teams of three school facilitators at each school. The Teachers in
Residence will provide professional development opportunities for teachers in
their cluster of schools and the facilitators will be available on a day to day
basis for the teachers in their respective schools. Principals play an important
role in the project. Each will receive 50 hours of professional training which
will be provided by the Co-Principal Investigators. The intent is that the
principals will become the instructional leaders of their schools. The
curriculum will be modular based and includes Science and Technology for
Children (STC), INSIGHTS and FOSS units. All the science disciplines are
included in the curriculum. A Materials Resource Center has developed TSU and
will be the distribution center for the kits. The Center maintains, refurbishes,
and distributes the kits to the classrooms. Scientists will work with teachers
to develop skills in inquiry and to provide support and enhancement of the
content for the curriculum. The project requested $5,145,000 from NSF with
institutions/agencies and the Metro School District providing $14,011,353 in
cost sharing.