* 9553236
* Presidential Faculty Fellow
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2002
* Jonathan Gruber, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bonney Sheahan
* 07/31/2002
* USD 500,000.00

This award provides support to Dr. Jonathan Gruber under the National Science
Foundation's Presidential Faculty Fellows (PFF) Program. The PFF Program was
established at the request of the President of the United States to recognize
and support the scholarly activities of some of the Nation's most outstanding
science and engineering faculty members early in their careers. Awards are
intended to allow Fellows to undertake self-designed, innovative research and
teaching projects, to establish research and teaching programs, and to pursue
other academic related activities. This award will allow the investigator to
pursue his research in public economics, the study of how taxes and government
spending programs affect economic activity. His particular specialty is the
analysis of social insurance programs. His research has been devoted to
investigating two key economic questions about social insurance programs in the
U.S. First, how should social insurance programs be financed? Second, what are
the benefits of social insurance programs for participants? His research over
the five-year period of the award will extend his analysis of the benefits of
social insurance programs along three dimensions: health, labor market
efficiency, and consumption smoothing. Specifically, he will study the health
benefits of public insurance coverage for infants; the effect of public
insurance expansions for young children on their utilization of medical care,
immunization rates, and health; the utilization and health implications paying
physicians more to see publicly insured patients; and the role of social
insurance programs in alleviating the consumption fall for those who suffer
adverse events such as unemployment. Dr. Gruber has established himself as a
major force in economics in just a few short years. His work provides plausible
evidence on the behavioral responses of economic agents to exogenous changes in
the economic environment that can be used to analyze public policies, test
alternative economic theories, and estimate important underlying behavioral
parameters. He is also an excellent teacher of undergraduate and graduate
students. Last year he was awarded the first Undergraduate Economics Association
Teaching Prize. This five year award will enable him to continue his important
research as well as to train students in the field of public finance which he
has helped to broaden to include public finance, health economics, and labor
economics.