* 9553662
* NASA-CCITT Project in Remote Sensing, Image Processing, and Geographic Information Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Patricia Cunniff, Prince George's Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1999
* USD 694,941.00

Patricia A. Cunniff DUE 9553662 Prince George's Com. College FY1995 $ 313,973
Largo, MD 20772 FY1996 $ 293,427 FY1997 $ 87,541 Advanced Technological
Education Title: Remote Sensing, Image Processing, and Geographic Information
Systems Community Colleges for Innovative Technology Transfer, Inc. (CCITT), a
consortium of 12 community colleges across the United States, all linked with a
local NASA Center, is conducting six faculty development workshops (two each) in
remote sensing, image processing, and geographic information systems. An earth
systems science course with a self-standing laboratory utilizing remote sensing,
image processing, and geographic information systems is being developed as well
as an interdisciplinary curriculum module having multiple strands which utilize
the technologies above. The interdisciplinary modules can be infused into
science and technology courses at CCITT institutions and other community
colleges throughout the United States. Community college members of CCITT
include: Brevard Community College, FL, Cuyahoga Community College, OH,
Foothill-DeAnza Community College District, CA, John C. Calhoun Community
College, AL, Pasadena City College, CA, Pearl River Community College, MS,
Prince George's Community College, MD, Thomas Nelson Community College, VA, and
Houston, TX-based Consortium for Aeronautical Technical Education composed of
San Jacinto Community College, College of the Mainland, Alvin College, and Lee
College. NASA Headquarters and local NASA Centers are supporting the faculty
development/curriculum work. The remote sensing workshop is being held at NASA
Goddard Space Flight Center in Greenbelt, Maryland with a portion of the
instruction being provided by NASA scientists and engineers. Scie ntists from
AMES are involved with the two image processing workshops to be held at Foothill
College. Individuals from academe and industry with GIS experience support the
two GIS workshops.