* 9553716
* Machine Tool Advanced Skills Technology Educational         Resources (MASTER) Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,01/26/1999
* Jon Botsford, Texas State Technical College
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 01/26/1999
* USD 1,550,000.00

This proposal solicits funding to support a multi-state effort to develop
curricula and laboratory materials for student learning in advanced skills
technologies for fifteen occupational areas supporting the American machining
and machine tool industries. The Machine Tool Advanced Skills Technology
Educational Resources (MASTER) Program will design, develop, test and
disseminate new curricula materials for AS/AAS degree options in machining and
metals related technologies. Since these occupational areas generally require
some form of apprenticeship or internship, these educational materials will also
be designed and prescribed for use with industry partners. The problems
addressed by this project are: (1) the use of outdated curricula materials by
schools and colleges; (2) fewer students entering programs of study in these
career fields that are highly important to the nation's economy in aerospace,
metals, and manufacturing; (3) the rapid evolution of new multi-task machine
tools that have reached beyond the capabilities of many existing technicians;
and (4) the lack of rigorous college level programs that are needed to prepare a
target audience of knowledge based workers in advanced problem solving skills.
Four key goals will be addressed by the MASTER Program: (1) to provide more
technical graduates that are multi-skilled in new machining tools and support
related technologies; (2) to upgrade curricula and laboratories in these
technical fields which are critical to the success of our nation; (3) to offer
college-level training to existing industry employees to become multi-skilled
with new and highly advanced equipment; (4) to establish realistic opportunities
for college and industrial partners to validate competency requirements, prepare
a national model for apprenticeship/internship with prescribed laboratory work
experiences; and (5) to disseminate the new curricula and educational materials
nationally. This collaborative effort brings together six of the nation's
leading two-year colleges, geographically dispersed, in areas of high demand,
with identified public school and industry partners. Significant national
outcomes can be the survival of many critical industries and technical jobs.