* 9553542
* Pacific Voices
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Karl Hutterer, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Barry A. Van Deman
* 09/30/1998
* USD 442,364.00

9553542 Kahn The Burke Museum at the University if Washington will develop
Pacific Voices, a 5500 sq. ft. exhibit that will focus on the issue of cultural
identity. It will encourage visitors to examine the definition of American
cultural identity, the integration of diverse cultural elements within American
communities, and questions regarding interactions between Native peoples and
Euro- Americans. Four themes (Teachers, Elders, and Authority; Language; Oral
Traditions; and Ceremonies) will be developed to help visitors understand
cultural identify, tradition and change in the context of Pacific Region
cultures. The extensive collections and professional resources of the Burke
Museum will be used and the exhibit will be used. Building on established
linkages between the Seattle school systems and the museum, the Burke staff will
introduce new teacher/student guides and a varied menu of teacher training
activities including for-credit courses and in-serviced programs that will
address the social science literacy benchmarks of Project 2061. Other outreach
activities will include traveling study collections, weekend family programs, a
resource bank in the museum's Department of Education and locally and nationally
disseminated radio and television news and feature programs related to the theme
of Pacific Voices.