* 9553430
* MPWG:  Training Mentors:  A Transportable Model to Improve  Retention of Women in Science and Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Suzanne Brainard, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1998
* USD 100,084.00

Brainard 9553430 Mentoring programs, albeit loosely defined, have become a
popular national "cure-all" for recruitment and retention issues for women and
minorities in science and engineering in both academic and corporate
environments. The goal of this project is to enhance retention rates of females
pursuing undergraduate and graduate degrees in engineering by improving the
current practices of mentoring programs through training. The effort builds upon
the successful WIE Undergraduate Mentoring Program at the UW. The project
proposes: to develop and formalize the existing effort into a comprehensive,
stand-alone Mentoring Training Program for women in engineering; to test the
program on undergraduate and graduate students, faculty and professional
scientists and engineers at two institutions to determine the feasibility of
transferring the model to other institutions; and to package and disseminate the
Mentoring Training Program nationally. The program will focus upon intensive
learner-centered training on how to be a mentor and how to be a mentee, with
separate manuals for students, faculty, and other professionals. Graduate
students will be added to the student population targeted. The program will be
modified based on findings from pilot testing. An external evaluator will
evaluate the effort. ***