* 9553689
* Foundation Skills for Advanced Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Stephen Rodi, Austin Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1998
* USD 318,715.00

The vision of Texas CREATE is to dramatically change the perception of advanced
technology careers in Texas by establishing a Center of Excellence at Austin
Community College. From this Center, CREATE will coordinate a strategy to affect
its vision. CREATE will achieve four goals: core curriculum development in three
areas, implementation of the core curriculum in both secondary schools and
community colleges, establishing the sophisticated infrastructure which supports
curriculum development and implementation, and finally evaluating its activities
both formatively and summatively. At the heart of CREATE's curriculum
development is a new foundation course, Introduction to Advanced Technology,
built around a carefully selected set of instruments as a medium for hands-on
experiential learning. This course simultaneously exposes students to a wide
range of technological activities and skills and develops their abilities in
math and science in an integrated, holistic fashion. CREATE believes all
technicians should be trained in the fundamentals of environmental science and
provides a mechanism for doing so in its course, Fundamentals of Environmental
Science Technology. CREATE's third course, Fundamentals of Electronics
Technology, is a radically new and exciting way of teaching students
introductory electronics by using Mobile Robot technology developed at Texas A&M
University. The implementation of CREATE's curricula at the high school level is
achieved by a three-year program of summer camps which reach 135 secondary
schools and bring both teachers and students together as learning partners.
CREATE also plans an intensive year of exposure to advanced technology for
community college administrators, faculty and students. CREATE will support its
curriculum by validating skills, by student recruitment with emphasis on women
and minorities, and by establishing sophisticated electronics links and a
central clearinghouse for articulation agree ments among institutions of all
kinds. CREATE will work cooperatively with organizations like the American
Chemical Society and the American Society of Mechanical Engineers to enhance the
professional status of technicians. Noteworthy among CREATE's dissemination
activities will be use of a World-Wide Web Home Page, state-wide
teleconferencing, materials production on CD-ROM, and development of packaged
educational materials commercially distributed. CREATE's evaluation efforts will
be both formative and summative and will benefit from advice from outstanding
external evaluators like those at Texas A&M University's Public Policy Research
Institute.