* 9553020
* Presidential Faculty Fellows Award - Observational Cosmology and Active Star-Forming Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 11/15/1995,10/31/2001
* John Salzer, Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen D. Friel
* 10/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

Abstract John J. Salzer Wesleyan University Galaxies that have active nuclei, or
regions of intense starburst activity, represent examples of the most energetic
phenomena known in the universe. Galaxian activity is very common and occurs on
all scales, from the super luminous quasi-stellar objects (QSOs), down to the
extremely active star-formation regions in blue compact dwarf galaxies. Much of
our knowledge of active galactic nuclei (AGNs) and starburst galaxies have come
by studying galaxies cataloged in objective-prism surveys which used
observations by Schmidt telescopes and data recorded on photographic plates. The
opportunity to use more sensitive charge coupled device (CCD) detectors to
survey for emission-line galaxies now exists, and initial observations have
provided results that have shown great promise to provide better data. The
large, deep samples obtained from CCD-based Schmidt surveys will provide
exciting new opportunities to study galaxian activity of all types, and should
allow us to better understand this activity in the context of galaxy formation
and evolution in general. The research will involve carrying out the next
generation of objective-prism surveys for emission-line galaxies. The technique
to be used combines the benefits of a traditional Qchmidt telescope survey with
the advantages of using a CCD detector. It is planned to survey several hundred
square degrees of sky to a limiting magnitude of B = 20 - 21 over the next five
years. Computer software developed specifically for this program will be used to
automatically locate, extract, and classify the spectra in each field, and use
pattern matching algorithms to select our sample of emission-line galaxies. An
initial pilot project, carried out in the Spring of 1994, has verified that our
technique is indeed capable of reaching the desired magnitude. It is
conservatively estimated that 20-30 emission-line galaxies will be found per
square degree, roughly 200 times the surface density of the galaxies in the
Markarian survey. The emission-line galaxy candidates will be observed
spectroscopically using a multi-fiber spectrograph to obtain redshifts and line
strengths for the full sample. The results obtained from analyzing the data of
this deep sample of AGNs and star-forming galaxies will have numerous
applications to the study of galaxian activity. These include: global star-
formation processes, chemical evolution in galaxies, the value of the primordial
helium abundance, luminosity functions and space densities of AGN and actively
star-forming galaxies, large-scale structure and observational cosmology.