* 9553325
* ID/PPD:  Systemic Assistance for Teaching Science to        Students with Disabilities (SATSSD)
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* Greg Stefanich, University of Northern Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence A. Scadden
* 08/31/2000
* USD 285,050.00

Proposal # HRD 95-53325 University of Northern Iowa Gregory Stefanich, Principal
Investigator "The Curriculum Development in Teaching Science to Students with
Disabilities Project" ABSTRACT The Curriculum Development in Teaching Science to
Students with Disabilities (CDTSSD) project is a two-year effort designed to
provide training to teachers and teacher educators to improve their skills and
knowledge in teaching science to students with disabilities. The project will
train professionals who provide services to students with disabilities about
effective resources and teaching/assessment strategies. Participants will be
exposed to effective instructional practice through model hands-on, multi-
modality science lessons, which will include the use of adaptive materials and
suggestions for accommodating students with disabilities. The disability areas
addressed will include motor/orthopedic impairments, deaf and hard of hearing,
visual impairments, learning disabilities, cognitive impairments, and behavioral
disabilities. The project will use a "training the trainers" approach. It will
begin with the development of training materials: an in-service training module
consisting of a publication entitled Guidelines for Teaching Students With
Disabilities, print materials and video tapes related to providing services to
students with disabilities in the regular science classroom, and hands-on
science investigations that will allow trainers to demonstrate five proven
methods of delivering science instruction with accommodations to students with
disabilities. These materials will be tested and disseminated through two
routes: 1. Training of science educators and content specialists in higher
education. The mode of delivery will be pre-conference programs presented at
NSTA and AETS (1997-1998), Annual Meetings. Participants in the sessions will be
required to prepare an action plan and deliver a program for faculty and staf f
at their institution of employment. 2. Training of science teacher/special
education teacher teams in a geographical region where access to specialists is
limited. Collaboration of science teachers and special educators as active teams
will strengthen the base of expertise and services to students with disabilities
in science education. Participants in these sessions will be required to prepare
an action plan and will deliver a program for teachers at their teaching
location.