* 9553642
* The 1995 National EPSCoR Conference
* EHR,ESR
* 07/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Randolph Lewis, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 12/31/1996
* USD 172,397.00

9553642 Lewis The Annual NSF EPSCoR Conference provides a forum for the exchange
of information between the National Science Foundation (NSF), members of the
state EPSCoR programs and many other parties with interests in the EPSCoR
program. During the Conference, progress and evaluation are discussed as well as
opportunities and strategies for the coming year. The State of Wyoming proposes
to host the 1995 Conference in Jackson Hole, Wyoming on September 29-29, 1995.
The theme of the Conference would be "EPSCoR: Design of a Partnership for
Success". The conference will focus on issues that are important for achieving
the goals foe EPSCoR. Topics for discussion will include: 1) Assessment and
evaluation methods at the state and national levels; 2) Individual state
programs and methods for success; 3) Opportunities for collaboration between
states and federal agencies to further advance EPSCoR goals; 4) Private sector
involvement in EPSCoR programs; and 5) Federal policy changes and their effects
on state EPSCoR programs. These objectives will be met through a combination of
invited speakers, symposia, poster sessions and displays, and adequate time for
discussion. Attendance at the meeting is expected to include, at least the
following groups of people: Project Directors and Administrative Assistants,
State EPSCoR Committee members, University Administrators, State Officials of
Higher Education, EPSCoR scientists, State Legislators, Private Sector members,
and representatives from other Federal Agencies and Programs.