* 9553639
* Science Learning in Context: Student Field Investigations
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,11/30/2000
* Robert Tinker, Concord Consortium
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 11/30/2000
* USD 1,955,976.00

9553639 Tinker This project will vastly expand the range of contexts in which
students can learn science, mathematics, and technology by providing flexible
tools that help them extract data and meaning in the complex, real world. We
will bring a full range of computer and networking tools outside the lab for
explorations of rich, natural settings (the field, classroom, school,
neighborhood, town and city) where we expect students will develop
understandings and investigative strategies that will last a lifetime. The
project will use portable MBL and client-server based wireless networking-
advanced technologies already beginning to make their appearance and certain to
be inexpensive, powerful, and widely available in five to ten years. The
technology will make it possible for students to make digital journal
observations, gather a range of kinds of data, consolidate data from others,
reflect on the data, link findings with background information and data, develop
models based on these data, and communicate with others. Used with intelligent
prompting, scaffolding, various data representations, and data exchange forms at
their fingertips, we expect to see far more student reflection and analysis in
the field. This will result in deeper learning, better use of time, and the
possibility of additional cycles of observations and analysis. In order to test
the educational potential of this technology, we will develop a series of
innovative units that employ the technology to support new ways to teach about
scientific measurement, modeling, mapping, and investigations. At the same time
we will test new instructional strategies using this technology to develop
holistic models of the natural, built, and social environment. The instructional
strategy will be based on a learning cycle that starts and ends with field
investigations, but, in between, also uses the same technology in a lab. Using
this approach, we expect student inquiry to be more efficient, student i
nvestigations will be more expert, the resulting knowledge will be less inert ,
and many new topics will be amenable to student investigation. In addition,
students will become more acquainted with their vocational choices. These
results will have important implications on the practicality of widespread use
of extended student investigations, equity, home study, and the school-to-work
transition. The project will require four years, with the primary technology and
curriculum, development in the first two years, final design in the third, and a
full year of testing in the fourth. ***