* 9553315
* AMP:  The Mid-South Alliance for Minority Participation
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Jesse McClure, Le Moyne-Owen College
* Cooperative Agreement
* A.  Hicks
* 10/31/2001
* USD 4,713,184.00

9553315 Miller The Mid-South Alliance For Minority Participation (MAMP) consists
of a coalition of nine Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs) all within
commuting distance in the tri-state area of three two-year colleges, and three
majority colleges. The alliance contains the largest Tennessee community
college, the largest Tennessee two-year technical institution, the largest
tennessee Board of Regents (TBR) undergraduate institution, a private college
with 47% majoring in engineering and science, the University of Tennessee In
Memphis a predominantly graduate institution, three HBCUs, and the fastest
growing community college in eastern Arkansas. It is an alliance of private
colleges, minority colleges, community colleges, majority colleges,with African
American community agencies and the secondary school system. One most probably
should conclude the demographics of Tennessee (See Figure 1 on next page).
Tennessee is a very long (480 miles) narrow state with the three largest cities
2000 miles apart with Memphis being the largest. Financially disadvantaged
African American students cannot afford to travel several hundred miles to
participate. the western section of tennessee is the Memphis section bordering
West Memphis has the highest density of African American students in the
Tennessee, and the neighboring counties in the tri-state area have a high
concentration of African Americans. This Memphis Mid-South region has a minority
population of 499,599, which is twice as large as the combination of the
Nashville and the knoxville regions (13 counties each). Shelby county containing
Memphis contains 371,267 year. 54% off all the youth in the city of Memphis are
African Americans. 47% of the youth in the Mid-South region are African
Americans while the Nashville and Knoxville regions are only 18.4% density of
the African American population and youth decreases rapidly as one travel west
to east as many African American youth as Nashville and 13.5 ti mes as many as
the knoxville area. During the first year, 320 incoming minority freshmen and
sophomore students will be prepared for completing baccalaureate degrees in SEM
and eventually graduate degrees. The program consists of instruction, and
personal development during the summer and mentoring and cooperative learning
during the academic year followed by research and employment in science
laboratories. 14,700 African American undergraduate students are already
enrolled in these Mid-South Alliance colleges. The Mid-South Alliance intends to
create a cadre of 800 minority students in the SEM baccalaureate programs each
year. After the fifth year 160 more will be in the first year of graduate
schools for a total of 960 per year. An additional 1000 African American
students majoring in SEM baccalaureate programs each year. An additional 1000
African American students majoring in SEM studies will be influenced through
auxiliary activities on the various campuses through seminary by visiting
African American role models. The fact that we have nine active IHE's in the
alliance within commuting distance allows us to work with small groups of twenty
students and yet permit all the first year students to come together on minority
and majority campuses for multicultural activities during our summer and
academic year activities. This Alliance will provide a stimulating means for
students to work their way through school with internships in science
laboratories. African American role models working as mentors will meet in
regularly scheduled classes for cooperative learning. Memphis Partners, one of
the Alliances member, received a $3 million grant form the Dept. of Labor in
July, 1994 in "young Fair Chance" to encourage African American into new
careers, and provide African American mentors and science related internships.
The Memphis school system received a $300,00 planning grant from the NSF, and
opened an office of School Redesign and Training now funded by a private
foundation. Their CEO is on the Advisory Committee of MAMP to improve bridging
mechanisms from secondary to postsecondary institutions. Graduate schools and
national laboratories will provide research experiences to Alliance students for
the sophomores and juniors. The MAMP views laboratory research by the
participants as extremely important to inspire students to continue for graduate
SEM degrees. The pool of minority students will be increased through recruitment
to SEM college degree programs from other disciplines, two-year colleges, and
secondary schools. Mentors will assist and encourage all Alliance scholars to
apply to SEM graduate schools.