* 9553286
* SSC:  "JSU-Summer Science Camp"
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,05/31/1997
* William White, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

For four weeks during the summers of 1996, 1997, and 1998, Jackson State
University will conduct the JSU-Summer Science Camps for fifty rising seventh
and eighth grade black students. The students will be exposed to life science,
physical science, mathematics, computer science, and communication skills in an
intensive four- week residential summer session. This exposure will take the
form of classroom instruction and laboratory activities, e.g., demonstrations
and experiments. These activities will involve individual as well as group
interaction with communication skills (oral and written), applications of
mathematical concepts, computer applications, and laboratory experimentation and
demonstrations. Participants will identify either an individual or group science
project with guidance from faculty mentors. Once the project has been identified
the faculty will work with students in four major areas--research, laboratory
work, problem-solving, and computer skills. Students will attend seminars and go
on field trips. This will provide opportunities to interact with practicing
scientist and observe activities at the planned site visits. During the school
year, students will come to Jackson State University once a month on a Saturday
to participate in scheduled activities and continue to develop their science
fair project with assistance from their faculty mentor. ***