* 9553767
* Defining the Emerging Role of the Technologist in a Computer-Aided-Engineering Environment
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Donald Garfield, Keene State College
* Continuing Grant
* Gordon E. Uno
* 08/31/1998
* USD 548,260.00

The Industrial Technology and Safety Program at Keene State College seeks a
four-year project grant from the Advanced Technology Education Program to plan,
implement, and optimize a revised curricula in its two-year associate degree
program in Design and Manufacturing based on the emerging Computer Aided
Engineering environment. Today our graduates are entering an increasingly
competitive job market. They need to have readily marketable skill in order to
compete for jobs or the academic proficiency to go on to obtain advanced
degrees. The companies that hire our graduates are facing enormous competitive
pressure from around the world. The loss of our manufacturing base continues and
the resulting job loss is a significant social-economic and political problem.
United State's companies need a flexible and technologically competent workforce
in order to stem this tide. The emerging role of the technologist must be one
that can fully utilize computer assisted technology. This computer environment
is integrating once discrete job functions, of design, manufacturing, and
business. The current limitations in existing discrete curricula suggests a new
"seamless" educational paradigm. To address this situation we are suggesting
three areas of study. The first is a conceptual based curriculum, using a
projects focus, to deliver technical problem solving for meeting curriculum
goals. The second aspect of our proposal is to create a series of four
integrated courses in the area of product design and development utilizing this
computer assisted environment. The third is to establish a collaboratively
working on these projects on the InterNet, with other schools, government
laboratories, and companies. The curriculum model we are creating is basically
an immersion model for our students that provide both a contextual and
constructivist environment for problem solving. In this environment students
solve holistic and fully integrate problems in math, science, te chnology, and
business. This curriculum model emulates both the emerging computer assisted
environment and the world of work. Our goals is to create this new curriculum
paradigm and study its effectiveness. We are creating a model that is both
pragmatic and realistic and that can serve as a nation model. This is one of
many solutions being offered to help improve the competitive position of our
graduates. By breaking with traditional paradigms it can serve as a model to
entice non-tradition, and minority students, as well as displaced workers to
move into the exciting and challenging world of product design and development.
Our project opens many new and exciting opportunity for educational research.
Through this curriculum project we will help guarantee our students the
opportunity to compete effectively and become contributing citizens in a global
economy.