* 9553210
* Presidential Faculty Fellows Award:  Development of Methods for Multidisciplinary Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Christina Bloebaum, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2000
* USD 500,000.00

9553210 Bloebaum This grant provides funding for a Presidential Faculty Fellow
Award. Research during the period of the award will focus on developing
computational design strategies for complex, multidisciplinary engineering
applications, aimed at addressing industry problems. Multidisciplinary Design
(MD) problems are typified by complex couplings between disciplines which
necessitate new design strategies that take these couplings into account. The
major areas of research during the term of this award include: 'System Reduction
Strategies' to reduce the size of the analytical models without sacrificing
system accuracy; 'Optimal Sequencing' to determine the best ordering of the
participating disciplinary subsystems to reduce overall computational cost;
'Decomposition for Mixed Systems' to develop decomposition strategies for
application in situations where variables are of continuous as well as discrete
type; and 'Coordination of Decoupled Subsystems' wherein coordination
coefficients amongst subsystems must be quantified for use in decomposition
strategies. Teaching objectives will focus on adding lab components to
undergraduate courses, renovating existing graduate courses to include teaming
and computational components, developing a new graduate course, developing a
graduate Master of Engineering program in Multidisciplinary Design, and focusing
on graduate training and mentoring. The successful development of the proposed
methodologies could result in substantially improved processes for the design of
complex systems, such as are found in aircraft, automobiles, naval vessels, high
speed trains, and even power plants. In the traditional serial design
environment, the cost of making a change increases by an order of magnitude for
each phase of the design cycle. Due to recent competitive market pressures, it
has become evident that for the design of complex systems, all requirements,
manufacturing, and life-cycle issues must be addressed throughout all phases of
the design process . This results in a shift of the knowledge curve, thereby
yielding more knowledge about the design while the design freedom is still high.
The increasing complexity of products requires new methods and processes to
provide for this next level of integration. Multidisciplinary Design (MD) is
recognized nationally as a critical technology. Only within the last couple of
years have industries other than aerospace recognized MD as a discipline that
can address many of their needs. MD has the potential to obtain substantial
reductions in both development time and costs, as well as improved performance.