* 9553411
* MPWG:  Jump for the Sun:  A Research Project to Encourage   Girls and Women in Science and Math
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Sally Hare, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 07/31/1997
* USD 109,498.00

9553411 Hare This model is designed to investigate factors that affect the
awareness of girls and women about careers in science and math, and to determine
the effectiveness of hands-on activities and a constructivist, cooperative
approach to learning in increasing interest in those careers. The design is to
increase participants' knowledge of science and math, and to encourage girls and
women through role models, and through opportunities to build community, to
connect, and to construct their own learning. The design pays particular
attention to the importance of science and mathematics in the ways human beings
live, and the ways in which they treat the planet. Field trips and hands-on
experiences are integrated with the content, and also provide opportunities to
talk, not only about content, but also issues of everyday life. Project goals
are: (1) to increase the numbers of girls enrolling in math and science courses
at the middle and high school levels, with a long-term goal of increasing the
numbers of women who enter careers in these areas; and (2) to make a difference
in the attitudes and agendas of teachers and parents, and of future teachers and
parents. The model will provide opportunities for young women to see how science
and math applies to their lives, to use hands-on activities with computers and
to build awareness of the computer as vital tool for learning and for access to
knowledge, and to participate in hands-on, learner-centered units in math and
science. The design uses available research in learning styles, multiple
intelligences, and "women's ways of knowing" to present content in ways
conducive to motivating the young women and tapping their strengths as learners.
Leaders are to work with teachers and parents to build a support system to
encourage the young women and to strengthen their self-concepts. The program is
structured to encourage practice of the arts of democracy, including problem-
solving, ethics, conflict resoluti on, prejudice reduction, roles of the
individual within the community, service leadership, and celebration of
diversity, as well as to increase communication skills of participants. ***