* 9553705
* Problem-Based Learning:  A Key to Enhanced Performance in   Advanced Technological Education
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Buck Brown, Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 08/31/1999
* USD 475,000.00

Buck F. Brown DUE 9553705 Rose-Hulman Inst of Tech FY1995 $ Terre Haute, IN
47803 Advanced Technological Education Title: Problem-Based Learning: A Key to
Enhanced Performance in Advanced Technological Education Education in the United
States is at a pivotal juncture. U.S. citizens must compete in a demanding
global society, but our educational systems are struggling with outdated
approaches and stagnant budgets. The "knowledge explosion" of the past 20 to 30
years has provided advanced technological education with the singularly
difficult challenge. The traditional answer to this "knowledge explosion" has
been to pack more "essential facts" into the curricula Careful consideration of
this issue suggests that an information-laden society requires resourceful
skills, insights, and abilities; hence, educational innovation must focus less
on facts and more on problem solving and inquiry-based learning. The Wabash
Valley Educational Alliance seeks support for the implementation of an important
educational vision and the establishment of a permanent cooperative effort
within the Wabash Valley (west central Indiana). This project addresses
instructional methods that will impact the education of students of technology,
science, mathematics, and engineering in two year, associate degree granting
institutions. It will affect educational approaches at all levels of technology;
produce new curricula materials including problems and examples; provide a
"living" video series of applications; and create a national, refereed,
electronic database for sharing problem-based materials and experiences.
Problem-based instruction concentrates learning around "real-world" problems
similar to those encountered by practitioners in the field. In problem-based
learning the teacher' s role changes quite dramatically from that in a
traditional learning s ituation. The teacher must guide the students in the
problem-solving process, directing them through questioning techniques. Problem-
based learning can help students become critical thinkers and problem solvers.
There is significant potential for its further refinement and widespread
application to advanced technological education. This potential, if fully
developed, can place technological education in a leadership role and heighten
it's visibility among the professions.