* 9553337
* MPWG:  Closing the GAP: Math Clubs for Girls
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1997
* Janice Mokros, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 06/30/1997
* USD 99,999.00

9553337 Mokros The proposed school-based clubs seek to provide a challenging,
engaging, non-competitive environment in which fourth and fifth grade girls can
discover their power as mathematical thinkers. Girls of this age, who are
beginning to lose confidence in their ability to solve mathematical problems,
need an extra boost in order to stay in the science-math-engineering "pipeline."
The clubs are to involve girls working with their classmates and teacher on
investigations that: (1) introduce them to the realm of mathematical thinking
(logic, visual- spatial reasoning, statistics, number theory) which extends far
beyond the arithmetic that is traditionally emphasized in these grades; (2) are
conductive to multiple approaches, interpretations, and solutions and that
promote discussion about these approaches; (3) require strategy and team
working; (4) incorporate appropriate technology, including building materials,
calculators and tool-based software. A collaboration with teachers and
volunteers from the business community is proposed to implement several model
math clubs during the course of the project. The clubs are to meet for at least
one hour per week during the semester, and initially will be led by a classroom
teacher working with a TERC staff member to link club activities with classroom
work. Thus, the clubs should provide teachers with a means of deepening and
extending their own mathematical understanding as they explore new
investigations that can later be modified and introduced during the regular math
class. During the second round of implementation, clubs are to be co-led by the
teacher and a volunteer from a local business, who will serve as a
mathematically-skilled role model for the students. Another important element of
the club is parent involvement. Parents (especially mothers) need to know how
they can encourage and support their daughters mathematically, and to experience
the excitement of working on meaningful mathematics problems wit h their
daughters. The clubs are to be based on Investigations in Number, Data and
Space, a new K-5 curriculum, developed at TERC and published by Dale Seymour
Publications. This curriculum is specifically designed to reach a diverse group
of learners, enabling all students to find their own passions reflected in the
activities, and encourage deep and thoughtful mathematical work across an
extended period of time. ***