* 9553583
* Learning by Design:  Integrating and Enhancing the Middle   School Math, Science and Technology Curricula
* EHR,DRL
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Joanna Hornig-Fox, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 04/30/2000
* USD 1,206,613.00

9553583 Kolodner Project-based learning modules, built around engineering and
design problems, promote the learning of essential concepts and processes in
mathematics, science and technology education at the middle school addressed by
the national standards. The methodology of problem-based learning is informed by
research in cognitive science and education, and the experiences of teachers and
science practitioners. The modules, based on complex, realistic design problems,
integrate the disciplinary material, focus on collaborative learning and doing,
and foster reflection. There are several options available to arrive at a
solution and both science knowledge and real world experience must be brought to
bear in evaluating solutions. Students design solutions, not just analyze
existing solutions; they are asked to identify knowledge and information needed
to solve the problem; students receive explicit feedback both about their
reasoning process and about the solution. Computer support provides an
interactive problem-solving environment, information resources and scaffolding
for teachers. Diversity issues are addressed through the relevant realistic
problems that are solved through cooperation and communication. The products of
this pilot study include two engineering design problems for the sixth or
seventh grade integrating life science, mathematics and technology, teacher
materials that support problem-based learning, a software-based interactive
problem-solving and learning environment and student assessments.