* 9553486
* MPWG:  Awareness, Skills, and Mentoring Add Up to Success   for Girls in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics Careers
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Bernadette Perham, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9553486 Perham The Ball State University project for high school girls in grades
eleven and twelve has a dual focus of career awareness and skill development in
the areas of science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM). Its major goals are:
to increase the awareness of high school girls about careers in SEM, to
introduce them to SEM role models on the job, to have them collaborate on a
research problem with a SEM mentor, and to positively impact their choice of a
career. Through seminars, industrial site visits, and panel discussions, the
girls are to learn about SEM careers and job opportunities--what they require
and how they are achieved. This project provides opportunities for all the girls
to acquire skill in using statistics and technology to support their future
research efforts. In collaboration with a SEM mentor at the University, each
girls will gain hands-on research experience in a university laboratory setting.
Afterward, each girl will independently solve a related research problem at her
home school with the support of an on-site resource teacher and the University
mentor, via Internet. In addition, the girls will disseminate SEM career
information to their peers. Participants should leave the residential program
prepared with a knowledge of SEM careers, technological skills that will support
problem solving, and experience in using the scientific method of discovery.
They will have explored SEM careers and interacted with professionals in these
fields. They should have acquired skill in using spreadsheets, software
packages, graphing calculators, word-processing, and Internet communications.
They also will have engaged in group and independent research projects supported
by SEM mentors and high school resource teachers. In addition, they should have
developed the confidence and self-esteem to choose an appropriate career--and
successfully embark upon it. ***