* 9553289
* SSC:  Metekukukiah Pemaenakuaq-Keepers of the Forest
* EHR,HRD
* 08/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Jerilyn Grignon, College of the Menominee Nation
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 05/31/1997
* USD 55,424.00

Metekukukiah Pemaenakuaq--Keepers of the Forest Summer Science Camp--proposes an
experiential field-based approach to studying mathematics and science. The six-
week camp builds-in camper mentorships during the school year that provides a
supportive network for 7th, 8th, and 9th grade students. In order to measure
desired outcomes, career pipeline indicators will be used (positive experiences
producing interest, encouragement, and enrollment in appropriate mathematics and
science coursework) so that students enter post-secondary institutions and begin
their careers in mathematics and science-related fields. Within the summer camp
program, students will experience mathematics and science in the context of
forestry--they will learn about the Annual Allowable Cut that is used in
determining the amount of timber harvested, and the measurements that are used
to calculate it. Students will learn to make these measurements themselves
including DBH (diameter-at-breast-height), volume, and height. During their
research projects, students will be using measurements of tree diameter, height,
and basal area either in the comparison of forestry tools, or in the change of
the measured plots over time. Mentoring systems are created during the camp
session where students and adults (forestry professionals and elder in the
community who have valuable experience and knowledge regarding the forest,
traditions, and necessity of sharing that knowledge) meet, and discuss sustained
yield forestry principles and its application to global sustained development.
Follow-up activities after the camp include: Menominee Tribal Enterprise mill
tours where cooperating teachers have students conduct career interviews; trips
to the Menominee Logging Museum where the museum curator conducts "hands-on"
experiences using technology from the past; scheduled visits to the College of
Menominee to hear speakers within the field of forestry; visits to larger
campuses that offer bachelor's degree s in forestry (student work on computers
in the library where information is obtained electronically); participation in
career day with focus enthusiasm and vigor; conduct presentations using their
own written pieces about research projects, using graphs and charts to provide
basis for decision-making about forestry practices; and cooperate in project
evaluation and students assessment activities. Evaluations are on-going and two-
fold. First of all, the project activities planned will be evaluated by an
external evaluator to monitor program activities--effectiveness of planning
meetings, recruitment and retention strategies, camp activities, and follow- up
activities in student's own school in the community, on college campuses, or in
the forest. Second, student assessment will entail how students feel about the
project in terms of its usefulness and how it builds their self-confidence to
enter the educational pipeline via activity (experience), coursework, and career
planning. Students will be monitored regarding school attendance, enrollment in
mathematics and science coursework, advanced mathematics and science coursework,
keeping tabs on oneself to seek as much career information as they can (contacts
and trips), and providing information via public presentations. In the long run,
students can monitor their own improved sense of usefulness and self-confidence
in mathematics and science because of planned entrance and exit interviews.
Furthermore, they can build positive experience during the camp and later with
the mentorship systems that provide a supportive network. For monitoring the
success of the program beyond and outside evaluator's report, project staff--
guided by pertinent timelines--will have opportunities to adjust plans through
continuous meetings, but will know what outcomes have been achieved through
actual presentations made by the students. The staff will also be involved in
various dissemination activities to share knowledge gained fr om participation
in this program. ***