* 9553474
* Technological Fluency And The Representation Of Knowledge
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,12/31/1996
* Seymour Papert, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1996
* USD 186,524.00

9553474 Papert This project proposes to study and foster the development of
technological fluency in K-12 students. In our view, technical fluency involves
not only knowing how to use technical tools, but also knowing how to construct
things of significance with those tools. Technological fluency involves the
ability to express, explore, and realize ideas with new technological media-and
to take advantage of those media to enhance learning in other domains. The
project focuses on two primary themes in the development and support of
technological fluency: * Access to knowledge. How can we provide students with
better access to the knowledge they need, when they need it, as they are engaged
in construction activities? To serve these needs, we will develop initial
versions of a constructopedia-a new kind of knowledge source in which concepts
are indexed according to their uses in construction. The constructopedia is a
browsable, interactive database, designed to help students build new
constructions-and to help them make connections to mathematical and scientific
ideas underlying those constructions. * Representations of knowledge. New media
call out for new representations. The language and forms most appropriate for
representing phenomenon in one medium might be quite inappropriate in another.
We aim to develop new representations of scientific and mathematical knowledge
that are more intuitive and concrete for students, and better suited to the
nature of computational media. Our goal is not to make traditional
representations of science/mathematics. We will pay special attention to
"epistemological shifts"-for example, emphasizing dynamic representations over
static ones, and developing new ways of casting knowledge computational terms
(such as "agent-oriented" descriptions of knowledge). New representations of
knowledge, and new access to knowledge, are needed in all domains, but we will
focus our efforts on two domains for which our past wo rk has laid the ground:
(a) the physics/mathematics of motion, and (b) systems theory concepts (such as
feedback and dynamic equilibrium). We will explore and develop new
representations of knowledge in these domains, and we will create
"constructopedia samplers" to support student construction and learning in these
domains. Each sampler will include examples, descriptions, explanations, and
illustrations (including graphic animations and video clips) related to the
conceptual themes. We will make our constructopedia materials available widely,
both on the World Wide Wed and in CD-ROM format. We will work directly with
teachers and students at a number of sites, with an increasing proportion of our
effort going to sites supporting the transition from school to work, and to
informal (non-school) settings. We intend to collaborate closing with user of
our materials, using new information channels to accelerate and enhance the
development cycle for the materials, using new information channels to
accelerate and enhance the development cycle for the materials, making the
development process more rapid, open, and transparent. We also plan to use new
information channels to make the evaluation cycle shorter and richer. We will
pay special attention to the dangers of "dilution in dissemination," exploring
ways to strengthen not only the adoption of our materials but the appropriation
of our ideas. ***