* 9553696
* Integrating New Visions in Environmental Sciences and       Technology (INVEST)
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Michael Reed, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1998
* USD 267,965.00

Project INVEST (Integrating New Visions in Environmental Sciences and
Technology year comprehensive ATE project encompassing curriculum development,
faculty enhancement and instrumentation and laboratory improvement. This project
provides an opportunity to address two different, but equally important
postsecondary education issues. The first is the lack of educational
opportunities available to environmental technicians in advanced technologies. A
second, but equally important issue, is the lack of environmental education
available to students at the secondary and postsecondary level of studies.
Curriculum activities will include development of: (1) a curriculum course in
X-Ray Fluorescence Analysis of Lead Based Paint and Building Materials; (2)
stand-alone laboratory experiments in analysis of lead in drinking water, GIS
applications in environmental assessment and remediation, and gas
chromatograph/mass spectrometer sugar analysis identification of viable airborne
organisms; and (3) environmental applications for integration into math,
science, and technology. Opportunities for faculty enhancement will be provided
through internships with industrial partners, as well as participation in
conferences and workshops. A curriculum work group, composed of project part
(industry, secondary and postsecondary educators) will facilitate a
comprehensive approach to materials development and sharing of expertise. A one-
week faculty training institute will be held in the second year of the project
to disseminate course materials and train instructor technologies. A variety of
activities designed to increase career awareness in secondary and postsecondary
minority student populations are planned for both years of the grant.