* 9553883
* Bridging the Gap Between the Microscopic and the Macroscopic
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/2003
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Gerhard L. Salinger
* 05/31/2003
* USD 1,200,000.00

9553883 Stanley Computer visualization and modeling techniques from current
multidisciplinary research are used in simulation experiments to provide a basis
for students to learn how microscopic processes such as intermolecular
collisions determine macroscopic processes such as temperature, pressure, and
the laws relating them. A modular set of materials is produced that allows
students to discover a molecular-scale view of a wide range of materials from
liquids to proteins and other polymers. Special emphasis is placed on
investigations of water. Students compare the results of computer simulations
with closely integrated, hands-on laboratory activities and are challenged to
think as research scientists do about scientific theory and modeling. The
simulations run on Pentium-based computers. The materials include a CDROM
containing complete teacher support material for installing and running computer
programs, for performing hands-on activities, and for constructing experimental
apparatus. Materials are also available on the WWW which provides teacher
support and exchange of ideas. Experimental materials demonstrated that teachers
changed their practice from lecturing to mentoring and concrete learners
increased their understanding of the microscopic world.