* 9553488
* MPWG:  Women in Astronomy:  Planetarium Show and Video from the Chabot Observatory and Science Center Young Astronomers After-School Program
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Margaret Hauben, Chabot Space and Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 117,600.00

9553488 Heber This pilot after-school program at Chabot Observatory &amp;
Science Center seeks to involve and excite adolescent girls about science,
through astronomy-related activities, including their own research and
production of a new planetarium program about women's contributions to the
field. Dissemination is to include distribution of the planetarium show product,
sharing information about the project process with other education
organizations, and a teacher enhancement program to foster replication
elsewhere. The concept for this project came from teachers of science who have
expertise in astronomy. They saw an opportunity to combine an existing, but
modest, volunteer program with a broader effort serving the community. This
project targets middle and high school girls at the point in their schooling
where an interest in science and related careers is most vulnerable to negative
influences. It involves them in an innovative and creative project, honoring the
contributions of women in science, and shedding light on the skills which
fostered those contributions, while developing in participants the very skills
which can influence their own career opportunities. In this project, both the
product--the planetarium show and video, and the process--skill development as a
means to the end product, are equally important and encouraged. After
completion, the 40 girls and two teachers directly trained will offer a model to
thousands of others who can use active learning to tell their own stories of
scientific achievement. ***