* 9553544
* "SSI Study:  New Jersey, Virginia, Vermont"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* Alan McAdams, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Sanchez
* 08/31/1996
* USD 44,626.00

; R o o t E n t r y F : e C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P
o o l e e 4 @ ( ) * + , - . / 0 1 2 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; LPT1: 9529402 Gawarkiewicz The project involves the
development of a series of coupled biological-physical models to examine the
effects of wind forcing and seasonal stratification on the recruitment of
zooplankton and fish to Georges Bank. These models will examine the influence of
transient and seasonal forcing of an idealized bank ecosystem, with the goal of
elucidating the mechanisms which lead to trophic uncoupling. Trophic uncoupling
results from spatial or temporal dislocation of populations within a community,
and can lead to rapid growth or depletion of affected populations. Physical
modelling will focus on the response of an idealized bank and bank-shelf system
to wind forcing and to seasonal buoyancy forcing. The biological modelling will
have three major objectives: (1) to understand the long term effects of "wash
out" events and advective losses on trophic interactions and recruitment; (2) to
study the mechanisms by which the dynamics at tidal fronts influence trophic
coupling and production; and )3) to explore novel techniques of reducing
complexity of biological models while maintainin g biological system necessary
for robustness. The ultimate goal of this work is to investigate the couplings
between the biological and physical systems, in particular the effect of
advective losses on recruitment of cod and haddock and the influence of tidal
fronts on primary and secondary production. These results can then be tested by,
and used to guide the upcoming field observations and further analysis of
historical data. *** ; Oh +' 0 S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( ' $ H l D h
R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT P:\BO\ABS\GAWARKIE.ASC prtaylor prtaylor @ w e @ @
e @ G Microsoft Word 6.0 3 ; e = e j j j j j j j K C - T : K j K j j j j ~ j j j
j . 9529402 Gawarkiewicz The project involves the development of a series of
coupled biological-physical models to examine the effects of wind forcing and
seasonal stratification on the recruitment of zooplankton and fish to Georges
Bank. These models will examine the influence of transient and seasonal forcing
of an idealized bank ecosystem, with the goal of elucidating the mechanisms
which lead to trophic uncoupling. Trophic uncoupling results from spatial or
temporal dislocation of populations within a community, and can lead to rapid
growth or depletion of affected populations. Physical modelling will focus on
the response of an idealized bank and bank-shelf system to wind forcing and to
seasonal buoyancy forcing. The biological modelling will have three major
objectives: (1) to understand the long term effects of "wash out" events and
advective losses on trophic interactions and recruitment; (2) to study the
mechanisms by which the dynamics at tidal fronts influence trophic coupling and
production; and )3) to explore novel techniques of reducing complexity of bio