* 9553685
* Electronics Technology Curriculum Development
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Brenda Bryan, Front Range Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1999
* USD 301,783.00

We propose the development of an Applied Learning Institute which would be the
focal point for advanced technical education and applied academic research and
development for the Rocky Mountain front range. Such an institute would function
as a catalyst for updating curricula, would test new instructional techniques,
and provide training for instructors in these methodologies while interfacing
with industry to keep abreast of workforce requirements. The Institute would
combine the resources of Front Range Community College, Colorado State
University School of Occupational and Educational Studies, and local secondary
institutions in the integration of academic, technical, and workplace skills,
the use of instructional technologies, and the implementation of innovative
instructional methods. The initial project will focus on the electronics
technology program. Multi-media instruction and laboratory experiences
equivalent to 1200 contact hours of traditional instruction will be developed.
Innovative, competency-based instruction that utilizes a combination of
pedagogical (task-oriented) and andragogical (student-oriented) methods will be
designed into small modules. These modules will be used to develop career
pathways based upon student career choices. This will increase flexibility and
enhance customization and/or modification. They also promote transportability,
as modules may be used off-campus or even at secondary institutions. Multi-media
techniques support consistency and flexibility of instruction and delivery.
Results, techniques, and modules will be shared through publications and
conference presentations.