* 9553751
* Development of a Two-year Associate Degree in Agricultural  Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Terry Brase, Hawkeye Community College
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 07/31/1998
* USD 200,000.00

Terry Brase DUE 9553751 Hawkeye Community College FY1995 $ 200,000 Waterloo, IA
50704 Advanced Technological Education Title: Development of a Two-year
Associate Degree in Agricultural Technology Hawkeye Community College is
preparing to develop and distribute the curriculum for an associate degree in
Agricultural Technology. In the past two years rapid changes have occurred in
technology in the field of food systems. Technology changes involving
biotechnology, chemical usage, GPS/GIS satellites, and
computer/telecommunication networks will continue into the next century. For
farmers to remain competitive in the food industry, they and the food systems
sales and service people supporting them, must be trained in this new
technology. "There will be fewer and larger farm operations, still individually
owned and operated by families, but more businesslike...And to be profitable,
the farmer will have to use technology" (KSU AE REPORT, Fall 1994). Hawkeye
Community College proposes to plan and test an innovative 63 credit hour
curriculum which would link the agricultural and business experience with
technology. The curriculum and all support materials would then be used in
expanding articulation agreements with the secondary schools and four year
institutions including a land grant university who are interested in updating
agricultural curriculum into food systems. The materials would also be
disseminated through national education associations, journals, and
telecommunication system.