* 9553386
* A Graduate Training Program in Environmental Biology:       From Genes to Communities
* EHR,DGE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2003
* Maureen Stanton, University of California-Davis
* Continuing grant
* Lenore S. Clesceri
* 09/30/2003
* USD 569,132.00

GER-9553386 Stanton This proposal outlines a multi- disciplinary program of
advanced training for doctoral students, to be coordinated through the Center
for Population Biology at UC Davis. The CPB is a newly-formed group with
established faculty of great accomplishment in graduate education and research;
highly qualified applicants have been quickly attracted to our young doctoral
program. Bringing diverse scholars together, the CPB facilitates
interdisciplinary education in environmental biology within the context of
contemporary population biology. A broadly synthetic field using sophisticated
analytical techniques, population biology addresses ecological, evolutionary,
behavioral, and genetic mechanisms at the heart of environmental biology. Our
program pertains directly to biodiversity, endangered species, and processes of
community restoration. GRT traineeships would provide the funds to increase PhD
enrollment to levels that our faculty and support facilities are prepared to
accommodate. Significant matching support has been pledged by UC Davis for this
GRT initiative. A major component of our innovative approach is a consortial
arrangement with San Francisco State University, which will direct diverse
students into our PhD program in environmental biology. SFSU produces highly
qualified and prepared Master's students, including large numbers of women and
minorities.