* 9553354
* Experimental Microelectronic Embedded Systems for Image     Processing and Intelligent Sensors
* EHR,ESR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1998
* Stuart Tewksbury, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 07/31/1998
* USD 230,000.00

9553354 Tewksbury Within the last few years, it has become obvious that a
profound and far-ranging paradigm shift in the practice of (and computer-aided
design - CAD - tools for) the design of competitive electronic system modules
has occurred. Earlier, designers worked with relatively simple ICs performing
specific logic functions to create an innovative and novel system realization.
Packaged integrated circuits (ICs) had a limited number (14 - 64) of external
connections (I/O) and were readily hand soldered onto thru-hole printed circuit
boards or connected using standard wire-wrap prototyping techniques. This
general approach for circuit boards remained largely unchanged for over two
decades and provided the necessary capabilities until a few years ago. During
that period, the complexity of digital ICs was doubling approximately every 18
months, with the simple quad gates per IC evolving into today's ICs with
hundreds of thousands of gates per IC. Present high-density VLSI ICs routinely
require several hundred I/O pins and industry projections suggesting several
thousand I/O pins per IC within a little more than a decade. Over much of the
last 20 years, the clock rate of digital systems remained surprisingly constant,
in the range 10 to 25 MHz. However, the last few years also has seen a
remarkably fast progression to higher clock rates extending well above 100 MHz.
This progression to higher clock rates also impacts system prototyping
dramatically, requiring special techniques to handle not only the fast signal
transitions but also the large number of interconnections and I/O lines
operating at high speed. The project will obtain (i) for equipment to fabricate
prototype, multilayer, surface mount, printed circuit boards (PCBs) and to mount
advanced VLSI components on those boards and (ii) for initial research related
to image processing accelerators, intelligent sensor systems, and advanced
packaging/interconnection technologies. These capabilities provid e a foundation
for a broad, experimental program in high performance, embedded microelectronic
systems, supplementing existing capabilities for advanced packaging and
interconnection technologies presently available. The project will result in a
strong experimental microelectronic systems research program designed to provide
(i) innovations in microelectronic systems education (undergraduate and
graduate), (ii) outreach to companies in WV both for continuing education and
for R&amp;D support, (iii) development of high performance modules in support of
interdisciplinary research within the academic research community of WV, and
(iv) development of a more competitive position for research in the area of high
performance microelectronic systems.