* 9553445
* MPWG: Teaching Traineeships for Undergraduate Women
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Priscilla Auchincloss, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,270.00

Auchincloss 9553445 Teaching Traineeships in Physics for Undergraduate Women is
a two-year pilot project in the Department of Physics and Astronomy, in
cooperation with the Women in Science and Engineering Project. Women students,
who are to be become co-instructors in the physics laboratory courses taught by
graduate teaching assistants, are to be recruited from the top-scoring
sophomores and juniors (not just physics majors) who have taken the introductory
laboratory courses. The undergraduate trainees will participate in a special
two-week training session during the summer, as well as in training sessions
throughout the academic year. Each trainee will be paired with a graduate
teaching assistant (TA), and assigned to a specific laboratory section. Most
instructional duties (except grading) will be shared equally by the lead TA and
the trainee (e.g., the graduate and undergraduate TAs will alternate in
presenting the 15-minute introductions to the laboratory exercises). Thus, the
trainees can acquire valuable experience as well as have visible classroom
responsibility. The proposed traineeship effort aims to improve the long-term
retention of college women in science, fulfilling the immediate need of
recognizing achievement and encouraging further commitment to science of
talented undergraduate women science majors at an early stage. By design, this
project also increases the number of women instructors in physics laboratory
courses, creating a more gender-equitable environment than now exists for all
students in introductory physics, and providing female role models for first-
year women students. The project should positively impact the instruction in
physics labs, by increasing not only the number of instructors in each
laboratory section, but also the number of competent instructors, through the
training and supervision which will be provided through the project. Thus, the
project expects to have a positive impact upon the quality of college science
education, as well as upon the trainees. The latter are to be recognized for
their prior academic achievement, and through participation in a proven teaching
program, increase their skills and leadership abilities. The teaching process
involves them as significant members of the Department and strengthens their
preparation for graduate work in science or science education. Additionally,
these women trainees serve as peer-mentors and role models to the undergraduate
women and men in their laboratory sections, conveying through their presence the
message that "science is for everyone." It is anticipated that after the pilot
effort is completed, the traineeship program will be institutionalized and
supported with Physics Department funds. The demonstrated competence of the
trainees and the increased satisfaction ratings from students in the labs should
provide an incentive for other departments with large enrollments in laboratory
courses to create similar traineeship opportunities for undergraduate women. ***