* 9553426
* MPWG:  Young Women in Science: Intergenerational Partnership in Science, Engineering and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Penny Hammrich, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 07/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9553426 Hammerich The proposed project is designed to increase interest in
science, engineering and mathematics (SEM) among 60 fourth-grade, African
American, Asian, and Hispanic females and to enhance the science and mathematics
curriculum at two Philadelphia elementary schools. This project brings together
female elementary students, women who are retired from careers in SEM, and
female undergraduate science education and math education students to engage in
intensive experimental environmental projects. This multi-generational approach
enables elementary school girls to investigate and explore urban environmental
issues on a scientific level utilizing mathematical concepts. Through their
involvement with retired scientists, engineers and educators, as well as
undergraduate students aspiring to be science and math educators, the project
introduces fourth-grade girls to career opportunities in SEM and effectively
expands their interest, enthusiasm, and concepts of math and science. The
proposed project represents a collaborative effort between Temple University,
the School District of Philadelphia, and area chemical companies. Participants
are drawn from: (a) fourth- grade students and teachers at Childs Elementary and
Dunbar Schools; (b) retirees from area chemical companies (including ARCO
Chemical Company), the School District of Philadelphia and Temple University;
and (c) science and math education students of the College of Education at
Temple University. The project is designed as an intensive intervention at two
targeted elementary schools, to demonstrate the effectiveness of a multi-
generational approach to enhancing the science and mathematics curriculum at the
elementary level. This model project can be replicated in other school
districts. The project activities include three components: classroom
activities; after-school activities; summer program--City Rivers Exploration.
The project is to be coordinated by The College of Education at Temple Uni
versity. ***