* 9553387
* Environmentally Friendly Pharmaceutical Manufacturing       Training Program
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Henrik Pedersen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9553387 Pedersen This project is a joint effort of the Department of
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering and the School of Pharmacy at Rutgers
University to establish an environmentally Friendly Pharmaceutical Manufacturing
Training Program. Such a training program will have a huge impact on promoting
the use of environmentally friendly technology in pharmaceutical manufacturing.
Such a program is needed because pharmaceutical processes generate large amounts
of avoidable pollution. Better designed and controlled processes would decrease
the impact on the environment of pharmaceutical processes, and would also result
in reduced cost of drugs; more reliably produced drugs and a more competitive US
pharmaceutical industry. The objective of the program proposed here is to train
professional capable of designing and implementing successful pollution
prevention strategies in pharmaceutical operation. These professionals will
require solid knowledge of chemical engineering fundamental; optimization
techniques; Current Good Manufacturing Practice (CGMP) guidelines; risk
assessment techniques, end-of-pipe treatment strategies, FDA and EPA
regulations, and unit operations employed in pharmaceutical processes. Training
in these areas will be imparted through a number of activities, including: * an
extended menu of courses from several academic units, * a new curriculum
component consisting of a year-round seminar/discussion session highlighting
successful pollution prevention scenarios * a PhD dissertation * another new
curriculum component consisting of a supervised teaching experience * a summer
internship in industry In addition to training students, the program proposed
here will lead to the establishment of a cohesive and self-sustaining research
program on environmentally friendly pharmaceutical manufacturing. Such a
research program will generate new technologies for preventing pollution in
manufacturing processes, and ensure t he viability of the proposed training
program beyond the period of NSF funding allocated by the GRT program.
Dissertation topics will address four problems that are of direct interest to
industry and that offer high potential for pollution prevention: a) process
failures in solid dosage manufacturing due to inadequate handling of solid
blending and compaction operations. b) failure of large scale bioreactive
processes (due to starvation, shear damage, or poor mixing ) c) lack of schedule
optimization in batch processes, generating a large amount of emissions from
processing steps such as loading, unloading, venting, cleaning, etc. d)
inadequate abatement techniques capable of preventing emission of organic
solvents in reactive and purification processes. An aggressive plan for minority
recruitment has been formulated. Minority recruitment activities include, among
others, expansion of an already established minority undergraduate internship
program, which serves as an in situ source of minority and female graduate
students, an extensive advertisement campaign in college newspapers with large
populations of minority students, and a mailing campaign directed to every
Chemical Engineering department in the US. As proof of Rutgers' commitment to
this project, the University will provide three five-year fellowships to match
NSF's contribution (one of these fellowships will be earmarked for a minority
student). Additional matching resources will be obtained from the Department of
Chemical and Biochemical Engineering and form ongoing projects funded by other
federal agencies and by industry. It is anticipated that these matching
resources will allow us to significantly expand the number of students supported
by the proposed training program.