* 9553000
* Rethinking Courses of Study: National Faculty Networks
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1999
* Stephen Ehrmann, Corporation Public Broadcasting
* Standard Grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 02/28/1999
* USD 50,000.00

The National Science Foundation and the Annenberg/Corporation for Public
Broadcasting, a private foundation, are cooperating on an initiative to support
national and international faculty networks that can help individual faculty
across the country to rethink their own courses. The curriculum in mathematics
and sciences has changed to incorporate student use of technology, and must
change more. Professionals increasingly use computers, video and/or
telecommunications as tools of analysis, design, construction, and research.
Students who do not learn the associated new skills of thought are at a
disadvantage. In many fields, pioneering faculty have made substantial progress
in rethinking courses of study. However, the work of these pioneers is often
unknown, even to one another. Most faculty, even at institutions with the needed
equipment and logistical support, do not know what the leaders of their
discipline have accomplished. In this initiative, project teams will gather
useful information about how selected courses of study are already being
improved at widely scattered institutions; analyze that information; and widely
share their findings through data bases, on-line seminars, workshops, print
materials, and other media. Heavy use of the Internet will be necessary in order
to reach large numbers of faculty.