* 9553857
* The Eddie Files
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Steven Heard, Foundation for Advancements in Science & Education
* Continuing grant
* George W. Bright
* 04/30/1999
* USD 2,200,000.00

9553857 Heard The Foundation for Advancements in Science and Education plans a
three year project designed to develop a set of 16, 18-minute motivational
videotapes titled, The Eddie Files. The Eddie Files is designed to be integrated
into the elementary mathematics curriculum by providing teachers with resources
that will engage, motivate and involve their students. Each episode is
accompanied by a teacher's guide, student activities, a related teacher
enhancement video, and a set of Math at Home activities. On-line activities
serve the dual purposes of facilitating interaction among teachers and students,
as well as, providing an additional distribution avenue for new lesson plans.
Major national educational improvement efforts, including the Systemic
Initiatives and the National Standards movement, place a high priority on making
mathematics accessible to all. As a result of this project, upper elementary
teachers will have exemplary models of how to increase their students' interest
in mathematics and their students' knowledge of careers, by engaging their
students in meaningful, complex, and mathematically rich problems as found in
The Eddie Files video tapes and accompanying ancillary materials. The Eddie
Files is designed to be integrated into the elementary mathematics curriculum
for children aged 8-11. The Eddie Files is presented from the viewpoint of a
lively sixth grader. Eddie's character is established through voice-over
narration and point of view camera shots. We never see him, only hear his voice.
In the videotaped series, Eddie and his classmates discover real-world uses of
the mathematics they are studying in the classroom of East Harlem teacher, Kay
Toliver. In each of the sixteen video tapes, Ms. Toliver presents a lesson to
real students and presents a workplace visit. Eddie's mathematics assignments
take him into the world beyond the classroom, where he meets a variety of
professionals whose varied and challenging careers involve mathematics and s
cience.