* 9553614
* Multidisciplinary Regional Studies Graduate Training        Program:  A Critical Need
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,02/28/2002
* Laurel Fox, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 02/28/2002
* USD 564,600.00

GER-9553614 Fox Natural ecosystems are rarely pristine, almost all are modified
by anthropogenic effects to varying degrees. Human activities are rarely treated
as integral parts of those systems, either in research or training. Ecological
communities are structured by top-down and bottom-up processes and interactions
between them; human activities affect the same ecological processes in similar
ways. The University of California at Santa Cruz recently initiated an
interdepartmental, multidisciplinary program of research and training (the
Monterey Bay Regional Studies (MBRS) program ) focused on basic understanding of
regional coastal processes and their relation to specific regional issues. The
regional approach provides a foundation for integrating research and training
across different research scales and traditions. Scientists from different
disciplines engage in multidisciplinary studies to examine complex environmental
processes. Recently hired new faculty, high student interest and new doctoral
program have rapidly increased our capacity to train students, but limited funds
for their support restrict our ability to reach our potential. The quality and
innovation of our program and the established need for multidisciplinary
training programs in environmental biology make a strong case for support of
this proposal. A Graduate Research Traineeship will allow us to expand the MBRS
training component significantly, and to attract students seeking a broader,
multidisciplinary foundation for their research. GRT students will participate
in symposia, discussions, seminars and research in projects supported by MBRS.
In addition, we will develop a graduate seminar course, student seminars and an
apprenticeship program aimed to encourage multidisciplinary awareness and
respect.