* 9553379
* MPWG:  Exploring New Options:  Science, Engineering and Math Careers - Program for Middle School Girls and Parents
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Margaret Mortz, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 07/31/1997
* USD 89,573.00

9553379 Mortz In order to maintain our nation's technological leadership, young
women need to be encouraged to explore careers in science, engineering and
mathematics (SEM). Currently many middle school girls lose interest in math and
science, thus failing to take the requisite courses which could open career
options in SEM fields. This model project is designed to counteract factors
which influence girls' decisions away from SEM fields by enrolling young women
from middle schools and their parents in monthly Saturday programs with
opportunities to enjoy fun, hands- on, SEM activities, exposing the girls and
their parents to positive SEM role models, and to providing activities designed
to help the girls' parents recognize and counteract negative social pressures.
The girls are to be chosen from three urban Denver middle schools, which serve
substantial numbers of ethnic minority or socio-economically disadvantaged
families. The format involves eight Saturday sessions for the girls, three of
which have activities for parents and for parents and girls together. These
sessions include "coping skills" activities, hands-on SEM activities, and
presentations and group discussions with SEM female professionals. The most
effective components of this program will be determined by the use of a control
group and administration of various outcome measures throughout the program. The
following formal measures have been prepared: student questions on knowledge and
attitudes, parent questions on knowledge and attitudes, knowledge about careers,
children's self-efficacy scale, science career predictor scale for children and
the science career predicator scale for parents. A major outcome of this study
will be an evaluation of how effective a comprehensive program of this type can
be in changing the attitudes and interests of the girls, and increasing their
commitment toward taking prerequisites for pursuing SEM careers. The project
also would evaluate effectiveness of the pro gram in changing parents'
attitudes. Informal written and verbal evaluations of each workshop should
identify the most effective activities. Written lesson plans and videotapes of
the workshop activities can provide useful documentation for future programs.
***