* 9553311
* RCMS:  Two Component RCMS Programs at the University of     North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* EHR,HRD
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Henry Frierson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* William A. Sibley
* 08/31/1997
* USD 100,000.00

9553311 Frierson The goal of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
(UNC- CH) RCMS project will be the motivated, excite, and encourage minority
students to pursue graduate studies and research careers in science. The project
has two components. The first component will focus on providing in-depth
research experiences for the students, starting the summer after their sophomore
year. This component will be termed UNC-RCMS. The second component calls for
special participation of NSF affiliated Alliance for Minority Participation
(AMP) students in the UNC-CH Summer Pre-Graduate Research Experience (SPGRE)
Program and will be termed the SPGRE- AMP Connection. At steady state, a total
of at least 32 students will participate each year. Annually, at least 16
students (eight juniors and eight seniors) will participate in the UNC-RCMS
components throughout the year and 16 students will participate in the SPGRE-AMP
Connection during the summer. A major aspect of the project is to provide the
projects throughout their junior and senior years with the goal tat they
matriculate in graduate science programs after graduating. Another feature is
for the students to spend the summer after their sophomore year at a corporate
laboratory in Research Triangle Park. In the subsequent summer, the desire is
for the students to spend the summer at another major research university. An
expected outcome is for a number of SPGRE-AMP students to enroll in UNC-CH
graduate programs and for UNC-RCMS to students to enter science and math Ph.D.
programs at other major research universities.