* 9553671
* Establish a Chemical Engineering Technology:  Advanced      Process Operations Program
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,02/29/2000
* Edward Fisher, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 02/29/2000
* USD 499,996.00

The chemical and material manufacturing industries have made a major commitment
to making products and process safer and more environmentally friendly. To
accomplish this, these industries have placed tighter controls on processing,
increased process instrumentation, and generally increased process complexity to
minimize waste production. This increase in sophistication has placed
substantially increased responsibility on the process operator. The innovative
two-year degree program in Chemical Engineering Technology: Advanced Process
Operations outlined in this proposal draws upon a strong partnership between Dow
Corning Corporation and Dow Chemical Company, major chemical and material
manufacturers; Delta College, a community college system serving the
manufacturing area; and Michigan Technological University, a major engineering
and technological university. The proposed degree program will consist of a
first-year program taught at Delta College where high school articulation
agreements and diversity outreach initiatives are well established. Due to
proximity, work internships will be possible with the industrial partners. Upon
successful completion of this first year experience based on academic
performance and work-related recommendations, students can transfer to the
second-year academic program at Michigan Tech. The second year will stress
engineering technology with a strong laboratory component leading to a capstone
pilot plant experience in the new multipurpose pilot plant facilities of the
Process Simulation and Control Center. Cooperative and apprentice experiences
will be available during the second year. This industry/college/university
partnership between a local community college, a major university, and two major
process industries will enable the development and implementation of a model
program which will lead to highly trained process operators who are comfortable
with new process technologies, the regulations which shape these industries, and
the safety and teamwork skills which are adaptive to the changing high
performance workplace of the chemical and material processing industry.