* 9553439
* MPWG:  Breaking the Silences:  A Faculty-Student Action     Project for Graduate Women in Science and Mathematics
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Banu Subramaniam, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 12/31/1998
* USD 90,344.00

9553439 Subramaniam This is a research and action program that: (1) assesses the
field-specific policies and practices in four departments at the University of
Arizona that impinge on the recruitment, retention, and advancement of women
graduate students, and (2) designs, implements, and evaluates intervention
strategies to foster a more inclusive graduate experience. It involves research
on the culture of science in a selection of labs, engages faculty and graduate
students in facilitated small-group dialogue about their differing perceptions
of the graduate experience; introduces them to literature on gender and the
culture of science; and works with them, and with departmental administrations
to design and implement changes in policies and practices at the laboratory and
departmental levels to address problems that have been identified. Participating
units include the Departments of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Chemistry,
Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, and Mathematics, and the Women in Science and
Engineering Program of the Southwest Institute for Research on Women. In
contrast to many other projects designed to address the recruitment, retention,
and advancement of women in the sciences, mathematics, and engineering, the
project focuses on changing institutions to be more responsive to women
students, rather than instructing women in ways to accommodate to existing
institutional policies and practices. The project will be carried out over two
academic years and the intervening summer. ***