* 9553208
* Presidential Faculty Fellow:  Metal-Organic and Metal-Surface Interactions Influencing Mobility of Metal Contaminants   of Water and Their Removal in Water Treatment
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Janet Hering, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Edward H. Bryan
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9553208 Hering This is an award to provide support for research on the mobility
and reactivity of trace metals in natural waters and soils and the removal of
trace inorganic contaminants by water treatment processes. This research is a
continuation of work she has been conducting under National Science Foundation
Young Investigator Award No. 92-58431. The teaching component of this award
addresses her observation that a serious deficiency exists in education of
students in chemistry and integration of this exposure into undergraduate civil
and environmental engineering courses. Her plan includes development of a one-
year introductory chemistry course that introduces students to concepts from
physical, inorganic and organic chemistry that have applicability to
environmental engineering practice. This is the initial increment of an award to
provide support for this Presidential Faculty Fellow who was selected through
evaluation procedures conducted by the National Science Foundation and based on
criteria contained in NSF 94-134 which contains the nomination guidelines,
review procedures and award conditions. Factors that control the transport and
fate of pollutants in aqueous systems are of interest because of the role they
play in controlling the movement and fate of pollutants through aquifers, in
treatment processes and natural systems. Results of this research are expected
to be applied in engineering design of water supply, water treatment and
pollution abatement systems.