* 9553692
* The Southeast Michigan Alliance for Reinvestment in         Technological Education (SMARTE) Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,02/28/1998
* Mulchand Rathod, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 02/28/1998
* USD 149,900.00

Mulchand S. Rathod DUE 9553692 Wayne State University FY1995 $ 149,900 Detroit,
MI 482023900 Advanced Technological Education Title: The Southeast Michigan
Alliance for Reinvestment in Technological Education (SMARTE) Project Alliance
Members: There are seven community colleges who are part of SMARTE (Southeastern
Michigan Alliance for Reinvestment in Technological Education). The Alliance
also represents K-12 school systems, a major state university, community-based
organizations, government agencies, labor, business, and industry interests in
southeastern Michigan. Overall Goal of the Project 1. Develop a SCANS based
model for manufacturing program, which will map the standards in each of the
three disciplines: product design, industrial controls, and manufacturing.
Specific tasks to be accomplished will be involve: identification of skill
standards which relate to engineering technologies, organize workshops to review
skill standards, create model competencies, study professional organization
certification procedures, and provide access to the information on curriculum,
and certification via WWW SMARTE alias. 2. Establish pilot enrichment programs
for students that will begin preparation for coursework in the technologies as
early as elementary school grades. This would result in holding at least one
two-week intensified summer institute for the local public school students, and
at least two workshops at community college sites to encourage elementary and
middle school students primarily minorities and females into technology fields.
3. Develop curriculum in product design, and this curriculum will be shared with
faculty and teachers of the conso rtium through a "hands-on" workshop.