* 9553630
* MPWG: Pedagogical Transformation to Restructure Introductory Physics Courses and Retain Women and Minority Students
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1997
* Corinna Ethington, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 08/31/1997
* USD 114,701.00

Buncick 9553630 The Physics Department and colleagues from the Department of
Counseling, Educational Psychology and Research of the College of Education, the
Center for Research on Women, and the University Honors Program propose a model
program to improve learning and retention of all students, but particularly
women and minorities, in introductory physics courses. Currently many
instructors are aware of the underrepresentation of women and try to encourage
women by increasing the visibility of women in science and providing them with
role models. The purpose of this proposal is to move beyond these standard
strategies and focus on removing some of the psychological barriers. This effort
focuses on calculus-based introductory physics courses. Students who attend
these courses major in all areas of science and mathematics, but are primarily
engineering and physics majors. Some straightforward pedagogical changes that
will address these barriers are to be implemented. The proposed teaching
techniques are designed: (1) to increase the comfort level in the classroom by
establishing a sense of community; (2) to build confidence in women and people
of color; (3) to increase the perceived value and utility of science and
mathematics; (4) to reduce the competitive nature of the classroom; (5) to
develop self-assessment skills; and (6) to encourage risk taking to enhance the
learning process. In addition, faculty are to engage in workshops and discussion
sessions to raise their awareness of the barriers that women and minorities
face. Faculty also are to be involved in the development and refinement of
pedagogical techniques that help to remove those barriers. The advantage of the
structural and pedagogical approach, compared to other models of comprehensive,
often course-specific curricular reform, lies in: (1) its portability from
course to course and from discipline to discipline, and (2) its emphasis on
"techniques" rather than content, thus making is likely to b e more easily and
readily embraced by a broader range of faculty. A focus on pedagogical
techniques and class structure is a unique aspect of this program. The intention
is to use this project as a foundation for long-term pedagogical and faculty
development. The program seeks: (1) to reduce the overall dropout rate from the
introductory physics course through increasing the number of women and people of
color who complete it, through raising the grades of those completing it,
especially the women and people of color, through increasing satisfaction with
the course; (2) to increase the proportion of women and people of color who
choose to continue in science, engineering, or mathematics; and (3) to introduce
to the science, mathematics and engineering faculty pedagogical techniques
designed to make classes more supportive, and to improve learning. These
efforts, hopefully, will lead to a cooperative and mutually supportive network
of faculty from engineering, science, mathematics and education who share a
commitment to increase the diversity of students who take and succeed in science
and mathematics courses at the University. ***