* 9553350
* Strengthening Graduate Education in Science and Engineering Through Systemic Involvement in Research and Outreach       Activities
* O/D,EPS
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Diandra Leslie-Pelecky, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 08/31/1999
* USD 456,203.00

9553350 Leslie-Pelecky Participation in outreach, in addition to research, as
part of the training of graduate students in science and engineering will be
established and institutionalized. Nine graduate students per year will be
funded to assist with the development of materials for the outreach program.
Other graduate students, faculty, and staff will work with the program on a
volunteer basis. The supported students will represent a wide range of
disciplines covering most of the sciences and engineering. Student awardees will
receive an enhanced stipend, $1000 for travel to a professional meeting, and
funding for purchase and/or construction of demonstrations in their field. The
outreach project has as its basis scripted modules that develop a scientific or
technical concept using demonstrations and hands-on activities supervised by
members of the outreach group. Graduate student participation by both the
awardees and volunteers will assist in the development of skills such as:
communicating the importance of science and engineering to non-scientists,
learning the fundamentals of grant writing, improving oral communication, and
working with the media. Centralization of these efforts will create productive
links between different departments and centers on campus, as well as provide an
efficient means for increasing the competitiveness of graduates in the job
market. As part of the project, a professional development seminar open to all
graduate students will be offered. Topics covered will include job hunting
skills (writing a vita, interviewing), professional skills (writing papers and
proposals, presenting technical talks) and outreach-related topics (working with
children, communicating with the media). After the materials development phase,
future plans call for dissemination to colleges and high schools throughout the
state, in conjunction with conferences to prepare the new users for outreach
activity.