* 9553482
* MPWG:  Family Tools &amp; Technology (FT2)
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1995,07/31/1998
* Arlene Chasek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/1998
* USD 120,636.00

9553428 Chasek FAMILY TOOLS &amp; TECHNOLOGY (FT2) is an after-school program
targeting girls and their parents who are to collaborate in problem solving
activities (using tools and building models) that illustrate the importance of
science, technology, and mathematics in the world beyond the classroom. This
proposal is for support of the second phase of the project: an assessment to
determine the project's readiness for wider dissemination by evaluating the
effectiveness of the existing activities, materials and strategies. FT2 was
created to make tools and technology activities and related careers accessible
and exciting to girls who traditionally are on the margins of technological
experience. The program seeks to increase the number of girls (and boys) who are
excited about science and technology and encourage to their continuing interest;
to stimulate parents to become advocates for their daughters' endeavors in
science and technology; and to train teachers to promote girls' confidence and
competence in problem-solving and in real life applications of mathematics and
science concepts. The program targets girls at a critical time in their
educational development, pre-adolescence, before sex role stereotypes are
solidified. (During the first phase of the project, funded in 1992-94 by an
Eisenhower Mathematics and Science Education grant, 40 teachers, grades 4-6,
field tested original technology activities with 240 families in an after-school
program.) Objectives for this second phase of the project include: (1) involving
and encouraging girls, (boys), and their parents in a hands-on technology
program, FT2, by training a cadre of teachers in the necessary facilitation,
motivation, and science, pre-engineering, and mathematics skills; (2)
supervising the program in 12 urban, suburban, and rural schools, with diverse
groups of majority and minority girls, (boys), and their parents; (3) providing
technical assistance and access to the FT2 Resource Center to reinfor ce and
sustain the interest of these girls, parents, and teachers in science,
technology, and mathematics activities and related careers; (4) observing and
evaluating the impact and effectiveness of the program (activities, materials,
facilitating and motivating strategies, and the career component) on
participants (girls, their parents, and teachers). Ultimately, it is hoped that
FT2 will become a national parental involvement program, increasing awareness of
the need for technological literacy by providing a model program for girls and
their parents that can be institutionalized in NJ and disseminated to other
states. A multimedia package (teacher's manual and video) are to be produced and
a Leadership Institute is to be designed and conducted to prepare a cadre of FT2
teachers to become trainers of other teachers to facilitate dissemination of
this model. ***