* 9553448
* MPWG:  Science Service Learning-Community
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Deborah Wiegand, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 85,255.00

9553448 Wiegand Since one of higher education's goals is to produce educated
citizens, not just educated people, there needs to be mechanisms to bring
service learning into the mainstream of university science education. The
University of Washington's Chemistry Department proposes adding to its
significant outreach programs a Science Service Learning-Community (SSL-C) class
which links undergraduate students to community projects. Students who take the
service learning section of the basic three quarters chemistry series have the
opportunity for a concurrent commitment to a community service project. Students
are able to select one of three forms of community service: 1) link directly
with an ongoing community group; 2) assist teachers and students to implement
on-going community service projects such as growing food for community food
banks; 3) serve in an elementary classroom assisting teachers to develop hands-
on curricula which help students understand the relationship between science and
their community. Numerous community groups and non-profit organizations take
advantage of limited funding resources, such as Neighborhood Community Action
Grants, to undertake projects to benefit their communities. Many of these
projects are science based, such as water monitoring, stream revegetation, and
salmon habitat efforts. Typically these projects do not involve university
students, but they can be a perfect training ground for students to become
involved in specific activities which need scientific input to achieve
measurable changes in communities. Developing such relationships help achieve
neighborhood goals; link students with mentors who live their commitment to
community service; and graphically illustrate to students the value of adding
scientific information to projects that directly impact communities. This
approach is particularly important for young women because they are provided
with opportunities to enhance their self- esteem and perception; develop a b
etter understanding of the scientific process through applications of specific
scientific concepts; develop a more positive image of scientists. It also
enhances interest in and commitment to science majors by focusing on how science
can help people/the community. The goals of this project are to instill in
university science students the importance of scientifically-based community
service through projects which are designed and driven by community volunteers,
to encourage elementary students to generate and sustain community service
projects which have academic outcomes, and to generate elementary science
curricula which draw students into scientific inquiry through hands-on science
related to community needs and concerns. This program can provide a model for
intergenerational community service learning with measurable academic outcomes.
The project is being jointly funded with FIPSE (U.S. Department of Education).
***