* 9553438
* Turning Information into Knowledge: Hypermodels for Science Education
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,12/31/1997
* Eric Neumann, Bolt Beranek and Newman Inc
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1997
* USD 1,060,953.00

9553438 Horwitz This 36 month project assesses the educational effectiveness of
a new paradigm for science education software, the hypermodel. This includes
multimedia and animation relating computer representations to corresponding
objects and processes in nature. GenScope, a prototype hypermodel for
investigating genetics, is currently under development. It supports open-ended
exploration at five levels: DNA, chromosomes, organism, pedigree and population
thus having applications in molecular biology, cellular biology, physiology,
Mendelian inheritance, and population genetics. The GenScope models. The goal of
this project is to demonstrate the educational effectiveness of the hypermodel
technology as a complement to the traditional textbook and lecture approach and
to implement the tools, protocols, and standards necessary to facilitate the
creation of others by researchers, teachers, curriculum developers, and
students. The project provides networking support to share data, parts of models
and full models. In addition to some technical gains in multimedia and networked
models, the project will examine the impact of the multi-level hypermodel on
individual student's understanding. The "seamless" levels allow students to
delve into why something happens on more and more fundamental levels, ultimately
down to the molecular. Conversely, students can look at the impacts and
generalize from the specific to more general cases by moving up levels from the
molecular to the most general, populations. This project will define which
content and reasoning skills are pertinent and should be studied in the
research. It will determine which of these "elicit which components of
understanding." ***