* 9553709
* Collaborative Model for Technician Education Through        Interactive Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* M. Carolyn Girardeau, North Carolina State Board of Community Colleges
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/1999
* USD 139,450.00

We propose a three-year plan to develop a new classroom model in mathematics
education. It will be focussed at the 11th and 12th grade levels and at the
community college level for engineering technology students preparing to enter
the manufacturing workforce. Students will be taught the same powerful problem-
solving strategies that are used in the manufacturing industry and will solve
these problems by developing critical thinking skills and using multimedia and
interactive technology in networked collaborative learning environments.
Students will learn to develop solutions to real problems in a high technology
virtual workplace-the classroom. Through partnerships with industry,
universities, community colleges, and high schools, new models of
apprenticeships and internships combining the classroom with the workplace will
be developed using full motion video conferencing. Colleges of Education at
universities in cooperation with the manufacturing industry and non-profit
technology institutions in North Carolina will provide both in-service and pre-
service professional development and technical support to high school and
community college faculty. To encourage alliances around the nation in
restructuring technician education, we will develop a national discourse on
innovative instruction in engineering technology. In this new model for
technician education, the classroom will become a virtual workplace for students
to gain experience and confidence in solving real problems facing engineering
technicians in manufacturing, and share experiences on problem-solving
strategies used in manufacturing.