* 9553405
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2002
* Frederick Smith, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9553405 Smith A proposed Graduate Research Traineeship project is described
which will focus on research in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing. The
project would be managed by a Principal Investigator and five Co-Principal
Investigators who will work with five PhD trainees as an interdisciplinary team
within the framework of the Manufacturing Excellence Center (MEC) at Colorado
State University. The MEC has operated for several years and provides a unique
setting within which PhD trainees would have the opportunity to interact with
small-and-medium sized manufacturing firms as the PhD education and research
programs are being undertaken. The research will focus on specific advances in
environmentally conscious parts cleaning technologies, chemical vapor deposition
reactors which minimize waste production, environmentally conscious design in
concurrent engineering, and low pollution painting processes. These areas are
selected because they are known to be relevant to the competitive position of
manufacturers. This is known based upon the ongoing, day-to-day interaction with
manufacturers through the MEC. In the context of the long-standing commitment of
Colorado State University of diversity, a significant effort would be made in
this project to enhance recruitment and retention of women, minorities and
persons with disabilities in the proposed traineeship program. In addition, a
significant contribution to the national infrastructure which promotes and
sustains student diversity is expected.