* 9553294
* SSC: "DAYS Summer Science Camp"
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1996
* James Giulianelli, Denver Area Youth Services (DAYS)
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 08/31/1996
* USD 76,540.00

Denver Area Youth Services (DAYS), a community-based non-profit organization
serving predominantly minority children, youth and families in Denver, Colorado,
submits this proposal to sponsor a 4- week Summer Science Camp for 50 minority
children entering 7th and 8th grade. Most will be students who will be enrolling
in the Denver youth Academy, a new charter public middle school for at- risk
students that is scheduled to open in Fall, 1995. Two-thirds of the target
population are Latinos, about 30% African-American and the rest Native American,
all minority groups that experience high drop-out rates, low college enrollment
rates and that are dramatically underrepresented in math and science fields in
Colorado and nationally. The Camp represents a unique collaboration of a
community-based agency that has access to and credibility with the minority
community, and two premier institutions of science education-Regis University
and Children's Museum of Denver. Regis University will provide the Principal
Investigator for the project, Dr. Jim Giulianelli, as well as develop and
facilitate the classroom learning activities for the first week of the Camp. The
Children's Museum of Denver will develop and facilitate the classroom learning
and research activities for the second and third week of the camp. Youth in the
Camp will thus be exposed to a university campus, as well as to a family-
friendly environment for practicing science that they and their families can
continue to access on an ongoing basis throughout the year. The Camp will
conclude with a week long residential experience at a campsite in a national
park in Colorado's Rocky Mountains. The Camp will provide a rich experience of
integrated classroom instruction, experiments and research activities that will
be documented in the student's Science Journals. Extensive Career Exploration
activities will be woven throughout the four weeks through field trips to
businesses and government agencies, meetin gs with individual scientists, guided
career research, and other group activities. Mentors will include: university
professors; science teachers; minority high school, undergraduate and graduate
students in math and science programs serving as Camp Counselors; and volunteer
scientists and engineers. Student support activities include numerous family
involvement activities, peer support, and ongoing involvement of the campers
with the Denver Youth Academy.