* 9553277
* SSC:  Wildlife Inquiry Through Zoo Education (W.I.Z.E.)     Summer Science Camp
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Annette Berkovits, Wildlife Conservation Society
* Standard Grant
* Alexandra King
* 10/31/1997
* USD 62,373.00

The Wildlife Conservation Society, founded 1895 as the New York Zoological
Society, requests a grant from the National Science Foundation, to launch and
exciting two-fold science education and career exploration project for
undeserved youngsters entering 8th and 9th grades. This commuter summer camp
experience, serving 35 children annually over a three year period, will be held
at the internationally acclaimed Bronx Zoo and be based on one of the exemplary
and PEP1 validated life science curricula developed by the Bronx Zoo Education
Department, Wildlife Inquiry through Zoo Education (WIZE). To date, over 1,000
teachers in 40 states and U.S. territories have adopted the curriculum in grades
7-10. WIZE, a science program targeted for adolescents, became available in
1987. Initially funded by NSF, WIZE has been successfully disseminated
nationally through two consecutive grants from the U. S. Department of Education
National Diffusion Network, and continually evaluate over the past seven years.
The goals of Wildlife Conservation Society, the Bronx Zoo Education Department,
the WIZE curriculum, and the proposed WIZE Teens Summer Science Camp closely
coordinate with those of NSF's division Human Resources Development: We are
actively seeking to: 1) promote an interest in science and mathematics in middle
school students that will remain with them beyond their school years; 2 prepare
adolescents to understand and participate as informed citizens in public policy
debates and decisions on issues involving the environment, habitats, and
wildlife preservation; 3) encourage middle school students to value and continue
their science education throughout secondary school and consider higher
education leading to careers in science, mathematics, or technology. ***