* 9553009
* Presidential Faculty Faculty Award:  A Unified Approach to  Damage Tolerant Design and Manufacturing of Microelectronic Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/1995,10/31/2001
* Sheng Liu, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 10/31/2001
* USD 500,000.00

9553009 Liu This award is made to an outstanding young individual who has
demonstrated great potential to advance both research and education in
engineering. The specific area of research encompasses the design and
fabrication of semiconductor devices. The goal is to advance the reliability of
electronic devices, which are an assembly of components. The size range of the
components can vary from microscopic submicron scale to macroscopic printed
circuit board scale. Inspite of this large variation in physical dimensions, the
research will attempt to seek unifying fundamental failure mechanisms such as
void generation, delamination, cracking, creep and so on which could arise out
of stresses induced by moisture migration, thermal excursion and mechanical
vibration. The research will attempt to study fundamental materials behavior
using submicron fatigue tester and monitoring flaw generation via nondestructive
evaluation. These physical properties are to be combined into the finite element
modeling to arrive at a predictive reliability code. The resultant computer
software, combined with graphics could enable optimization iteration without a
trial and error fabrication. If successfully demonstrated, this research has the
potential to offer a very robust integrated circuit design tool. The educational
plan is to take the multidisciplinary elements of the research into the class
room combining mechanical, chemical and electrical engineering with elements of
materials science, corrosion chemistry, and design for manufacture. In addition,
taking advantage of the very close liaison established with several industrial
partners, the education plan takes students to the real world industrial
environment and at the same time brings industrial researchers into the class
room. Successful completion of the research and education plans brings together
not only the research and education elements but also theory and practice. As a
result, the microelectronics industry may benefit with reliab le electronic
devices. In addition, a new cadre of educated workforce could result who can
traverse between science and practice with equal ease. This has the potential to
advance the U. S. leadership in education and research in the important
microelectronics sector.