* 9553768
* Advanced Technological Education Project in Environmental   Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Dennis Fulk, Stark State College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth M. Dorland
* 08/31/1999
* USD 516,219.00

Stark Technical College (STC) proposes an Advanced Technological Education
project in Environmental Technology which will result in the development of an
Environmental Technology option within Civil Engineering Technology. The project
will address northeastern Ohio's business and industry needs for technical
expertise in environmental instrumentation, regulation and compliance areas as
well as waste minimization/pollution prevention concepts. This need is critical
due to the heavy concentration of manufacturing in the region and the fact that
northeastern Ohio is the most polluted quadrant of the state. The College's
established ties with business and industry in the region will facilitate the
design of a program that will produce uniquely qualified graduates who can help
the public and private sectors address growing environmental regulations and
concerns. The AAS degree curriculum will be tied into secondary Tech Prep
programs in the region and related bachelor's degree programs at Youngstown
State University and the University of Findlay. An integral part of the
curriculum will be advanced communications technologies which will enable
students (high school, two-year college and university) to communicate with each
other on collaborative projects. It also will serve as the basis for an
Environmental Resource Center (ERC), to be operated by students, which will
facilitate and enhance instruction, as well as respond to business/industry and
community questions and concerns. A major component of the project will be
Summer Institutes and academic year follow-ups for teacher/faculty enhancement
in several key areas: pedagogy; technical expertise; and math, science and
communications-related instruction.