* 9553380
* Graduate Research Traineeships:  Integrating Science,       Technology, and Management in Global Civil Infrastructure   Systems
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Sue McNeil, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9553380 McNeil Carnegie Mellon University is proposing an innovative GRT
program that focuses on the joint impact of science, technology and management
on global Civil Infrastructure Systems. The student training will include an
appreciation and understanding of the current state of the U.S. Infrastructure
systems, an exposure to advances in other areas of critical importance to
encourage interdisciplinary technology transfer and development, and internships
abroad and in national laboratories and industries to provide the cultural
breadth and to bridge theory and application. The research program for each
student will emphasize a unified strategy towards deterioration science,
assessment technologies, and renewal engineering. This research vision will
enable the student to leapfrog the current myopic strategy of "design and new
construction" to unified strategy that recognizes the importance of a systems
approach, good science, new and emerging technologies and sound management
practices to sustain infrastructure over its life. The proposed training program
will provide the graduates with the opportunity to be future leaders in the
development and sustenance of U.S. and international infrastructure. We will
actively recruit underrepresented groups building on our success with working
with women graduate students and utilizing our links to other institutions. We
have an excellent track record with respect to retention and intend to maintain
this through not only providing a unique education experience but also by
maintaining strong advisor- student relationships. The innovative elements of
the program are also attractive for students interested in a holistic graduate
experience.