* 9553674
* Southeast Community College - A Chemical Technology Curriculum and Materials Development Project
* NONE,NONE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Paul Kelter, Southeast Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1998
* USD 191,590.00

Southeast Community College (SCC) will establish a National Center of Excellence
for Chemistry-Based Technician Education at its Lincoln, Nebraska, campus.
Through this center, SCC will coordinate and direct a comprehensive curriculum
and educational materials development project for chemistry-based technician
education. The new curriculum will be developed for associate degree programs
with input from a national consortium of employed technicians, business and
industry representatives, community college and high school instructors,
university professors, and the American Chemical Society's National Voluntary
Industry Standards project. A new curriculum will also be developed for those
already employed as chemistry technicians following a comprehensive survey of as
many employed technicians as can be reached nationally with the help of local
alliances and the American Chemical Society's Division of Chemical Technicians.
Both traditional and technologically advanced educational materials will be
developed for all curriculum projects and published and/or distributed for the
purpose of delivering the new curricula in a manner consistent with modern
educational theories and systems. Workshops for the enhancement of high school
and community college faculty will be held during the summers in cooperation
with local industries. Topics of the workshops will center around the modern
work place and associated instrumentation and technologies community colleges
use in the training of technicians. Marketing of chemistry technology as a
career will be addressed, with special attention given to underrepresented
groups, To help the center achieve these goals, all chemistry technician
training programs, their students and graduates, the business and industrial
communities they serve, and the feeder high schools in their areas will be
united into a national community college network centered at SCC. The entire
project will be guided by a national advisory board and a s teering committee.