* 9553726
* Advanced Technology Curriculum:  Meeting AEA Standards
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Thomas Griffith, North Seattle Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 08/31/1998
* USD 600,000.00

North Seattle Community College seeks funding from NSF's Advanced Technological
Education program to make major improvements in electronics and engineering
technologies curricula By collaborating with industry, professional
associations, institutions of higher education, and secondary schools, the
college proposes to develop model ATE programs that raises standards and
performance levels for technicians in industrial applications. Since its opening
in 1970, the college has offered comprehensive electronics and engineering
technologies programs, along with technical specializations in biomedical
technology, CAD for industrial applications, industrial power control,
communications technology, digital computer electronics, and computer
networking. To comply with the new standards developed for technicians by the
American Electronics Association designed to raise skill and knowledge levels,
faculty propose significant changes in the college's approach to technological
education. Spanning a period of five years, 1995-2000, the project focuses on
three major components: (1) Faculty Development. A rigormus faculty enhancement
program is planned to prepare faculty for curricular reform. Participants in a
summer institute in 1996 and 1997 will include electronics and engineering
faculty, secondary school teachers, and representatives of industry. Building a
foundation for preparing technical workers, the institute will cover a range of
topics that include AEA standards, industry practices, collaborative approaches
to teaching, use of interactive courseware, and competency-based instruction.
The professional enhancement program also promotes faculty's return to industry
for updating their knowledge and skills. (2) Curriculum and Instructional
Materials. Comprehensive curricular reform requires development of Tech Prep
career pathways in electronics and engineering technologies with Sea ttle Public
Schools, pre-college level workshops in applied academics for students deficient
in basic skills, integration of science and mathematics into technical programs,
and new and revised curricula in electronics and engineering. Included in the
project is faculty's collaboration with industry on training modules that can be
used in the classroom as well as at the work site. These modules will focus on
basic skills and on specific, typically complex technical topics such as object-
oriented design and documentation. Faculty will also coordinate curricula for
improving articulation between two- and four-year institutions and for
establishing new degree options for NSCC's students. (3) Laboratory Improvement.
Over the five-year period, faculty will integrate into the curriculum a new
learning laboratory where automated work environments can be simulated and
state-of-the-art systems demonstrated. The integrated systems laboratory will be
designed to provide students with an overview of systems involved in taking a
product from design and pattern layout to a tested and finished product.