* 9553361
* Establishment of a Statewide Environmental Sciences         Education and Research Training Program in Nevada
* EHR,ESR
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* James Seiber, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 12/31/1998
* USD 250,000.00

9553361 Taylor The University and Community College System of Nevada (UCCSN)
will develop an education and research tpaining program in the environmental
sciences that is integrated and system-wide, with an emphasis on linking the
disciplines of environmental chemistry, environmental biology, ecology, and
human health. This interdisciplinary area of emphasis within the environmental
sciences is an important initiative because the State of Nevada is experiencing
an unparalleled rate of population growth (5% per year over the last four
years), which is far in excess of all other states. In addition, the increases
are confined to the urban centers in Las Vegas (Clark County), Reno and Sparks
(Washoe County) and Carson City. The net effect of this growth over the last
four decades has been to transform the state from a predominantly rural to a
largely urban environment. The rate of transformation is unprecedented, and the
consequences for human health and natural resources are just beginning to be
recognized. The current effort will stimulate the development of a cohesive
statewide program to address the relationship between quality of the environment
and the health of human populations and natural resources in Nevada. The program
calls for the following: (1) to develop a system-wide infrastructure for
graduate education and training in the environmental sciences because none of
the UCCSN units have the depth and breadth to individually develop a program of
excellence; (2) to develop a research infrastructure to encourage UCCSN faculty
and graduate students to devote more of their competitive research to the
environmental sciences by linking basic and mission-oriented research and
emphasizing priority problems in the state of Nevada; and (3) to develop a
training and networking infrastructure in Nevada to inform and educate the
population on issues in the environmental sciences, focusing on linking the
educational and research expertise in the UCCSN with bus iness interests in the
public and private sector. These three platforms of the infrastructure will be
implemented through the Graduate Program of Environmental Sciences and Health
(ES&H) at the University of Nevada, Reno (UNR); this program is part of the
Center for Environmental Sciences and Engineering (CESE) at UNR. The ES&H
program will be aggressively expanded to include faculty and graduate students
from the University of Nevada, Las Vegas (UNLV), leading to eventual full
partnership. This will be the first example of a system-wide degree and training
program within UCCSN and will serve as a template by which other systemic
graduate programs in the sciences and engineering can be developed in the
future.