* 9553484
* MPWG:  Operation SMART Western South Dakota Expansion       National Science Foundation Model Project
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/1995,10/31/1998
* Melanie Flatt, Youth & Family Services
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 10/31/1998
* USD 104,498.00

9553484 Flatt The current Operation SMART project has been very successful in
utilizing methods and materials developed for out-of-school girls' programs to
provide training and technical assistance to public school teachers, as well as
to enable students to experience equity-based, hands-on, math and science
activities in their classrooms. This award enables the Operation SMART project
to significantly expand its efforts to include an additional 600-700 students
and 22 elementary teachers, largely in rural areas, a population not previously
targeted, and to focus on project evaluation. This training and technical
project is designed: (1) to improve the performance and persistence of girls in
science, math and relevant technology, while influencing all students' positive
performance in these disciplines, and (2) to increase teachers' use of hands-on
inquiry, and problem solving approaches while building confidence in their
teaching skills, which involves increasing their awareness of and skills in
addressing gender equity as a cultural issue. An evaluation of the project will
include: a quantitative analysis of the project impact on students and teachers;
a qualitative analysis of the project impact on teacher attitudes, perceptions
and implementation of project activities; and an analysis of the process of
developing and implementing the project--ascertaining key elements, methods, and
players--the "who, what, why, and how." ***