* 9553456
* Molecular Aspects of Energy Transduction by Plants:  An     Integrative Approach
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Willem Vermaas, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9553456 Vermaas With exciting advances in plant molecular biology, many
graduate students in the molecular plant sciences have focused their research
efforts on narrow issues that are currently in vogue; examples include detailed
characterization of regulation of gene expression or identification of new
genes. Consequently, graduate students who are interested in molecular biology
of plant systems often do not receive sufficient training in important aspects
of biochemistry, bioenergetics, cell biology, and physiology. However,
integrated knowledge in these areas will be essential for further progress in
the basic plant sciences. This proposal seeks to reverse the trend of narrowing
the research focus of graduate students; an effort is described in which 15 PhD
students will be trained to creatively and synthetically integrate various
disciplines bearing on the molecular plant sciences and addressing critical
questions in the field. Several of these students will be minorities. The common
denominator of research areas described in this proposal is energy transduction
in plants. A major emphasis is on photosynthesis and its regulation, as this is
an area of particular interdisciplinary strength at Arizona State University.
Our goal is to provide training that will optimally prepare graduates for truly
imaginative and integrative research in the molecular plant sciences.