* 9553765
* The Development of an Advanced Applied Technological Mathematics Course Via a Partnership
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Amy Salvati, SUNY Adirondack
* Continuing grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1999
* USD 234,194.00

The goal of this project is the strengthening and streamlining of high school
and community college technological education programs. To achieve this goal, a
partnership between Adirondack Community College, four area school districts,
and area business and industry will develop and implement an advanced applied
mathematics course AM4 to follow and extend Tech Prep's Applied Math 1, 2, and
3. The courses and materials will conform to reform guidelines (Standards)
established by the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, the American
Mathematical Association of Two-Year Colleges, and the New York State
Curriaulum, Instruction, and Assessment Framework for Mathematics, Science, and
Technology. Mathematics will be viewed as a powerful tool for real world problem
solving; calculators and computers will be integrated throughout this contextual
approach. Labs will emphasize the hands-on nature of the course. The mathematics
departments from Adirondack and the four area high schools have worked closely
in the implementation of AM1, AM2, and AM3. Initial feedback indicates
substantial success with the Center for Occupational Research and Development
(CORD) materials. Desired student outcomes measured include an improvement in
problem solving and critical thinking skills, concept attainment, motivation,
and making connections. The project will serve as a model for cooperation
between high schools, community colleges, and area business and industry in
extending these desired outcomes to AM4. Materials will be produced for use by
interested school districts from the Capital Region Consortium and throughout
the nation. The course and materials will be widely disseminated through
conferences and workshops, in journals, and possible publication as texts.