* 9553355
* Development of a Center for Macromolecular Photochemistry   and Photophysics
* EDU,ESR
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1998
* Anselm Griffin, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 06/30/1998
* USD 100,000.00

9553355 Creed A enter for Macromolecular Photochemistry and Photophysics at the
University of Southern Mississippi (USM). Macromolecular Photochemistry and
Photophysics (MPP) is of unquestionable scientific and technological importance.
The results of basic research on this topic would have an impact on
technological areas as diverse as degradation of plastics by sunlight, the
development of optical computers, and the fabrication of increasingly smaller
circuits for electronics applications. The Center will draw upon the
considerable body of expertise of nine current faculty in the Departments of
Chemistry and Biochemistry, Physics and Astronomy, and Polymer Science at USM,
and make use of existing equipment and other physical facilities. It will draw
these faculty closer together and promote synergism in their research efforts
through a broad spectrum of activities such as participation in joint research
projects, funding of graduate and undergraduate students, participation in a
seminar series and international conferences, participation in a literature
discussion group, funding of travel to conferences and industrial, academic, and
government labs, funding of a seminar series and consultant's visits to the
campus with special emphasis on visitors from industrial labs, provision of
specialized courses in photochemistry and photophysics, and provision of modest
support for operation and repair of common, specialized research equipment. The
Center faculty will also serve the departments in an advisory role particularly
in such matters as identification of important research areas and selection of
new faculty, library acquisitions, and equipment acquisitions. The Center will
generate promotional materials for such crucial activities as recruitment of
graduate students and informing industry of the Center and the expertise of its
faculty. Photochemical projects range from studies of the photochemistry of
polyimides to the development of new functionalized photopol ymerizable
monomers. Photophysical projects range from the use of fluorescence probes in
sol-gel systems, associative thickeners, and surfactant polymers, to studies of
dynamic light scattering in liquid crystal polymer dispersions.