* 9553749
* New Jersey Center for Advanced Technological Education
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Jack Waintraub, Middlesex County College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/2001
* USD 2,966,472.00

The New Jersey Consortium for Advanced Technological Education proposes to
restructure engineering technology education beginning in grade eleven in
secondary school through the associate degree with articulation with
baccalaureate institutions. Just as the engineer of today must be knowledgeable
in more than one area and must be able to learn other fields quickly, the
diversified technological environment of today requires a new engineering
technician who has a thorough understanding of the mechanics, electronics, and
computer hardware and software that drive the modern workplace. In engineering,
one response to the need for cross-disciplinary knowledge was the creation of a
"mechatronics" engineering discipline. In engineering technology, Mecomtronics,
a new program to be created under this plan, will respond to the widespread
demand for a multifunctional engineering technician. As the result of an
intensive planning process, the New Jersey Consortium for Advanced Technological
Education (a partnership of community colleges, baccalaureate institutions and
school districts) will establish a center for engineering technology education
that will: create and implement an integrated Mecomtronics (MEchanical/
COMputer/teleCOMmunications/elecTRONlCS) Associate Degree program; develop and
integrate curriculum and instructional materials based on an interdisciplinary,
project-centered, collaborative learning approach to instruction; restructure
existing engineering technology programs; expand existing Tech Prep
relationships with high schools and articulation agreements with baccalaureate
institutions; establish a meaningful business/industry education professional
association partnership; incorporate quality principles into engineering
technology curriculum; develop and implement strategies for faculty professional
development; adapt and develop model p rograms and strategies to increase
enrollment and success of students, particularly those from underrepresented
populations; implement an electronic and print engineering technology education
communications network; enhance the professional status of technician careers;
evaluate the impact of Center activities on engineering technology education. At
the end of the five-year project, not only will the Consortium have created a
new engineering technology discipline that responds to the needs of industry and
students, but it will also have had a profound positive impact on the entire
field of engineering technology education. In each year of the project,
interrelated curriculum, materials development, faculty development and student
outreach activities will result in achievements that are measurable and
sustainable.