* 9553363
* Automation and Characterization of Environmental Research   Facility
* O/D,EPS
* 07/01/1995,06/30/1999
* Paul Gremillion, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* James Hoehn
* 06/30/1999
* USD 274,442.00

9553363 Knox The goal of this initiative is to improve the understanding of
interrelated environmental processes within surface and subsurface aqueous
ecosystems. To work toward that goal, the Oklahoma EPSCoR Committee will to
complete an automated environmental monitoring system and develop a detailed
site characterization database for a landfill ecosystem. These efforts will
involve equipment acquisitions and focused research applications. Development of
the landfill site into an automated, characterized research facility will be
coordinated with the United States Geological Survey (USGS), which recently
selected the landfill as the next field research site for its Toxic Substances
Hydrology Program. The Automation Component of this initiative centers around
the Oklahoma Mesonetwork, an outstanding example of the application of
technology for the benefit of people and programs. The MESONET is a statewide
network of automated environmental monitoring stations. Each station measures a
variety of environmental parameters (temperature, wind speed, soil moisture,
etc.) every 15 minutes and transmits the data to a receiving location via the
Oklahoma Law Enforcement Telecommunications Network. The data is quality
assured, archived, and made available within 15 minutes to multiple agencies
around the state. Two MESONET towers are planned for deployment at the Norman
landfill research facility. The objective of the Automation Component of this
initiative is to install networks of selected environmental sensors and exploit
the capabilities of MESONET for remote, continuous, real-time, environmental
monitoring. By using the MESONET system, the landfill research site and its
associated characterization datbase will be made available to researchers
throughout the state. The Research Component of this initiative is focused on
developing an accurate and detailed description of the surface and subsurface
flow and contaminant transport regimes at the lan dfill. The research work
proposed herein was developed in direct consultation with the U. S. Geological
Survey (USGS); hence, each project is designed to complement research activities
of the USGS. The research activities will focus on quantifying/qualifying
certain hydrologic interactions and subsurface biotic processes. In addition,
tracer studies would be conducted and geophysical surveys will be conducted at
the research facility. Selected sensors associated with these research efforts
will utilize the MESONET system to transmit data. The objective of the Research
Component of the initiative is to characterize the surface and subsurface flow
regimes of the landfill ecosystem using innovative monitoring, measurement, and
modeling techniques.