* 9553694
* Advancing Geo-technology Education:  Providing GIS/DPS/     Remote Sensing /Computer Cartography Skills for the         Workforce of the Twenty-First Century
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Ronald Hutkin, Indiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1998
* USD 306,250.00

William A. Dando DUE 9553694 Indiana State University FY1995 $ 300,000 Terre
Haute, IN 47809-0001 Advanced Technological Education Title: Advancing Geo-
technology Education: Providing GIS Remote Skills for the Workforce of the
Twenty-First Century The Department of Geography and Geology of Indiana State
University, is introducing twenty-five community college instructors to the
principles of Geographic Information Systems (GIS), one of the fastest growing
employment fields in the 19990s. Designed to promote the adoption of GIS as an
integral part of numerous technically-oriented instructional programs in two-
year colleges, this model program is taking the needed first step in supplying
the workforce in the Midwest with technicians educated in the use of this
rapidly growing technology. Working in teams of two or three community college
instructors from the same institution, participants are acquiring the basic
principles of GIS in two 3-week summer institutes and in one continuing
education class. They are learning of the many ways in which this technology is
used today in business, government, and industry. The immediate aim of this
project is to give participants sufficient familiarity with GIS principles and
knowledge of software and its utility so that they can return to their campuses
with enough expertise to begin to incorporate this technology into existing
courses. The long-term aim envisions participants establishing discrete GIS-
education programs at their institutions. To ensure realization of project
goals, consultants from two-year colleges with successful GIS programs are
advising in organizing all instructional programs and are part of the summer
institutes' teaching teams. A two-year college faculty member is serving as
project evaluator. Close cooperation of the Robinson, Illinois campus of
Illinois Eastern Illinois Co mmunity Colleges and the Terre Haute campus of
Indiana Vocational Technical Institute is assured with the inclusion of faculty
teams from those two institutions receiving GIS instruction in the summer
institutes and by providing them with hardware and software to help facilitate
employment of GIS into their existing courses. Development of introductory
courses in GIS and integration of GIS into existing courses at these two
institutions is a primary aim of the project.