* 9553423
* MPWG:  Engineering, Science, and Math Increase Job          Aspirations (ES MIJA)
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1996
* Chris Green, Intercultural Development Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Larissa Rogers
* 06/30/1996
* USD 99,953.00

9553423 Green The phenomenon of science/math avoidance closes off chances for
future career choices and diminishes earning potential for young women,
especially for Hispanic females. To reverse this trend, the
Engineering/Science/Mathematics Increases Job Aspirations Program (ES.MIJA)
proposes to target 60 Hispanic girls in the sixth grade who have not made plans
to pursue higher level courses in science or mathematics. Through an educational
partnership with the University of Texas at San Antonio/Alliance for Education,
Harlandale Independent School District in San Antonio, Texas, and the business
community, Intercultural Development Research Association (IDRA) will provide a
support system that will promote Hispanic girls' continuing participation and
achievement in advanced science and mathematics courses and increase their
career opportunities. The program seeks to achieve this goal through four
components: (a) curriculum, (b) instruction, (c) professional development and
technical assistance, and (d) support from a number of sources, including
parents and businesses. IDRA also will be collaborating with the University of
Texas at San Antonio (UTSA)/Alliance for Education, as appropriate, in
increasing awareness of engineering, science and math in this population through
mechanisms such as UTSA's annual Expanding Your Horizons Conference. IDRA and
ES.MIJA also will be working with UTSA on the San Antonio NSF-funded Urban
Systemic Initiative. ***