* 9553740
* South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE)    Exemplary Faculty Project
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1999
* Lynn Mack, South Carolina State Board Technical & Comprehensive Education
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 08/31/1999
* USD 1,419,128.00

The South Carolina Advanced Technological Education (SC ATE) Exemplary Faculty
project addresses the issue of restructuring the learning environment to prepare
two-year technical college students to compete in today's high performance
global marketplace. The specific goal is to create a cadre of exemplary faculty
teams for the express purpose of implementing innovative research-based advanced
technological education practices across the SC Technical College System. The
major objectives are to: (1) Develop and implement a comprehensive Faculty
Development Program for ATE that addresses faculty development needs in advanced
technological education content, effective pedagogy, and assessment of student
learning outcomes; (2) Develop, pilot test, and implement research-based
curricular reform in advanced engineering technology programs; and (3) Evaluate
implementation processes and materials and disseminate successful processes and
products at the local, state, and national levels. Methods include involving
interdisciplinary faculty teams from across the sixteen colleges in intensive
professional development activities; implementing a system-wide electronic
communications system based on the concept of a physical conference room; and
instituting project-based peer teams to design and implement new curriculum
materials and instructional strategies. The primary target audience is
mathematics, physical science, engineering technology and communications faculty
members. Collaborative partners include Clemson University and the National
Dropout Prevention Center at Clemson, the SC State Department of Education (SSI
and Tech Prep Programs), SC ETV, the Academy for Educational Development, and
the Virginia Community College System. This project represents an innovative
approach to systemic reform in professional development and seeks to coalesce
the strengths of individual faculty members into a unified effort to move the
entire system forward in advanced technolo gical education practices.