* 9554493
* MPWG: The Oceanography Camp for Girls
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Joan Rose, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Dawn M. Pickard
* 07/31/1997
* USD 99,878.00

9554493 Coble The Oceanography Camp for Girls (OCG) was developed jointly by the
University of South Florida's Department of Marine Science (USF DMS) and the
Pinellas County School System to encourage career interest in the sciences for
young women posed to enter high school. Oceanography was chosen because of its
inherent interdisciplinary nature, requiring a familiarity with the four "hard"
sciences--biology, chemistry, geology and physics, as well as a foundation in
mathematics. As such, the camp reflects the areas of study in which women are
most often underrepresented, and allows young women to use the knowledge gained
from hands-on activities and to apply it to a tangible marine environment in
their own "backyard." This environmental "bridging" is accomplished via cruises
aboard a research vessel for data collection, field trips, and in-depth,
practical laboratory explorations. The uniqueness of this educational program
derives its focus, not only from real-world environmental studies and awareness,
but also from one-on-one mentoring of middle school girls by women who are
already established in scientific fields. This project would significantly
expand and refine the camp experience. Annually, the OCG has reached only 30
young women residing in Pinellas County. The target population beyond Pinellas
County allows a new population of young women residing within a six county
radius to benefit from this experience. Additional components of the expansion
and refinement of this program include: 1) modification of the program format to
accommodate a residential component, increase interactions between student role
models and camp participants; 2) addressing the numerous leaks along the
education pipeline to directly improve access and retention of women in the
sciences; 3) providing teacher training to enhance science education at
secondary levels; 4) increasing collaborative efforts between public and private
research facilities statewide; and 5) serving as a m odel program for others,
offering training materials to pilot similar programs regionally. The
demonstration of the provision of services to female students includes: a summer
science program, use of technology in instruction, technical assistance,
development of a curriculum addressing needs and interests of female students,
improvement of individualized instruction in the classroom, collaborations
between secondary schools, university and governmental organizations, and
dissemination of information gathered over both short-term and long-term review
processes. The target population for this program is young women who have
successfully completed seventh grade. This is a critical time when girls
experience a loss of self-confidence and need positive encouragement in their
pursuits of math and science. The rationale is that the camp experience will
motivate participants to select more math and science courses and seriously
consider the sciences as a career option. ***