* 9554470
* Morse High School Networking Infrastructure for Education   Implementation Grant
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1995,03/31/1999
* John Shacklett, Morse High School
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 03/31/1999
* USD 1,057,867.00

Shacklett 95-54470 The NSF Networking Infrastructure for Education
Implementation Grant will provide a process model for integrating a networking
infrastructure into the Morse High School Center for Tech- nology and Pacific
Rim Studies magnet. The infrastructure will support Morse High School's effort
to implement reform concepts contained in the master plan for high schools in
California: Second to None: A Vision of the New California High School. The
project centers on the develop- ment of an interdisciplinary career path
curriculum supported by multimedia technology. The goal of the proposed
educational reform is that every high school graduate will have the knowl- edge
and skills needed to make the choice of immediately entering the workforce or to
continue in post-secondary education before engaging in a career. The project
will result in a process model, documented on CD ROM and disseminated through
the Internet. that can be used by other schools which are integrating technology
and implementing educational reforms to improve student achievement in math and
science. The project will develop a process model for implementing Second to
None that includes the following components: development of an interdisciplinary
curriculum for five magnet career paths: Aeronautics, Engineering, Science,
Tourism, and Languages integration of high quality math and science courses in
each career path a Certificate of Initial Mastery (CIM) program a "Tech Prep"
certification program early entry to college-level study through telecourses and
community college courses on and off campus a collaborative model K-16 a process
for delivering staff development for teachers and other staff functioning in a
Second to None teaching and learning environment a process for involving
industry as full partners in the Second to None teaching and learning
environment a process for integrating a networking infrastructure that will
support and enhance student learning, staff developmen t, industry and
parent/community involvement, and administration/ classroom management. Over the
three year period, the project will: network the entire school train teachers
and other school personnel in the use of technology utilize
school/parent/industry design teams to develop the career path curriculum
replicate school/industry/university models providing students hands-on
experience using technology and on-the-job experiences infuse math and science
in each career path redesign courses using applied, problem-solving approaches
integrate technology and accompanying new teaching/learning methodologies,
including ethics, in the classroom curriculum develop academic support programs
using technology for students who fail to meet minimum standards in math,
science, and reading