* 9554633
* An NAGT Program of Intensive Short Courses to Disseminate   Effective and Innovative Strategies for Teaching            Undergraduate Geoscience
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1996,06/30/2001
* R Macdonald, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 06/30/2001
* USD 153,000.00

The National Association of Geology Teachers (NAGT) will develop a program to
disseminate the effective and innovative strategies for teaching geoscience that
have been developed over the last decade. The two-year program has four
components: 1) three one-day short courses on effective teaching offered each
year at meetings of professional geoscience societies; 2) one annual four-day
summer workshop on re-designing an introductory or upper-level geoscience course
in the context of educational reform; 3) opportunities for continuing
discussions among participants via an electronic list server and "alumni"
reunions at meetings of professional geoscience societies; and 4) a Teaching
Resource Book of successful and innovative strategies for teaching geoscience to
undergraduates. The audience for this project will include faculty members at a
variety of types of institutions as well as graduate students and post-doctoral
fellows. The short courses and workshops will introduce participants to teaching
techniques that promote active learning, stimulate them to look critically at
design of effective learning environments, and provide opportunities for
discussions about teaching. The presenters are five experienced faculty members
who will actively involve participants in the session. Participants will leave a
short course or workshop informed not only about the value of making changes in
how they teach, but also about specific teaching strategies and examples of
assignments.