* 9554232
* Online Internet Institute
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1996
* Bonnie Bracey, Princeton Regional Schools
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Sanchez
* 09/30/1996
* USD 177,157.00

Serim 95-54232 The Online Internet Institute (OII) will create a virtual
infrastructure on the Internet to provide leading Internet using educators,
proponents of systemic reform, and teachers desiring professional growth with
hands-on experiences which will enable them to integrate the Internet within
their classrooms, and support their peers in doing the same. The OTA report
Technology and Teachers: Making the Connection states "helping schools to make
the connection between teachers and technology may be one of the most important
steps to making the most of past, present, and future investments in educational
technology and in our children's future." OII will add to the knowledge base
required to make these connections. During an eight week period this summer, 665
selected participants from school districts around the country will take part in
a series of online activities and workshops designed to teach them how to
identify and build successful models for using the Internet for systemic reform
and curriculum development at the local level. Educators must experience what it
is to learn through project-based, technology-enhanced approaches in their own
learning, in order to effectively support this kind of learning for their
students. Accordingly, each OII participant will in turn mentor at least five
online participants in order to extend the process to the wider Internet
education community, adding to the National Professional Development Library
that will be created by the project. At the same time, researchers working with
the project will create an assessment piece that will support replicating this
model. Software and technology developers and publishers will work with the
project to develop virtual online components of value to educators with Internet
access who are not workshop attendees. Through these efforts, more than 3,000
teachers will return to their classrooms in the fall fully prepared to bring
their students along into a rich environment of Internet resources. Man y tens
of thousands of additional teachers will have access to electronic databases and
models that provide a virtual instructional resource for networking in the
service of curriculum development and systemic reform.