* 9554233
* Mathematics Education and the World Wide Web
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Eugene Klotz, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1997
* USD 649,916.00

Klotz 95-54233 The Math Forum will be a virtual mathematics education and
technology-transfer center that brings together four critical elements that must
be integrated in order to realize the promise of the WWW for math education:
teacher support and networking, math resource development, a well-designed WWW
focal point for math education, and development of necessary WWW tools. Built on
knowledge gained in the successful Geometry Forum project, the Math Forum will
use the power of the WWW to weave public discussion forums, teacher education,
interesting mathematics, and sophisticated archives into a productive community.
New tools modeled on our existing software will be employed to create
collaborative environments that enable public discussion with the full set of
resources available on the Internet. Through interactive projects and
facilitation of special topic discussions, students, mathematicians, and math
educators will contribute to each other's work and provide the rich input,
networking, and support sought by teachers for their ongoing professional
development. Through the process of archiving and summarizing the activity of
online communities and teacher groups, the Math Forum will build a collaborative
math educational materials library. The Math Forum will collaborate with
existing publishers and curriculum groups, such as those working on NCTM
Standards materials, so that educators and students can participate effectively
in the curriculum development process and the products can meet the needs of
real classrooms. In the course of this effort many more well-developed
curricular resources will become available online. In order for the archives to
be useful and for math educators to make effective use of the WWW the Math Forum
must adapt and create software tools and web site designs to meet their specific
needs. Forum programmers will produce subscription software, evaluation tools,
and structured resources that enable users to make sense of the overwhelming
informatio n on the Internet. These tools will make it possible for participants
to filter and evaluate resources and to move more directly to the task of
constructing the environments they wish their students to explore. Furthermore,
the Math Forum will develop interactive math projects that take advantage of the
WWW for presenting engaging mathematics. Many of the experiments conducted here
will have immediate and wide applicability in other areas of education and use
of the Internet. A careful program of evaluation and outreach will bring regular
reports to the broader educational community. Hired netsurfers and online
support staff will keep the Forum on top of new developments and gather relevant
resources while publicizing the Forum and establishing the resourcefulness of
this pivotal venture.