* 9554576
* Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing:  Waste Minimizationin Chemical Processes
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Eric Beckman, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554576 Beckman In recent years we have observed extensive interest among
industrial BS-level engineers, chemists, and biologists in returning to school
to pursue a PhD in chemical engineering. In each of these cases, the parent
company has contributed significantly to the work via access to corporate
analytical labs, chemical samples, and outright cash gifts. Given that we have
found that these non- traditional students are often amongst our best graduate
students, due to their drive, experience, and maturity, we propose to employ the
title graduate fellowships to support an increased number of such students in
PhD research. Our experience is that research programs which emphasize water
minimization are of great interest to our industrial colleagues, and thus we
feel that use of the proposed fellowships in the area of waste minimization to
attract students returning to school form industry will lead to a large number
of applicants. Further, we propose to collaborate with the University of
Pittsburgh Manufacturing Engineering Program by offering Pollution Prevention
over MSEP's distance learning program. By participation in MSEP we foster
greater interaction with local industry, and can identify and recruit students
with interests in continuing on for the PhD vial research in waste minimization
topics.