* 9554283
* Planning for a Ubiquitous Educational Network with Enhanced Cognitive Interaction
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1995,09/30/1997
* Eugene Leonard, Kentucky Educational Television
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1997
* USD 94,680.00

Gorman 95-54283 Full time access to appropriate computing power for every
student, in class as well as at home, has not been economically possible despite
its generally recognized benefits. Nor has it been possible to seek the
potential for parental involvement in their child's studies if provided with
outreach from the school to the home.' This proposal for a planning grant
describes organizational and research activities pre-requisite to developing a
computing/communication structure that would provide those benefits.
Interdisciplinary discussions including professionals from the fields of
cognitive psychology, educational technology and digital engineering have
envisaged an approach that serves the unique requirements of a computer-enriched
educational environment. Those requirements are: realistic cost significantly
lower tolerance to complexity of use, and an absolute demand for ubiquity and
equality in access. The projected approach calls for a hierarchical local
network infrastructure which includes the classroom and the home, and which
expedites access to remote information resources. The envisaged infrastructure
meets education's unique requirements by simplifying and relocating the
requisite technical facilities and, at the same time making innovative use of
new communication and multisensory input/output technologies. This planning
grant proposal would survey existing and developmental high quality educational
software and operating protocols, in K-12 mathematics and science. This would
include evaluation criteria from current and experimental school programs,
curriculum developers and test-bed operations. The software and the operating
protocols will be conceptually superimposed on the envisaged infrastructure. As
a result, a scenario of design, testing and evaluation will be derived to serve
in guiding the development of a follow-on project to implement the envisaged
infrastructure in a succession of test environments.