* 9554501
* Determinants of Biodiversity, Social and Economic Patterns  in Montane Eco√êystems
* EDU,ESR
* 08/01/1995,07/31/1997
* Anthony Barnosky, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Reiss
* 07/31/1997
* USD 500,000.00

9554501 Stanford A pilot project to initiate multidisciplinary research needed
to determine links and conflicts between long-term economic growth and
sustainability of ecosystem integrity is proposed. The vehicle to accomplish
this end is an experimental collaboration of some 80 scientists called the
Consortium for Study of North Temperate Montane Ecosystems. The group is
composed of scholars at The University of Montana, Montana State University and
participating institutions. The Consortium will be advised by members of
relevant land management agencies and informed citizens. Existing and new basic
research efforts will coalesce under the Consortium umbrella around a common,
integrativeresearch theme. Examination of biodiversity patterns and processes,
including natural, social and economic attributes in a regional ecosystem
context, is the unifying principle. Work will be focused on the Crown of the
Continent (CCE) and Greater Yellowstone Ecosystems (GYE). The GYE and CCE
represent the largest, relatively intact ecosystems in temperate latitudes of
the world. They are among the last vestiges of "natural" Montana ecosystems and
encompass mountains and river valleys where altitudinal, climatic and associated
gradients lead to a diverse assemblage of animals, plants and human communities.
Both ecosystems are rapidly becoming affected by human influences at local to
regional scales as a consequence of shifting demographic and economic patterns.
The biodiversity unifier will be used to guide assembly, analysis and modeling
of massive regional data bases required to accomplish an integrated synthesis
that, in the long run, will offer predictions about future conditions as a
consequence of current practices and policies. The primary goal of the
Consortium is to sufficiently understand linkages and conflicts between natural
and social components to begin to predict the long- and short-term consequences
of environmental and social change within and between these two enormously
valuable ecosystems.