* 9554947
* The Geography Virtual Department:  Building and Linking     Geography Curricula Nationally Using the Internet and       Worldwide Web
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Kenneth Foote, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 12/31/1999
* USD 303,628.00

Funds are requested to convene workshops and seminars to plan and develop
ilstructional materials that will use the Internet and Worldwide Web to
interlink the cufficula of geography departments throughout the United States.
The goal of the project is to build high quality curriculum materials including
"electronic" textbooks and interactive modules that: 1) span the entire
undergraduate curriculum, 2) exploit further the potential of existing Internet
resources, and 3) take full advantage of the hypermedia format of the Worldwide
Web. The project will allow geographers at many universities to work toward
common goals and share the time and expense of developing the sorts of
hypermedia curriculum materials that are likely to become the hallmark of higher
education in the twenty-first century. The project addresses three important
challenges facing contemporary higher education: 1) to provide faculty with the
skills needed to create hypermedia instructional materials and use the Worldwide
Web effectively, 2) to set goals for the development of the discipline-specific
educational resources that will support the emergence of "virtual" departments
and even "virtual" universities, and 3) to help transform the Worldwide Web from
an adhoc and improvised collection of materials into an orderly and
systematically developed resource for education and research. To reach these
goals, two week workshops will be held at the University of Texas during the
summers of 1996, 1997, and 1998 to bring together thirty faculty from
universities across the nation. Participants will set goals for the development
of new materials, gain skills in hypermedia authoring, and write the first
modules. One day seminars will also be held at the national meetings of the
National Council for Geographic Education and the Association of American
Geographers to: 1) evaluate and refine materials, 2) present the new materials
to a larger professional audience, and 3) offer hands-on training.