* 9554325
* Making Good the Promise: A Regional Infrastructure Model forScience Education by Way of Electronic Field Trips ... from Abyss to Andromeda
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1995,06/30/1999
* Nancy Giberson, Monterey Peninsula Unified School District
* Continuing Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 06/30/1999
* USD 1,239,901.00

Matray 95-54325 The Monterey Bay Regional Education Futures (MBReEF) Consortium
is a broad based collaboration of scientific research organizations, education,
and government agencies, libraries, museums, and business/industry partners
working to develop a collaborative educational networking infrastructure,
Monterey BayNet, that would build a sustainable base and serve as a national
model for the application of telecommunications technology to science education.
It is designed to initiate collaborative efforts to a) integrate high speed data
communications access (ATM, ISDN, and Frame Relay) and computer technologies, b)
identify and make accessible relevant 'real world' data sources, e) develop
interactive electronic field trips by student/client groups, educators, and
scientific research communities in various ecosystems, and d) ultimately design
access to these trips and their relevant datasets residing in a regional
environmental electronic library. Teams of scientists, educators, and students
design initial electronic field trips around four exemplars: the Virtual Canyon
Project with the Monterey Bay Aquarium and the Monterey Bay Aquarium Research
Institute (MBARI), the Watershed Project with the Monterey Bay National Marine
Sanctuary and Moss Landing Marine Laboratories, the Virtual Telescope Project
with the Monterey Institute for Research in Astronomy (MIRA), and Building
Bridges on the Super Highway with Cabrillo College. These trips will utilize
voice, video, and data originating at participating science research agencies,
museums, and/or aquaria. In addition, real-time video and data will be provided
from the bottom of the Monterey Bay Canyon via MBARI's undersea Remotely
Operated Vehicle (ROV), from the watershed field sites, and 'from Andromeda' via
MIRA's virtual telescope. As other participants take these trips, they can, in
turn, create yet another level of electronic field trips for yet another group
of peers based upon their experience, questions, and interactions. The process,
outcomes and ultimate curriculum products of each field trip created and taken
become new input for a regional electronic environmental library. New trips,
utilizing existing and new, successive inputs are then created and embarked upon
in such a way that the entire information system is recursive and ever changing.
Access to the ultimate field trip utilizing such an infrastructure will result
in: improved quality and effectiveness of instruction and learning in the areas
of regional/global marine and environmental studies and astronomy; the use of
data communications to increase access to informational, instructional, and
technological resources (voice, video and data); models for integrating cost-
effective telecommunications networking into the science curriculum; a migration
model to allow schools and/or agencies to move from one communications service
tier to the next as their needs and applications change; definitions of the role
of voice, video, and data communications in teacher training; models for product
and service dissemination, collaboration between diverse agencies. and military
base conversion towards educational use.