* 9554330
* The Edison Link
* EHR,DRL
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1996
* Lynn Spampinato, Denver Public Schools
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Sanchez
* 08/31/1996
* USD 102,543.00

PI: Spampinato 95-54330 With the advent of new technologies in distance
education and interactive networks, students no longer need to be in a
traditional school setting in order to access quality educational resources. How
will this impact the future of education and learning? How can these new
resources be used by schools to transform the way they do business rather than
to simply incorporate the technological changes into their current models? How
can these new resources be used to impact the lives of urban and minority
children? In addition, how can these resources be used to assist teachers in
their efforts to change their methods of instruction? Edison Elementary, a K-5
school in Denver, Colorado, in conjunction with the Denver Public Schools (DPS)
Department of Technology Services, and other community organizations seeks to
develop a network model, named. the "Edison Link", that will begin to answer
some of the questions mentioned above. The curricular focus of the proposed
network will be in the areas of elementary science, math and technology.
Research shows that science receives the least amount of weekly instructional
time of all the core curriculum in American schools. A recent survey also has
shown that a vast majority of teachers want to institute reforms in the way they
teach science and math. Knowing this, those involved in the proposed Edison Link
see great possibilities in developing a network devoted to math and science that
can offer educational opportunities for students and teachers alike. The Edison
Link will utilize a variety of technologies to achieve its goal of becoming a
valuable and far reaching interactive math and science resource. The current (or
soon to be) available technologies are as follows: The DPS has installed a T-1
network, capable of audio, data and video transmissions, that connects all
district schools and buildings. An ITFS broadcast tower, capable of reaching
throughout the Denver metro area, will be ready in early 1996. This tower w ill
be owned and operated by the DPS and will allow television broadcasts receivable
by any Denver metro home or institution with a satellite dish. One way video and
two way audio connections can be made utilizing ITFS World Wide Web connections,
utilizing Netscape, are already available within the DPS. With CUSeeMe software
and a computer top video camera, broadcast capabilities can be activated over
the Internet and received throughout the world. To date, a number of distance
education projects focusing on science and math have been implemented throughout
the United States. Their successes have been duly noted by those involved in the
Edison Link project. The Edison Link will be developed and implemented building
on these successes but with an additional focus on incorporating greater
interactivity and Internet access. In addition, the project will be developed
and implemented by classroom teachers. This is a departure from most distance
education networks currently available. It will therefore be particularly
focused on and sensitive to the needs of students and teachers.