* 9554910
* The Applied Apprenticeship Approach (AAA):  An              Object-Oriented/Object-Based Framework for CS2
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,09/30/1998
* Owen Astrachan, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 09/30/1998
* USD 119,382.00

The second course in the standard Computer Science curriculum (CS 2) is often
based on a theoretical study of data structures without an integrating practical
component. As this course migrates to an object-oriented approach, students and
instructors must be given materials to support a unified and application-
oriented course. We propose to develop learning modules that support an
application oriented, apprenticeship learning approach to the CS 2 course. Each
module supports a methodology that is inverted from the traditional "learn a
data structure and use it in a program" approach. Rather than studying data
structures to use in applications, we propose to use applications to study data
structures. Each module supports an apprentice style of learning wherein
students read and modify implementations of data structures and application
programs before writing them from scratch. Modules supply code libraries and
frameworks, explanatory material for students and instructors, and potential
programming, lab, and homework exercises. Each module supplies a situated
learning experience that engages students from the outset by providing practical
and illuminating examples for how and why data structures are used. Applications
are interdisciplinary in nature, graphical where appropriate, and integrate
several data structures into real-world programs. Modules will be developed to
support object-oriented (using C++) design and programs, but each module will be
developed as an Abstract Data Type (using C) to reach as wide an audience as
possible. Three institutions are collaborating in this proposal: a research and
teaching oriented private university, a teaching oriented public university, and
a teaching oriented historically black university, ensuring that material will
be accessible to a wide audience. The modules developed will be made available
electronically, as hyper-text documents, and as published material to supplement
traditional texts.