* 9554206
* Leveraging Networks for Collaborative Education in the      Blacksburg Electronic Village
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,12/31/1999
* Mary Beth Rosson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 12/31/1999
* USD 1,244,698.00

Carroll 95-54206 We propose to create and evaluate an infrastructure for
constructing and conducting experiments in a virtual laboratory. Our
architecture will integrate existing and future Internet technology to support
collaborative, highly interactive educational settings. Our prototype testbed
will address physical science middle and high school students. The project
represents a rational melding of existing technologies in new ways that we
believe will do as much for active learning as the advent of World-Wide Web
browsers such as Mosaic has done for passive browsing of information. Key
elements of our proposal are: a participatory design approach involving teachers
and students as design team members (in contrast to externally-imposed
educational technology solutions). support for reuse of a wide variety of
educational software available on the Internet (in contrast to requiring and
assuming custom-designed educational applications). asynchronous extensions to
interactive, collaborative environments (in contrast to the current dichotomy
between non-interactive e-mail collaborations and strictly real-time
interactions via MUDs and MOOs). multimedia extensions to interactive,
collaborative environments (in contrast to teletype-style interactions currently
supported by MUDs and MOOs). collaborative system support for heterogeneous
platforms ranging from PCs to high-end workstations (in contrast to the
assumption of homogenous computing environments). continuous on-site teacher
support to help in selection and composition of project-oriented curriculum
elements, community involvement in experimental projects, and evaluation of
technology change, attitudes, and outcomes. This project seeks to leverage the
technological and cultural opportunities of the Blacksburg Electronic Village
(BEV), a densely interconnected community in rural Southwestern Virginia. It
exploits the availability of Tl network connections to the four participating
public schools. It builds upon an ongoing NIE Planning Grant, our ongoing work
on participatory design of educational network applications, our ongoing work
with computer aided education systems and software, and working relationships
with Apple Computer, a company with years of commercial experience in supporting
K-12 education. This project will develop the technical infrastructure necessary
for solutions to educational issues and concepns of national significance:
mitigating logistic obstacles to peer-based learning in rural settings.
facilitating broad community involvement in public school activities. empowering
teachers through their use of instructional technology. promoting more active
roles for students in using World-Wide Web technology. increasing access to peer
collaboration and laboratory experiences for students. enhancing participation
in school activities for all students.