* 9554526
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Instructional Technology  for Science Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Margaret King, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554526 King Traineeships will fund five NCSU graduate students working in
Instructional Technology for Science Education. Trainees will enroll in either
Physics Education (Physics), Science Education (Mathematics and Science
Education), or Spatial Information Systems (Forestry) and complete new
interdisciplinary seminars focusing on research n the frontiers of instructional
technology in science education. Internationally recognized faculty from other
departments who have conducted extensive research on electronic delivery of
instruction will also participate in these seminars as well as teach other
graduate courses in instructional technology. Trainees will attend professional
research conferences and participate in NCSU's multiple regional and national
service activities in science education, including the American Physics
Association's Physics Academic Software Project, housed at NCSU; the NSF-and
industry-funded Science House, which sponsors outreach projects to rural and
African American K-12 students and NC's science and math teachers; and the GIS
Literacy Project. Traineeships will assist NCSU in focusing its multiple
research programs in the Colleges of Physical and Mathematical Sciences,
Agricultural and Life Science, Engineering, Education and Psychology, Humanities
and Social Sciences, and the School of Design that are integrating instructional
technologies with cognitive science to develop truly innovative models of
science education.