* 9554634
* Regional Molecular Modeling Workshop for College Teachers
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Beatrice Botch, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 01/31/2000
* USD 88,826.00

The current rapid increase in the level of affordable computer hardware, and the
ready availability of a variety of -computational chemistry software packages,
have made molecular modeling accessible to all levels of the undergraduate
curriculum. Construction and visualization of molecules have become valuable
teaching tools, yet many chemical educators have had limited or no experience
with this medium. This three year project will offer college faculty in New
England and eastern New York an opportunity to learn about using molecular
modeling in their undergraduate courses. A three and one half day workshop will
be held each June at the University of Massachusetts, with a follow-up symposium
to be held in January. Participants will gain familiarity with the basic theory
and practical use of molecular mechanics and semi-empirical molecular orbital
calculations and will receive a brief introduction to ab-initio methods. The
emphasis of the workshop will be on the use of these techniques to teach and
learn undergraduate chemistry. We will further advise the participants in
establishing computational chemistry programs at their home institutions. During
January participants and local educators from the Five-College region will be
invited to the University to exchange success stories and discuss methods of
incorporating modeling into undergraduate courses.