* 9554685
* Molecular Genetic Analysis Applied to Evolution, Ecology,   and Systemic Biology:  An Extended Laboratory Course
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Eric Routman, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 01/31/1998
* USD 207,065.00

We propose an Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement project that will provide for
each of the next two years, an intense twelve-day laboratory short course in
Molecular Genetics & Evolutionary Biology in the summer with a 4-day follow-up
session each January, and on-going technical and material support. A highly
successful established format that evolved from ten prior national Chautauqua
courses was used in the design and development of our proposed Undergraduate
Faculty Enhancement project. Twenty-two faculty will be selected each year from
a national applicant pool comprised of faculty from community colleges, 4-year
liberal arts colleges and universities, comprehensive universities, and research
universities. Participants will learn the fundamentals of molecular biology
through the presentation of lectures and demonstrations, and they will also
conduct a series of experiments to develop skill in PCR amplification,
restriction enzyme analysis, and various gel separation techniques. In research
groups of 4-5 composed of a mix faculty from community colleges and four-year
institutions, the participants will investigate "thematic" research projects.
Seminar speakers will discuss their research on procaryote, vertebrate,
invertebrate, and plant systems, and their application of molecular techniques.
Faculty will implement the molecular techniques that they learn by adapting the
exercises from the course into undergraduate laboratory courses at their
respective institutions. Trained faculty will have gained the extraordinary
capabilities afforded by these techniques to access the genomes of natural
populations from any taxa on earth and thus create unique laboratory curricula
at their own institutions. The SFSU faculty and Instructional Support Technician
will support participants after the summer course in the incorporation of
molecular techniques and analysis in undergraduate instruction. Participants
will also develop skill and confidence with molecular techn iques to use in
their research. The workshop will be used to develop laboratory modules and
exercises for use in primary and secondary education.