* 9554610
* TEAM 2000
* EHR,DRL
* 01/01/1996,12/22/1998
* Peter Dow, Buffalo Society of Natural Sciences
* Continuing grant
* Susan P. Snyder
* 12/22/1998
* USD 2,419,092.00

9554610 Dow Central to Buffalo's Local Systemic Change Through Teacher Education
project TEAM 2000 (Teacher Education at the Museum) is a plan to implement a
constructivist teaching and learning science program in all of Buffalo's sixty-
one elementary schools by the year 2000. The project is an outgrowth of a long-
standing partnership between the Buffalo Public Schools and the Buffalo Museum
of Science. A previous NSF funded project of this collaboration resulted in the
development of 150 teacher leaders of hands-on science. These teachers, the TEAM
staff, and scientists from the informal sector will form the core of the
instructional staff for the current project. Together they will provide
professional development for all 1400 K-8 teachers in the city's 61 elementary
schools. The program will also provide opportunities for TEAM mentors to pursue
their own continuing professional development, a process that is essential for
the long term implementation and well-being of Buffalo's Elementary and Middle
Level Science Program. In addition, TEAM 2000 will create a Science Materials
Center that will provide for the continuous design, delivery, and reconditioning
of instructional kits and materials to facilitate the on-going growth and
development of the District's science program. The cost sharing for the project
will be 46% of the NSF award.