* 9554261
* Collaborative Interactive Remote Instruction
* EDU,DRL
* 01/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Kurt Maly, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Cherniavsky
* 03/31/2001
* USD 1,032,040.00

Maly 95-54261 Building on its expertise in networking, computer supported
collaborative work, and remote learning, Old Dominion University will prepare to
build a statewide highly Interactive Remote Instruction (IRI) pilot system based
on networked workstations. Technology and pedagogical methods developed in the
system will be integrated into TELETECHNET, a state funded program in which Old
Dominion University and community colleges provides four-year degree programs.
The first two years are being taught at the community colleges with the last two
being provided by Old Dominion University to remote community college campuses
via networked and televised course instructions. The project will consist of a
three-year phase of research, development, implementation and evaluation.
Significant contributions include: 1) refining an existing IRI system to provide
an open-ended teaching/learning environment with a set of basic features easy to
use by students and faculty of all disciplines; 2) developing the basic concepts
of new instructional methods to exploit the interactivity of the system in
support of higher domains of learning; and 3) bringing together a consortium of
government, industry and academic individuals who are dedicated to innovative
approaches to education for the 21st century, and 4) providing Virginia with a
cost-effective method of delivering high quality education remotely; and 5)
serve as a model for other states faced with similar problems. The proposed open
hardware/software architecture uses existing technologies but anticipates the
wider availability of a high-speed Information Superhighway and multimedia
workstations in the near future. The system provides two-way video to remote
sites; shared operation of X-window tools and applications; interactive note-
taking; a VCR-like replay of past classes and ancillary material and a full
motion video window which can display the instructor, a classroom demonstration,
or any PC, Macintosh or X-window application. These in structional capabilities
enables instructors and students to access multimedia generated from a variety
of sources and to use group collaboration tools for interaction between two
participants, among small groups, or entire classes. The system will provide
audio-visual interaction and allow faculty and remote-site students to share the
manipulation of software tools, such as spreadsheets or chemistry models. While
the elements of IRI are currently technically feasible, a major portion of the
project's efforts are directed to the developing of new student-centered
teaching methods and paradigms which take advantage of the environment and to
refining the hardware and software through experience of actual instructional
needs. This system will provide easier access to higher education for both
traditional and non-traditional students, who for personal or financial reasons
choose not to reside at a four-year institution. IRI will promote effective use
of network and computer technology for all participating students and faculty.