* 9554251
* The Network Montana Project: Development of a Rural         Networking Infrastructure in Support of Systemic Change in  Mathematics and Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* David Thomas, University of Montana
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/1999
* USD 2,520,000.00

Churchill 95-54251 Network Montana Project (NMP) will focus on the development
of flexible, sustainable approaches to a systemic educational network
infrastructure. The partners in this enterprise will include teachers,
administrators, and researchers from the state's educational system, leaders in
state government, and individuals from a variety of community, professional, and
private sector organizations. Commitments of talent and resources from all
partners will be focused on the development of a lasting infrastructure capable
of supporting the development of a variety of educational telecommunications
services. This proposal seeks funding for a three year grant aimed at developing
a systemic approach to K-16 networking in Montana that: 1. Builds and maintains
a state-wide coalition of partners from academia, government, and the private
sector responsible for directing a wide variety of K16 educational networking
activities during the period of NSF/NIE funding and in subsequent projects; 2.
Supports and enhances a number of nationally significant systemic mathematics
and science education reform projects; 3. Integrates multimedia network-based
materials and delivery systems into mathematics and science instruction to
enhance access and usability of many scientific resources. 4. Investigates
adaptations of educational and informational telecommunications required to
serve populations with special needs including those that may be visually or
hearing impaired; 5. Develops a workable community networking model that is
feasible in a low population density environment, promoting teleliteracy for
rural citizens to enhance their involvement with lifelong learning,
entrepreneurship and local/state governance.