* 9554327
* Union City On-Line:  An Architecture for Networking and     Reform
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1995,02/28/1999
* Gary Ramella, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 02/28/1999
* USD 1,555,434.00

Honey 95-54327 Union City On-Line is a unique partnership among the Education
Development Center's Center for Children and Technology, the Union City New
Jersey Board of Education, New Jersey State Systemic Initiative and the
associated Networking Infrastructure for Education Testbed, Bell Atlantic, Lotus
Development Corporation, ISDN Systems Corporation, and ARC Consulting. The
objective of this project is to develop highly sophisticated networking
resources dedicated specifically to furthering the goals of the District's
systemic educational reforms. Anticipated outcomes include: producing extensive
knowledge about effective architectures for high-speed networking in schools.
creating disseminable training applications to support teachers in integrating
Internet resources into the curriculum, and to introduce them to authoring
techniques and design principles for building original World Wide Web resources.
developing disseminable on-line applications to support three key themes of
educational reform: student-driven inquiry, portfolio assessment and parental
involvement. creating a model for community authoring initiatives that bring
together teachers, students and parents to create World Wide Web resources.
demonstrating the transfer of technical and design expertise from corporate and
non-profit collaborators to the local community. providing opportunities for the
extensive dissemination of project outcomes by the school community and by
project collaborators, at state and national levels. Achieving these objectives
involves two central tasks: first, developing a technical infrastructure that
demonstrates a novel approach to creating an affordable, scaleable, and
potentially ubiquitous district-wide networking architecture; and second,
developing the necessary human infrastructure by creating: Novel and scaleable
approaches to teacher training and ongoing staff development. A core set of
applications that support district-wide reform efforts. Opportunitie s to
involve the community, including teachers, parents and students in a wide range
of authoring projects. A model for state and national network-based K-12 reform
efforts. New Jersey's SSI and associated NIE project are a primary audience for
this model. At the conclusion of this three year effort, the project will have
ensured the development of technical, training, and design expertise at the
local level, so that the project's technical and human infrastructure can be
maintained and further developed, and continue to serve as a model to other
school districts .