* 9554211
* The Weather Underground:  Application of Computer Technology to Science in Michigan Secondary Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/2000
* Perry Samson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 09/30/2000
* USD 2,086,446.00

Samson 95-54211 Operating from within the Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Space
Sciences Department at the University of Michigan, The Weather Underground has
been supplying the Internet community near real-time meteorological conditions
and National Weather Service forecasts for 3 years. The Weather Underground has
developed a technology which brings user interactivity to imagery. Growing from
the desire to provide an intuitive interface for exploring complex data (all
current weather conditions, and forecasts for every airport in the United
States), a client-server technology has been developed which provides a
framework where information can be 'attached' to imagery. Information can be as
simple as text (caption), or as complex as motion video(CUSee-Me session). The
Weather Underground's inspired vision is carried to completion by a team of
dedicated individuals in multiple disciplines. The cross pollination between the
humanities and the science communities has created a collaborative working
environment extending between universities. Through NSF support, this funding
cycle will bring the complexity of the Weather Underground systems into the
hands of teachers and students throughout the Internet community. It is proposed
to build software systems where participants can easily create interactive
imagery, and create server based survey systems. The creation of such systems
will allow participants to create domain specific interviews, carried out over
the Internet. The content domain in which this proposal sits is the hydrology
cycle, including water quality. This is the second of a series of content
components, which will link the weather, air quality, the hydrology cycle, water
quality, land use, and agriculture. This iteration of research and development
will refine current intuitive interfaces for entering and browsing complex data
sets. Additionally, the data collection methods will be used, when appropriate,
to gather large samples of educational research data and process this data
automatically. The Interactive Image Format (.iif) is a language which defines
regions and actions, allowing authors to create networked imagery. Regions
include: points/pixels, polygons, rectangles, colors, pop-menus, help bubbles.
Actions include: warm (mouseOver), hot (mouseClick). Actions effect properties,
including: show, hide, URL(ftp, gopher, http). Paralleling .html, the .iif
language is platform and server independent, insuring browsing and authoring to
occur from multiple hardware platforms, and allowing .iif files to be
incorporated into existing Internet browsers. This round of funding will produce
intuitive IlFConstructors for both the Macintosh and X-Windows platforms. These
editors will be graphically oriented and very easy to use. Their products will
be interactive images which utilize networked resources. It is the goal of The
Weather Underground to put the power of this editor into the hands of K12
students. The Weather Underground's experience with real-time data streams has
produced a very intricate series of interconnected software programs capable of
ingesting, processing, and displaying large volumes of data. This system has
come from the current NSF-MT funding. This proposal is an attempt to link our
multi-bandwidth user interfaces with our sophisticated data processing engines.
The Weather Underground has teamed with educational, and scientific partners
capable of creating a testbed involving large numbers of participants. This
proposal is an attempt to put our 'raw-computation' into the hands of worldwide
participants through intuitive ,"cool" interfaces.