* 9554693
* Regional & Global Workshops in Community Computer Networking
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Chandler Stevens, Minnesota Riverland Technical College (Austin Campus)
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 01/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal offers solutions to the wise and effective use of Internet and
multimedia, illustrated by concrete applications of these technologies. It will
provide for summer workshops for teachers, 2 and 4 year college faculty,
community leaders, and some in the local business community. The underlying
networking technologies developed by the lead 2 year college, and the evolving
new paradigm for its use provide a model for others in the nation to consider.
Most of the content for these workshops will be based on recent experience in
creating the Community Networks (CoNets) in Southeastern Minnesota, and a new
2-year curriculum in Networking communicating (NetCo). CoNet kiosks are linked
collaboratively via the Internet. The NetCo curriculum will help and lead
builders of networking facilities. These workshop, directed at mostly 2-year
college faculty, will help them implement the developed 2-year curriculum. These
proposed workshops in 1996 and 1997, will be expanded from earlier ones given in
1995. They will cover areas in Minnesota, eastern Dakotas, northern Iowa, and
western Wisconsin, using 2-way interactive TV linked to the workshop providers
at Austin College Park. In 1997, the providers will attempt to expand to the
national level, to allow telecommunication of the workshops to many other 2 and
4 year colleges.