* 9554556
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Environmentally           Conscious Manufacturing
* EHR,DGE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/2001
* Walter Peters, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 566,600.00

GER-9554556 Peters The Departments of Chemical and Mechanical Engineering at the
University of South Carolina will establish an interdisciplinary traineeship
program focusing on the reduction, recycle, or elimination of hazardous solvents
in manufacturing processes. This program in Environmentally Conscious
Manufacturing addresses an issue which is of great importance across the
manufacturing spectrum, and which affects both large and small industries. The
program includes significant interaction with small businesses in the State of
South Carolina, as well as support from the State Department of Environmental
Control. In addition, close collaboration with large companies such as
AlliedSignal, AT&T, and Westvaco ensures that trainees will receive a broad
exposure to fundamental and applied problems facing industry. Trainees will
perform research in one of three broad areas: pressure swing adsorption for
solvent recovery and recycle; supercritical fluid technology for solvent
substitution and process modification; or modeling of solvent-intensive
manufacturing processes (including adsorption and supercritical fluid
technologies) for life cycle analysis and environmental design. The modeling
effort in particular is designed to hasten the transfer of results of academic
research to industry, including small businesses. Trainees will receive
mentoring form outstanding academic scholars, as well as from industrial
mentors. Some will have internships in domestic industries, while others may
apprentice with AT&T Global Information Systems in Germany under an arrangement
developed for this traineeship program. These trainees will also be given
instruction in classroom teaching.