* 9554624
* A Series of Workshops in Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/1999
* Jerry Smith, Georgia State University
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 04/30/1999
* USD 299,808.00

Georgia State University (GSU) and the Georgia Institute of Technology (GIT)
jointly propose an Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement project in chemistry;
recruitment of participants is to be on a national basis. The project is
designed to improve the ability of faculty primarily at two- and four-year,
public and private, institutions to develop and teach a modern program in
chemistry. The major activities of the proposed project are 11 five-day
workshops and two annual reunions of the previous year's participants. Workshop
topics are (1) Advanced Materials Chemistry, (2) Chemistry of Nucleic Acids, (3)
Environmental Chemistry, (4) Mass Spectrometry, (5) Molecular Modeling, (6)
Molecular Orbital Theory, (7) Multidimensional Nuclear Magnetic Resonance
Spectroscopy, and (8) Multimedia Techniques in Chemistry. The workshops will be
taught primarily by GSU and GIT faculty; members of the faculty from Indiana
University, the University of Georgia and the University of California at Irvine
will also participate. Several former workshop participants will serve as
assistants in these activities. Prominent specialists from other institutions
and industry will serve as keynote speakers. The reunions are designed to allow
participants to share their experiences in implementing project material into
their curricula. Over a two-year period, 900 participant-days are scheduled. A
compilation of all innovations in the chemistry curriculum at participating
institutions resulting from the project will be distributed to all participants.