* 9554313
* Implementation Grant for the NIE MOST (Missouri Supporting  Teachers) Electronic Support System to Promote Problem-BasedLearning Using a Computational Science Model
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,09/30/1999
* William Mitchell, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 09/30/1999
* USD 863,865.00

Laffey 95-54313 Project MOST (Missouri Supporting Teachers) represents a
consortium that has embraced a vision and plan of work to improve science and
math teaching and learning. We propose to build, implement, and sustain an
Internet-based support system for teachers and students as they undertake
project-based learning and computational science. Along with reform efforts
already underway in Missouri, the following objectives of Project MOST enable
new ways of working and learning in schools: (1) a network infrastructure that
creates a community of educators and leverages knowledge and experience across
the community, (2) an electronic teacher support system designed around the
practices and challenges of teaching and learning with project-based and
computational science approaches, (3) a consortium of change agents with a
cohesive vision and a common set of tools for supporting teacher
professionalization and school restructuring, and (4) new knowledge both to
understand the nature of the learning, teaching and community enabled by new
tools and approaches, and to improve, as well as judge the worth, of the tools
and approaches. A support system using available technologies and based on the
innovative work of two teachers in Lee's Summit will assist teachers as they
facilitate and monitor student projects, use new tools and methods, solve
problems, assess student outcomes, and develop professionally. The support
system will assist students as they undertake meaningful projects by helping:
locate resources and mentors, collaborate with others, use new tools and
methods, solve problems, and build and share a portfolio of their project. The
support system also facilitates the roles of preservice teachers gaining field
experience, mentors from in and out of school who support student work, those
who assess student processes and achievements, and researchers. Over time the
support system will grow in richness of resources and have improved functioning
for teaching and learning throu gh better designed processes and more tightly
integrated and powerful technologies. In the second year of the grant four new
schools will join Project MOST and a model of regional consortia will be
implemented and tested. Project MOST and the research that comes out of this
undertaking has the potential to lead to fundamental advances in the area of
educational reform, professional development of teachers, and school change. As
the project develops, contributions will be made to understanding how to utilize
existing technology to break down teacher and school isolation and provide
immediate ongoing professional support for the practitioner in the classroom.
This provides a foundation for growing this model from a focus on computational
science and project-based learning at the secondary level to other appropriate
educational reform programs at all levels. The potential is there to impact
students and teachers who are currently isolated in classrooms, and transform
them into active members of a growing intellectual community.