* 9554731
* Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in Molecular and Cellular Biology
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* Neville Kallenbach, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas H. Howell
* 01/31/1999
* USD 300,000.00

The Faculty Resource Network--a 28 member award-winning consortium which links
fourteen liberal arts colleges in the Northeast, twelve historically black
colleges and universities in the South, and one predominantly minority
institution in the Midwest with New York University-proposes to build on its
decade of experience in improving undergraduate teaching by initiating an
intensive three-year faculty enrichment program focusing on the teaching of
introductory and advanced undergraduate courses in molecular and cellular
biology and the development of innovative laboratory techniques. Two summer
residential workshops form the centerpiece of the program. The first, in 1996,
will focus on introductory molecular biology courses and the second, in 1997, on
advanced molecular biology courses. The workshops will introduce faculty to the
latest methods and techniques of molecular biology and explore new means of
teaching biology that incorporate innovative hands-on and inquiry-based methods.
At the conclusion of each of the workshop sessions, participants will have
produced a curricular packet, which includes summaries of major lecture themes,
laboratory experiments, relevant bibliographical materials, and teaching
strategies, for direct classroom application. During the academic years
following each summer workshop, a series of local campus-based colloquia at the
home institutions will be held. Workshop participants, who will have tested and
refined the material developed during their summer study, will lead these
colloquia, and will have an opportunity to share their new knowledge and
teaching techniques with colleagues. Publications summarizing these conclusions
on curricular and pedagogical methods will be published and distributed to the
600 Network faculty members teaching in the sciences, together with faculty
members of other colleges and universities linked to the Network through the
Leadership Alliance and CCTOP, a tri-state community college consortium. In
Summer 1998, the program will conclude with a three-day conference held at
Spelman College in Atlanta, Georgia. At the this concluding event, program
participants will make presentations on the refined curricular and pedagogical
innovations they have tested in their classrooms to an audience of scientists
from Network institutions and beyond. Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement in
Teaching Molecular and Cellular Biology will be of particular interest to
biologists, but it will also benefit other science faculty whose work involves
an aspect of molecular biology, as well as those who are interested in effective
and innovative teaching strategies in the sciences. By introducing faculty to
new and important areas of the life sciences and by emphasizing different
pedagogical applications, the program will improve the quality of learning for
the 80,000 students on Network college campuses.