* 9554715
* Workshop to Promote Course/Curriculum Change Using C + + and the Closed Laboratory Model
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Jane Prey, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 12/31/1997
* USD 91,328.00

The objective of this workshop is to disseminate material that will assist in
Computer Science course and curriculum changes. The approach is the direct
result of previous NSF CCD funding (CS-NSF- 5239-92) which focused on the use of
C++ and closed laboratories to effect a better teaching/learning environment.
The keystone of this new curriculum is a 4-course core sequence which
incorporates closed laboratories. Lecture materials and content are supportive
of the laboratories rather that the reverse as is usually done. This work was
completed in the summer of 1995. The proposed workshop with be 5 days, with
participants selected from a range of programs across the nation. Participants
will be expected to familiar with C++, and interested in developing new
curriculum and laboratory material and methods for the early years of Computer
Science education. C++ will be the utility language for this work. Participants
are supplied with a complete set of software and printed material to carry back
to the home institution. This will include lecture slides, laboratory manuals,
and teacher's manuals. More important will be the opportunity for each
participant to experience the pedagogical and technical driving forces for the
material, and how they are used. Participants will be able to apply/use this
material when they return to their CS programs.