* 9554717
* Ada: A Software Development Tool for the Entire Computer    Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Janet Hartman, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Mark James Burge
* 02/28/1998
* USD 118,867.00

This project focuses on two week summer workshops (Summers 1996 and 1997) and
follow-through activities during the following academic year and summer on the
integration of Ada as a software development tool into all levels of the
computer science curriculum. The workshop covers material on software
engineering, the design and development of Ada programs, techniques for
integrating software engineering and Ada into computer science courses,
resources and educational materials for using Ada in undergraduate courses,
hands-on lab activities using Ada, and the development of a curriculum project
which utilizes Ada. The workshop contains a significant laboratory component
that is designed to complement the lecture material and include classroom tested
lab activities and typical assignments. The first week of the workshop
emphasizes the early portion of a typical computer science curriculum. The
topics for this week are based on the traditional paradigm of structured
analysis and design. The second week emphasizes the upper levels of the computer
science curriculum. Object-oriented design and the corresponding features of Ada
95 will be introduced and contrasted to traditional software design and
development. Ada tasks will be introduced as the basis for studying concurrent
programming. Graphics packages and the realtime aspects of Ada programming will
also be introduced. The curriculum activities for the workshop include (1) the
proposal of a curriculum project to be completed during the academic year
following the workshop, (2) discussion groups in which issues, assignments, and
resources for using Ada in an educational setting are explored, and (3)
interaction with an expert on using Ada in the computer science curriculum. An
electonic follow-up session is planned in Fall 1997 following the workshop to
present and discuss completed curriculum projects and to develop products and
plans for the dissemination of results from the curriculum projects. Results wil
l be presented in SIGCSE forums