* 9554725
* Undergraduate Fiber Optics and Communications for           Engineering Technology
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/1998
* James O'Brien, Bunker Hill Community College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 03/31/1998
* USD 52,850.00

Undergraduate Fiber Optics and Communications for Engineering Technology is
designed to introduce 30 faculty members from community and undergraduate
colleges to this expanding technology. Two one-week seminars/workshops are
planned for June 1996. The program is a collaborative effort involving three
community colleges in the Boston, MA area and one four-year technical college.
During the first week, 15 faculty will be offered 40 hours of training, half of
which will be in the fiber optic laboratory at Wentworth Institute of
Technology, and the remaining 20 hours will consist of lectures, simulation and
analysis using computers. Involvement by industry is integral to the program.
The laboratory exercises allow participants to handle optical fibers and a
number of specialized instrumentation and test equipment developed specifically
for fiber optics. The basics, uses, and applications of fiber optics will be
emphasized, especially as they relate to engineering technology education at the
two- and four-year level. In the selection process, women, minorities and those
faculty who intend to introduce/enhance fiber optic instruction at their home
institutions will receive priority. No prior knowledge of fiber optics or
communications technology is required. A follow-up one-week session is proposed
for the summer of 1997.