* 9554163
* Issue-Oriented Elementary Science:                          Leadership Project/Implementation Project
* EHR,DRL
* 04/01/1996,06/30/2002
* Herbert Thier, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Cheryl L. Mason
* 06/30/2002
* USD 1,281,735.00

9554163 Thier The proposed 39-month project (starting on 1 April 1996) will
implement the Chemicals, Health, Environment, and Me (CHEM) project in ten
school districts. The CHEM project is part of the Science Education for Public
Understanding Program (SEPUP) of the Lawrence Hall of Science. The proposed
project will combine summer leadership conferences for teacher-leaders and in-
district project-run experiences for other teachers that will serve 630 teachers
and 10 school administrators and 37,000 students from ten school districts. The
project will provide three years of ongoing support and leadership training in
issue-oriented elementary science to each partner school district. The
continuous in-district assistance by the local science mentors, the trained
teacher-leaders, and the project staff, together with the commitment of the
local administration, will establish the climate and infrastructure required to
improve science education in each of the partner school districts. Critical to
the long-term success of this effort are: (1) the continuing development of
teacher-leaders as agents of change through their leadership and their
adaptation and design of instructional materials for local use and (2) the
higher degree to which partner districts adopt or increase their commitment to
materials-centered science generally and issue-oriented science specifically.