* 9554311
* A Model for Preparing Teachers to Integrate Technology into Teaching Mathematics, Science,and Social Studies
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1998
* Pui-Kei Wong, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 08/31/1998
* USD 98,647.00

9554311 Ames This proposal is a planning grant to develop a comprehensive model
for integrating technology into teaching mathematics, science and social studies
for both undergrad courses in the deciplines and in the preparation of K-12
teachers. The fundermental premise of this model is that significant integration
of technology into teaching will only occur with the simultaneous engagement of
university science and mathematics faculty, university teach education faculty,
students in K-12 school districts. In the fall of 1994 the Deans of the College
of Education and the College of Natural Science agreed to place a high priority
on developing collaboration between the two colleges around the integration of
technology in teaching, both for university courses and for preservice and
inservice work with K-12 teachers. Pursuant to that priority they appointed a
planning committee with representatives from the two colleges, the Office of
Computing and Technology, and the Ingham Intermediate School District.
Concurrently, the College of Education, with support from the University and
private industry, designed a new Technology Exploration Center that embodies
innovative design principles that offer a unique approach to integrating
technology into education. This center, which opened in January 1995, is located
in a highly visible, central location in the College of Education, is organized
around subject matter applications and is designed to create a socially inviting
environment to stimulate discourse about educational among faculty, students,
teachers and school children. In April 1995 the planning committee hosted the
first "Technology in Education Showcase" in the Center in which nine university
faculty presented their uses of technology in teaching to an invited group of
faculty from the two colleges, K-12 teachers, Intermediate School
Representatives, and graduate students. The showcase stimulated a high level of
engagement and discourse about the possibiliti es and challenges of integrating
technology in teaching. The planning grant will support a yearlong series of
four such technology showcase meetings, including outside speakers, that would
be open to a wide audience with the specific intent of developing a full
proposal for a systemic approach to extending this model to a larger educational
community. Study groups including faculty, students and teachers will be
organized around new hardware and software applications. In addition, the grant
will support making these deliberations visible on the internet, both to invite
input from other universities around the country and to share the emergent
model. The model will address a priority identified in NSF's Division of
Undergraduate Education: "A major emphasis is teacher preparation programs that
feature both small- and large-scale efforts to engage the nation's college and
university faculties in the undergraduate education of the next generation of
K-12 science and mathematics teachers." ***