* 9554732
* Improving Introductory Economics Education by Intergrating  the Latest Scholarship on Women and People of Color
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Susan Feiner, University of Southern Maine
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 01/31/1998
* USD 190,000.00

Over the two years of this proposed faculty development project more than 400
undergraduate economics professors will: participate in hands-on activities
focussing on methods for integrating the new scholarship on the economics of
women and minorities into introductory economics courses; revise all aspects of
their courses to reflect the teaching and assessment of student learning of this
scholarship; and disseminate the results of these activities. These faculty
development activities are informed by, grow out of, and adapt the very
successful NSF funded programs we've held in the summers of 1993, 1994, and 1995
(June 15 - 20, Wellesley College). This proposed project will extend the results
of prior NSF support to ensure the long term impact of these innovations in
undergraduate economics education. During the three years of proposed activities
Project Director Feiner will work with Project co-PIs to plan, advertise and
conduct one, 1.5 day and four, 2.5 day faculty development conferences focussing
on integrating race and gender into introductory economics (Two 2.5 day
conferences are scheduled in the first year, two 2.5 day conferences and one 1.5
day conference are scheduled in the second year.) The 1.5 day program will run
immediately prior to regional Eastern Economics Association meetings in March of
1997, the 2.5 day programs will target various sub-sets of the profession
including economics faculty teaching at; women's colleges, historically black
colleges, colleges with substantial Hispanic/Native American enrollments,
community colleges serving underrepresented populations, and new minted Ph.D.'s.
Each program (excluding the last) will accommodate 40 participants who will work
in small groups to develop: ways to use the work of prior NSF conferences in
their classrooms; strategies for teaching economic controversies in a manner
which facilitates students' critical thinking capacities; the pedagogies
associated with diversity and the classroom clima te; and instructional
materials for the range of course activities which incorporate race, gender and
active learning. Participants will critique and refine these modifications and
develop techniques to assess the impact of these changes on student outcomes.
The last program is the Capstone Conference and is planned for 250 participants.
It will be held at the University of Southern Maine in October 1997. Upon return
to his/her home institution faculty will teach their redesigned courses, and
assess the project's impact on student outcomes and faculty intellectual growth.
Dissemination occurs as participants: share project results with department
colleagues; meet at the Allied Social Science Association Meetings (the annual
meeting of the AEA); present papers at regularly scheduled professional
meetings; and participate in panels or workshops during the Capstone conference
scheduled for October, 1997 open to all interested members of the economics
profession. Conference proceedings will be published in an edited volume. This
project has the potential to significantly affect the teaching of economics
while greatly increasing the numbers of minority and female undergraduates
pursuing economics.