* 9554705
* Fiber Optic Sensors and Smart Structures Workshop; Summer   1996; Portland, Oregon
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* Bruce Ferguson, University of Portland
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 05/31/1998
* USD 54,914.00

This proposal involves the offering of a program for facilitating and enhancing
the teaching in engineering and technology of the relatively new fields of fiber
optic sensors and smart structures. This program is intended to give
undergraduate faculty a chance to explore these technologies where teaching
loads and institutional resources have prevented such exploration in the past.
The goals of the program are: 1) to introduce primarily undergraduate faculty
members in the various engineering and technology disciplines to these
technologies through both discussion and practice, 2) to allow these faculty to
consider and discuss how to include the study of these technologies in their
courses and laboratories, and 3) to collect and distribute participants'
experiences in the teaching of these technologies. Theory, application, and
hands-on exposure will be provided during the workshop, with specific attention
paid to sensors of major interest in engineering, such as force/strain sensors,
gyroscopes, electromagnetic sensors and chemical sensors. The program consists
of a series of participation events; a summer workshop wherein the technologies
will be introduced both technically and in terms of educational applications;
enhanced interaction over the following year among the participants for the
exchange of ideas and preliminary results; and a follow-up workshop for the
exchanges of experiences of program participants, as well as updates on the
technologies. In addition, formal dissemination of results will be achieved
through appropriate publications and workshop presentations.