* 9554843
* Interactions and Matter:  An Atomic-Level Approach to       Mechanics and Thermal Physics
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Bruce Sherwood, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2000
* USD 337,098.00

There are four serious problems with the first calculus-based physics course
most science and engineering students take in college. 1) Research has shown
that even students who do well in a traditional mechanics course emerge from the
course unable to apply basic principles in reasoning qualitatively about
physical problems. 2) Most students have studied mechanics in high school, and
resent having to study the same material again (although their understanding of
mechanics may be weak). 3) Both students and physics teachers are dismayed by
the lack of modern physics in the introductory course. 4) The intellectual
coherence of the subject matter is obscured when mechanics and thermodynamics
are treated as two separate sciences. We propose to develop a fundamentally new
course that emphasizes atomic-level description and analysis and unifies
mechanics and thermal physics by examining both macroscopic and microscopic
viewpoints. As we have done in our work on electricity and magnetism, we will
place heavy emphasis on teaching students how toconstruct rigorous, qualitative
explanations of physical phenomena in terms of a small set of powerful
fundamental principles. The fundamental physical understanding that results from
this qualitative work will form the foundation for the more quantitative
components of the course. As in E&amp;M, we will stress the nature of the
assumptions and approximations made in analyzing physical problems, and the
limitations of a classical viewpoint. Theory and experiment will be integrated
by creating "just-in-time" desktop experiments that can be done in the lecture
hall, recitation room, or at home. We will draw on existing research on
effective teaching of mechanics, and will adapt successful strategies where we
can to the context of this course. The textbook we produce will have the same
workbook format as our electricity and magnetism textbook, Electric and Magnetic
Interactions (1995, John Wiley and Sons), and we expect to write computer
programs to aid in v isualization.