* 9554939
* Hands-On Activities for Developmental Math Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1996,09/30/1999
* James Sandefur, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Frank Wattenberg
* 09/30/1999
* USD 145,344.00

This project will develop a collection of hands-on activities that support
introductory college mathematics at the Elementary Algebra, Intermediate Algebra
and Precalculus levels. The units will particularly support older students who
are coming back to school. There will be student and teacher materials that help
convey mathematics within the context of engaging applications and interesting
problems. The materials will support a cooperative learning style, with the
students doing hands-on group activities during much of class time. The hands-on
activities help students visualize mathematics and make connections between the
real world and the mathematics. Particular attention will be paid to developing
materials for students in teacher preparation programs, and for the faculty who
work with these preservice teaching majors. Many mathematical topics will be
integrated into each application. The materials will be supported by the use of
spreadsheets and the TI-82 calculator. Hands-on activities using cooperative
learning will appeal to the learning styles of holistic learners and we believe
that the methods encouraged by our materials will engender the support networks
that social learners often appreciate. The applications will come from physics,
economics, biology, genetics, and other areas of interest to students. These
applications provide a context for the mathematics. To insure accuracy,
practitioners in a variety of fields will be consulted. Over the two years of
funding, units will be developed to support most topics in Elementary Algebra,
Intermediate Algebra, and Precalculus.