* 9554466
* Alaska Native/Rural Education Consortium for Systemic       Integration of Indigenous and Western Scientific Knowledge
* EDU,ESR
* 09/01/1995,03/31/2001
* Oscar Kawagley, Alaska Federation of Natives
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 03/31/2001
* USD 10,000,000.00

9554466 Larson The Alaska Federation of Natives and the University of Alaska
Fairbanks have established the Alaska Native/Rural Education Consortium (ANREC)
to implement recommendations from a seminar series that focused on instruction
to Alaska Native students. Working through institutions of higher education, the
Alaska Department of Education, and tribal councils, the consortium will
undertake a five year initiative to systemically document the indigenous
knowledge systems of Alaska Native people and develop pedagogical practices that
will integrate indigenous knowledge into the curriculum, and restructure
instructional practices to capitalize on Native learning styles, to improve the
science and mathematics achievement of students in Alaska Native village
schools. The focus of the proposed initiative is on providing an opportunity for
the Native people of Alaska to formulate a renewed educational agenda regarding
the structure, content and processes that are needed to increase the application
of Native and non-Native science, mathematics, engineering and technology (SMET)
knowledge to the solution of educational problems in the Arctic environment. The
overall project is organized into the following three initiatives: (1) Native
Ways of Knowing and Teaching (the preservice component); (2) Culturally aligned
Curriculum Adaptations (the curricular component); and (3) Elders and Cultural
Camps (the inservice component). These activities will be implemented in the
five (5) cultural regions of the State. It is anticipated by the Year 2000, the
Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative will involve 48 of the 54 public school
districts in the state, impacting 302 schools, with a total of 2925 certified
staff serving 31,515 students. In addition to the pedagogical impacts, ANREC
plans to establish a Native Sciences Advisory Board, with national membership
and reflecting the culturally relevant science and mathematics knowledge held by
Native scientists and enginee rs. Although the Board will provide guidance to
the content of ANREC's activities, it is hoped that other systemic initiatives
or organizations involved with teaching native students will benefit from its
existence. ***