* 9554196
* IDA/WG: An Invitational Conference for Female Faculty and   Graduate Students in Engineering
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Suzanne Brainard, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 08/31/1998
* USD 99,757.00

9554196 Brainard An Invitational Conference for Female Faculty and Graduate
Students in Engineering will begin to address the low representation of female
faculty in engineering in the US. This initiative will increase the awareness of
all deans of engineering regarding the need to improve the institutional climate
to promote the identification, hiring and promotion of female faculty and to
examine the admissions and funding criteria for female graduate students. The
conference will focus on the professional development of female faculty and
gradate students by identifying strategies to improve grant writing and skills,
increase their publications and collaboration with colleagues, and to enhance
their mentoring and advising skills which will benefit their students. A total
of 30 will be female faculty and 30 female graduate students will participate in
the conference. An assessment will be conducted to determine the benefit of the
conference and to determine the need to offer this training on a broader scope.
The anticipated outcome of this project is to effect a positive change in the
engineering infrastructure which will be equally conductive to female and male
faculty and graduate students. To this end, conference proceedings including a
set of recommendations to facilitate this process will be disseminated to all US
deans of engineering, participants and other female faculty who are members of
WEPAN, AWIS and ASEE. WEPAN, Women in Engineering Advocates Network will
continue to mark, print and disseminate the conference proceedings and
recommendations after the grant period ends.