* 9554684
* Summer Seminars on Workshop Calculus:  Using Interactive    Methods and Technology to Teach Fundamental Concepts to     Mathematically-at-Risk Students
* EHR,DUE
* 11/01/1995,10/31/1997
* Nancy Baxter Hastings, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 10/31/1997
* USD 69,922.00

This project is intended for faculty who are searching for new pedagogical
approaches and new uses of technology to teach calculus to mathematically-at-
risk students--students who are not prepared to enter the traditional calculus
sequence, but need to acquire fundamental calculus concepts for use in other
disciplines or further study of mathematics. The project is based on the
Workshop Calculus program, developed at Dickinson College with support from the
Fund for Improvement of Post Secondary Education (FIPSE) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF). One-week Workshop Calculus immersion seminars are
being offered in the summers of 1996 and 1997, with twenty-four participants
invited each summer. The primary purpose of the summer seminars is to provide
participants with the necessary background and support to adapt the Workshop
Calculus materials for use in their own environments, and to forge the necessary
liaisons to help them successfully implement their projects. To help accomplish
this, participants will: (1) learn to use interactive teaching methods such as
guided inquiry, collaborative learning and experiential learning cycles--that
is, to use the workshop approach--to enhance student learning; (2) gain
experience using technology--including a computer algebra system, the
mathematical programming language ISETL, and Microcomputer-Based-Laboratory
tools--to help students understand fundamental calculus concepts; and (3)
customize Workshop Calculus instructional materials for use at their home
institutions and design their own workshop-based courses; and (4) refine
existing assessment tools to analyze the impact of the workshop approach on the
attitudes and learning gains of students at their institutions.