* 9554965
* Interdisciplinary Minor in Global Sustainability
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Michael Burton, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 12/31/2000
* USD 135,000.00

The purpose of this three-year project is the development of a curriculum
including six new courses, leading to an Interdisciplinary Minor in Global
Sustainability at the University of California, Irvine. The new courses will
integrate and address global sustainability themes across disciplines and will
be developed and taught by faculty from five of UCI's schools: Biological
Sciences, Engineering, Physical Sciences, Social Sciences, and Social Ecology.
The Minor will be open to undergraduates in all disciplines and will begin in
the sophomore year with a sequence of three core courses. The first course, The
Physical Environment, will deal with the origin of the earth, the dynamics of
its oceans, lands and atmosphere, and the impact of human uses on the physical
world. The second course, The Biological Environment, will examine the evolution
of biological diversity and ecosystems, and the impacts on biological diversity
of human encroachment, exploitation, and pollution. The third course, People,
Cultures, and Environmental Sustainability, will cover the causes and
consequences of human population growth, natural resource management,
environmental law, and environmental ethics. In the junior year, students will
select from a series of elective courses in relevant disciplines. In the senior
year students will attend a seminar series, complete a research project, and
present the results of their projects at an undergraduate research symposium. AU
courses will include relevant field experiences making use of UC's Natural
Reserve System as well as other sites. The overall curricular structure and
proposed courses have already been approved by appropriate UCI Academic Senate
committees. Ongoing evaluation will consist of formative and ?tive components
using data from student surveys and interviews. Electronic communication will be
used for data acquisition by faculty and students, for communication between
students, faculty and the outside, and for dissemination of the pro gram to
other institutions. Additional dissemination activities will include
presentations at national conferences for environmental educators, a journal
article, and videotapes of seminars given by guest lecturers.