* 9554569
* NSF Graduate Traineeships "Democracy and Democratization:   Social Conditions, Institutional Forms, Transitions"
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2002
* Kenneth Bollen, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2002
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554569 Calhoun The present proposal seeks to enhance the interdisciplinary
training of graduate students in sociology, history, anthropology, and political
science to be better able to contribute to understanding of (a) the social
conditions of democracy (b) the nature of transitions to democracy and their
consolidation, (c) democracy in historical perspective, and (d) cultural and
ethnic issues in democratic development. The UNC Traineeship program aims
specifically to overcome the unfortunately sharp divisions between three major
styles of work: studies of large scale quantitative data sets; comparative
quantitative and qualitative historical studies and ethnographic studies of
smaller numbers of cases (including single cases set in comparative context);
and social and political theory. All trainees will gain competence in all three
of these major approaches to the field. The Traineeship program will be centered
in a two-semester interdisciplinary course sequence required of all trainees and
offered annually, and a proseminar for trainees, other interested graduate
students, and faculty. All trainees will be eligible for up to four years of
further financial support from UNC, contingent on satisfactory progress.
Trainees will be selected by a committee composed of the Principal Investigator
and faculty from the four departments. Trainees will have the option of an
international field practicum in the summer after their Traineeship year.
Programs are in place with the Constitutional Commission of Eritrea, the Ford
Foundation and a cluster of NGOs in India, and university-based research centers
in Russia and Eastern Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America.