* 9554278
* WhaleNet - Interactive Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1995,02/28/2001
* J. Michael Williamson, Wheelock College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 02/28/2001
* USD 1,323,378.00

PI: Williamson 95-54278 WhaleNet is a unique interdisciplinary, hands-on,
collaborative telecomputing project to foster excitement and learning about the
natural world in schools across the nation and around the world. Through
interaction with cooperating international scientists and research institutions,
students will be able to participate in research projects on the marine
ecosystem and have access to data from a variety of research programs, including
studies on marine mammals, pollution, and general environmental sciences.
WhaleNet Program Goals: to utilize telecommunications and other advanced
technologies to enhance education through cooperation and communication among
students, teachers, scientists, and research institutions; to involve students
in real-time interdisciplinary scientific research and education by sharing data
collected from classroom field experiences, existing research programs, and new
research projects by participating organizations using high technology devices;
to establish collaboration among business, education, and research institutions,
with the goal of enhancing student involvement and interest in learning and
environment; to establish an international network of schools, students,
educators and scientists who are interested in integrating WhaleNet into the
K-12 curriculum as an interdisciplinary resource; to connect students to a
variety of research databases, students to scientists/naturalists, and students
to students via telecommunication to stimulate interest in and involve students
in interdisciplinary learning; to make related supplementary curriculum
materials available to educators electronically, utilizing a gopher server,
listserv, and world wide-web connectivity. The proposed project builds upon the
success of WhaleNet - Interdisciplinary Curriculum Planning Grant (RED-9454757),
which has been active throughout the academic year September 1, 1994 to August
31, 1995. As a result of this planning grant, WhaleNet has expanded to include
participants from all 50 states and 28 countries. With continued funding
students and educators will have access to scientists as well as past and
current data so that they can experience a more comprehensive academic program
on a year-round basis. WhaleNet continues to establish contacts among educators,
students, scientists, and research programs to enhance K - 12 science education.
Interdisciplinary K-12 teaching units and innovative, interactive CD-ROM
materials are being produced so they can be used with the WhaleNet program.
WhaleNet enables students to use research data and information in real-time to
generate involvement and interest in scientific investigations while fostering
an interdisciplinary approach to learning, research, critical thinking, and
problem solving.