* 9554683
* Two-Year College Physics Workshop Project
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2001
* Curtis Hieggelke, Joliet Junior College
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/2001
* USD 525,000.00

This three-year national program is a continuation of several successful
projects administered by Joliet Junior College(IL) and Lee College (TX). It will
provide 15 intensive workshops (five each year) for two-year college physics
teachers at several qeoqraphically-dispersed two-year college campuses. One set
of workshops will acquaint participants with the development and implementation
of (1) microcomputer-based laboratories in mechanics and heat; (2) digital
video, modeling, and microcomputer-based laboratories in electricity, magnetism,
and opticsi (3) physics simulationsi and (4) active learning problem-solving
strategies using conceptual exercises and overview case studies. The fifth
workshop will be a working conference on introductory physics that will provide
previous workshop participants an opportunity for sharing, gaining additional
experiences, and discussing new developments and technologies. Each workshop
will be led by two, two-year college physics professors and two or three
university/college physics professors who play a major role in developing these
areas. These workshops will provide participants with applications of the recent
developments and findings of physics education research. As a result,
participants will be able to evaluate these developments and will return to
their campuses to begin implementing the workshop activities. Thus, these
workshops, as they have done in the past, will facilitate the rapid
incorporation of this knowledge and technology at two-year colleqes. The impact
of the workshops will be reinforced by the continuation of a networking system
that employs a microcomputer bulletin board system, an Internet access system,
and a newsletter. The ultimate goal of this project is to help two-year college
students develop a stronger understanding of classical and contemporary physics.
The task of updating physics programs at two-year colleges is difficult, but
essential, for the nation and for science because of the lar ge number of
students, particularly women and minorities, attending two-year colleqes.