* 9554559
* Integrated Systems Approach to Civil Infrastructure Education
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Rahmatallah Shoureshi, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554559 Gosink In determining priorities for the research agenda for civil
infrastructure problems, there is a growing recognition of the need for
integrated approaches to infrastructure assessment and repair. Strategies for
the solution of these problems must be based on an interdisciplinary,
coordinated approach, with a systems perspective. In this proposal we describe
an innovative visionary graduate program in Engineering Systems at the Colorado
School of Mines. This course of study is deliberately designed to integrate
across traditional boundaries with the intent of enabling graduates to see
connections between disparate disciplines and methods of analysis, to think in
terms of a systems approach, and to comprehend the demands of the societal and
global marketplace. The proposal sets forth the application of the Engineering
Systems Curricula and research agenda to the problems of the civil
infrastructure, and demonstrates how this program will provide a strong and
creative model for training engineers to address civil infrastructure problems.
The three focus areas of the Engineering Systems program, energy systems,
mechanics and structural systems, and applied sensors and automation systems,
each applies directly to several civil infrastructure problem areas. With this
background, graduates will have the technical expertise, the systems
methodology, and the corporate perspicacity to effectively champion sound
technology transfer. Graduates will be industry-oriented to take leadership
roles for rebuilding the civil infrastructure.