* 9554660
* Parallel Processing in the Undergraduate Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Janet Hartman, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 06/30/1998
* USD 59,792.00

This project provides a 2 week workshop focusing on parallel processing for
faculty from institutions with limited parallel computing equipment. It also
includes a follow-through activities during the following academic year. The
workshop covers material on how to design and write parallel programs, parallel
computer architectures, techniques for integrating parallel computing into
computer science courses,and methods and materials for teaching parallel
processing to UG students. The workshop includes a significant laboratory
portion in which participants will have the opportunity to write, analyze, and
compare parallel programs for various parallel computers and simulators. many of
the lab activities will be assignments that have been successfully used with
students. a portion of the workshop will be devoted to the design of a parallel
processing unit or course to be implemented during the academic year following
the workshop. As part of the workshop, 4 participants from prior parallel
processing workshops at Illinois State University, will present the work that
they have done with UG students in parallel processing. Follow-through
activities will include an interactive forum during following forum, in which
past participants will talk about their work. Dissemination will occur at annual
national CS forums.