* 9554497
* MPWG:  Science Connections
* EDU,EES
* 07/15/1995,06/30/1998
* Cindy Johnson-Groh, College of Saint Scholastica
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,761.00

Johnson-Groth 9554497 The enthusiasm that girls develop during short-term
enrichment programs is rarely sustained in their home and school environments,
particularly in rural communities where girls have little exposure to role model
scientists, and teachers often are unfamiliar with cooperative activity- based
curricula. The College of St. Scholastica is developing, implementing, and
evaluating Science Connections, an intervention program designed to provide
sustained encouragement and support during the critical middle school years.
Science Connections is to involve teachers, families, and scientists in a
network of continuing support for young women's involvement in science courses
and careers. Specific objectives include: 1) increasing the likelihood that 6th
and 7th grade girls who have participated in science and mathematics enrichment
activities will retain their interest in these subject areas; 2) increasing the
likelihood these girls who have participated in science and mathematics
enrichment activities will enroll in advanced science and math courses; 3)
increasing the linkage between informal programs designed to develop girls'
interests, skills, and understandings in science and mathematics; 4) increasing
the involvement of parents, teachers, and scientist role models in supporting
the girls' interests, skills and understandings in science and mathematics; and
5) evaluating the impact of the intervention design, and disseminating
information on the program model throughout the science education community.
Science Connections consists of two major components: a monthly series of
Saturday Science Workshops during the academic year and a Summer Science
Weekend. Twenty-five sixth and seventh grade girls are to participate each year,
selected from a pool of seventy girls (from predominantly low-and middle-income
rural or minority families) who have already attended an existing week-long
science enrichment program. Science Connections provides participant s with
ongoing opportunities for hands-on science, cooperative group activities,
interactions with role model scientists, and visits to scientific institutions,
as well as supplemental activities to do at home. Family and teacher involvement
provides further support for sustaining girls' interest in science and
mathematics. All students receive annual surveys to determine whether
participation in Science Connections has influenced their attitudes, course
selections and performance, extra- curricular activities and career goals.
Survey results will be compared with those of summer camp graduates who are not
participating in Science Connections, thereby providing a modified control group
to help isolate the impact of this program. Information on the project design,
methodology, and impact will be disseminated widely. ***