* 9554230
* Planning Grant:  Networking Infrastructure to Support       Systemic Educational Reform
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1995,09/30/1996
* Dwight Allen, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 09/30/1996
* USD 83,245.00

9554230 Allen The Darden College of Education at Old Dominion University(ODU),
in conjunction with the Norfolk Public Schools (NPS), will develop a proposal
for a competitive Networking Infrastrcture for Education project, in support of
the Norfolk Public Schools' PRIME (Public School Restructuring for Innovative
Mainstream Education) Project, a long term(10 year), comprehensive education
restructuring initiative. The planning grant will make it possible to: Develop a
plan to network the six PRIME schools(complete building network), with internet
access from each class room; homes, schools, and community agencies will
eventually be linked; Help fund release time for teachers and administrators to
collaborate in the development of the technology infrastructure plan and its
instructional uses, and plan for staff development to accelerate the learning
curve for becoming technologically exemplary teachers; Collaborate with members
of the national Academy of sciences Draft National Science Education Standards
and the National Council of Teachers of Math Guidances in the development of a
compressed, contextual, math and science curriculum; Develop a cadre of involved
and committed parents at each school, from a cross section of SES levels, who
will be involved in planning grant activities, and to plan school labs with
labtop lending for parents and community, with school based computer and
telecommunications training; Further seek and develop collaboration with
industry and business, and strengthen existing ties and forge new links with the
U.S. Navy, which has a large presence in the Norfolk area; develop links with
social organizations, for example, libraries, social services, and rest home for
mutual benefit; Develop a plan for a full scale test of curriculum compression;
develop measurable evaluation criteria for the effects of curriculum compression
on student achievement and teacher effectiveness, and to measure the effects of
parental and community involvement on student achievement. Teams of teachers,
administrators, parents, ODU faculty, NPS central office personnel, and grant
staff will meet for three weeks in July and August, 1995, and once each month
for seven months, in preparation for performing tasks such as: gathering
baseline data on current instructional technology practices, hardware and
software configurations, and parental levels of technological expertise using
surveys; consulting with members of the national standards of learning for math
and science communities, and assessment planners; developing business
partnerships through parental contacts and intensive direct solicitation;
strengthening a partnership with the Brunswick County Public Schools;
identifying staff development imperatives, technology, curriculum and change
management. A unique, systematic, restructuring project located in an
economically challenged area, PRIME is a prototype for school reform which may
be replicated in any school district. PRIME, through its emphasis on technology
and telecommunications, seeks to completely redefine the process necessary to
prepare students, including those most at risk, for leading roles in a
technological, multi cultural global village. Technology will not be viewed as
an "add on" to sustain the traditional curriculum. The opportunities provided by
a technologically rich environment will extend to parents and community to
overcome the isolation of poverty, create trust between a cross section of the
population, nationally and internationally, that would otherwise remain isolated
for each other.