* 9554748
* A "Networked" Social Science Laboratory: In-Person and      Virtual Workshops
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/2001
* William Frey, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 12/31/2001
* USD 255,547.00

The problem this project addresses is the "quantitative reasoning gap" that has
been widely recognized among undergraduate social science majors. The objectives
are to (1) introduce more "science" into the social sciences at the early
undergraduate level; (2) make quantitative reasoning skills accessible to social
science majors by showing their relevance to social issues in an active learning
setting; (3) prepare students for applied upper level courses and careers that
utilize these skills. The methods are implementation of both traditional in-
person workshops and a "virtual" -- Internet -- accessible workshop that will
enable social science faculty at two and four year colleges to exchange data and
ideas toward introducing analysis of U.S. Census data in their classes. This
project will have impact beyond that in the project period, since the virtual
workshop, along with an Internet-accessible library of exercises, will be self-
sustaining after the conclusion of the project period. In addition to faculty
generally at two and four year institutions, the special audiences addressed are
minority and disabled faculty, as well as faculty from two-year undergraduate
institutions and other institutions that provide little or no financial support
for involvement in such activities. This proposal builds on a Department of
Education-funded (FIPSE) collaboration between the University of Michigan
Population Studies Center (PSC) and a network of 12 colleges of the Great Lakes
Colleges Association (GLCA). This existing FIPSE project demonstrates the
feasibility of incorporating interactive U.S. Census data analysis via the
Internet into existing undergraduate curricula. This proposal to NSF extends to
a national community of social science instructors an approach to sharing
curricular materials and interactive networking capabilities.