* 9554744
* 'Tri-State Physics': An Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement   Program for Physics Instructors In Maine, New Hampshire, and Vermont
* EHR,DUE
* 03/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Doyle Davis, White Mountains Community College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2000
* USD 99,932.00

(The Problem) Few opportunities to learn new methods of physics instruction
exist for physics faculty who teach in technical/community colleges in the
northern New England state of Maine, New Hampshire and Vermont due to limited
funds to pay for travel and registration at national and, in man cases, regional
AAPT meetings often held in the southern New England states. (The Objectives)
This proposal seeks funding for two faculty enhancement workshops to be held
during the summers of 1996 and 1997 to provide opportunities for 24 physics
instructors from two- year and four-year colleges and universities in both the
northern and southern New England states to learn ways of presenting physics
instruction via the Internet and the World Wide Web. (Methods to accomplish the
objectives) During the workshops, participants will learn how to create
platform-independent physics lessons using the hypertext markup language of
browsers such as Netscape which can be shared with other instructors from
neighboring New England states. (Collaborations) They will work with the
nationally recognized leaders in distance education from institutions including
the USAF Academy and Indiana University, Purdue University Indianapolis who have
developed innovative new ways to teach using the World Wide Web.
(Significance/impact of the project) The workshop will offer the unique
opportunity for physics faculty to discuss during a two-week period critical
issues in the teaching of college physics using distance education at the two
and four-year level and to develop a strategic plan to promote stronger
partnerships between two-year and four-year colleges through the sharing of
information and resources.