* 9554198
* Quantum Science Across Disciplines
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Dan Dill, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 04/30/2001
* USD 1,591,774.00

9554198 Garik The Project on Quantum Science Across Disciplines proposes to
design and implement an introduction to quantum science for high school students
and undergraduates in biology, chemistry, and physics through activities
integrating computer modeling tools, a data resource base, and hands-on
experiments; do research on student response to materials intended to introduce
quantum science at a level appropriate for interdisciplinary inquiry with hooks
paths between biology, chemistry, and physics; and, investigate the extent to
which a technologically rich approach to teaching interdisciplinary science can
fundamentally change high school and college instructional practices. The target
audiences are the high school students and undergraduates for whom it is
important to develop scientific literacy as defined by the AAAS 2061 Project and
the Draft National Science Education Standards (NSES) prepared by the National
Research Council. An understanding of the methods and results of scientific
research and the tools of technology are important for the broad spectrum of
students studying science, whether for satisfaction of diploma requirements,
technical professional training, or preparation for advanced study. The new
materials will be aimed at high school classes, undergraduates, and adult
education courses with the potential for science teacher in-service training.
The goal is to provide students with the tools to navigate between the
representations for quantum science adopted by each of the sciences. As the
theory for the microscopic processes which affect all the sciences, quantum
science can be a means for providing an integrated approach to science
education. The examples of quantum science will be drawn from biology,
chemistry, and physics, will reflect research scientists' mental models for the
process in question, and will be coupled to laboratory experiments. Each of the
subject modules will be independently usable in an introductory courses;
however, their linkage will encourage interdisciplinary instruction. Earlier
projects have demonstrated the change in classroom structure, communication, and
the role of the teacher that results from the combination of inquiry oriented
projects and rich technology. Students have the technological tools to pursue
their own independent projects, while the teacher takes on the role of mentor
and advisor. Electronic journals provide new opportunities for student-student
and teacher-student dislodges, combining the best features of journal writing
and portfolio assessment. ***