* 9554219
* Technimagineering: A Program to Build a Science and Engineering Pipeline of Skilled and Motivated African American and Mexican American Students
* NONE,NONE
* 09/15/1995,08/31/1997
* Robert Rinker, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1997
* USD 125,996.00

9554219 Brown We seek a planning grant of $99,542 to devise and implement a
research program for testing the potential of electronic networks for increasing
the number of skilled and motivated African American and Mexican American
students in the field of science, mathematics, engineering, and technology. The
work to be done in the planning phase will lead to a final project proposal. The
final project will study whether electronically linked communities of members
engaged in these fields can counteract features of African American and Mexican
American communities that discourage children and adolescents from studding and
pursuing careers in these fields. Social cognitive theory suggests that students
in 5th or 6th grade who establish strong connections with supportive, ethnically
similar peers and mentors who are successful in science and math field- and
maintain those connections through graduate school-are likely to become excited
by as well as confident and competent in those disciplines. Unfortunately,
potential peers and mentors rarely live or work sufficiently close to
economically disadvantaged Mexican Americans and African American communities to
forge such relationship. A special contribution of the final project will be the
first comprehensive and systematic evaluation of the effectiveness of electronic
technology in overcoming the sparse distribution of appropriate peers and
mentors for these traditionally under-represented groups, and thus of promoting
excellence through diversity in the science and engineering academic pipeline.
During the twelve-month planning phase, the principal investigators will select
and convene an advisory board of 15-20 people who represent various stakeholders
in the final project: students, parents, teachers, and a variety of African
American and Mexican American professionals in science, mathematics,
engineering, and technology. The Technimagineering Team, which includes the
Principal Investigators, will determine: (1) strategies for selecting and
training participants; (2) curriculum materials and resources; (3) networking
technology; (4) configurations linking students to peers and mentors; (5) final
project evaluation strategy; (6) means of documenting and disseminating project
results; and (7) self-sustaining strategies. ??