* 9554653
* Summer and Spring Workshops to Disseminate the Results of   the University of South Alabama NSF-CCD Grant (DUE-9455522):"A Cognitive-Based Approach to Introductory Comp.Sci. Course
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1996,05/31/1997
* Michael Doran, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Lillian N. Cassel
* 05/31/1997
* USD 62,946.00

The University of South alabama and Tuskegee University will conduct 2 workshops
to train 20 faculty from two and four year institutions to use a cognitive-based
approach to curriculum development, as applied to Introductory Computer Science
Courses." This project will act as a major dissemination of the results of a
previously awarded CCD. The 1st week long workshop will be held during the
summer 1996, consisting of 3 major activities. First, the participants will
study the cognitive based process using: the Bloom taxonomy (levels of
learning), Bruner's spiral approach to earning, Soloway's problem solving
heuristics and code templates, collaborative learning in structured labs (as
described by Webb), and system theory to provide frequent feedback and control
of this learning process. The second activity will be to use this knowledge to
study the materials developed from the CCD project. After the needed background
has been developed, application to curriculum issues will be covered. The third
and final activity will be the use of this material to develop similar material
for the participants home institution. As follow-up, 2 forums will be used; a
suitable national forum (eg. SIGCSE-97), and a weekend workshop to beheld at
Tuskegee University in the Spring 1997. The participants for these workshops
will be selected from applications, received as a result of public
announcements. Every attempt will be made to select faculty from diverse
institutions, and to include a minimum of 25% participation from HBCUs.