* 9554480
* Methods For Setting Standards on Performance Assessment In State-Wide Assessment Contexts
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Ronald Hambleton, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Larry E. Suter
* 08/31/1998
* USD 279,796.00

; R o o t E n t r y F f C o m p O b j b W o r d D o c u m e n t O b j e c t P o
o l f f 4 @ , - . / 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 F Microsoft Word 6.0 Document MSWordDoc
Word.Document.6 ; button CC CC static ! %d %d %d %d @"t# e D P ! %s (%s) %s: %s
%s Print Manager is out of memory. Quit any applications thAbstract This
proposal seeks support for research on the development and validate of methods
for establishing standards of student preference eon statewide assessments that
require students to produce, rather than select, responses to examination
exercises. Statewide assessments of student performance are critical to the
improvement of American education. Through such assessments, state governments
can assess the comparative strengths and weaknesses of students' achievement and
can guide school systems and schools in the remediation of deficiencies in
curriculum and instruction. Existing standard-setting methods were developed for
use with multiple-choice, pencil-and-paper tests in which students select an
answer from among those presented in each test item. These methods are not
directly applicable to modern performance assessments that attempt to measure
what students can do, not which answer they can select. As more and more states
modernize their assessments in lie with newly-developed curriculum standards,
such as those of the National Council of Teachers of Mathematics, they must e
defe nsible and reliable methods for determining whether their students have
achieved levels of performance that are competitive with those of the world's
major industrialized nations. The research proposed here will provide such
methods. The proposed research will be conducted by a consortium of directors of
statewide assessments in five states and leading university-based psychometric
researchers who have contributed substantially to the development of standard-
setting methodology over the past two decades. The research will be coordinated
by the Council of chief State School Officers, ensuring its rapid dissemination
to al of the nation's state departments of education and its ready adoption by
those agencies. Oh +' 0 $ H l D h R:\WWUSER\TEMPLATE\NORMAL.DOT Abstract
Microsof S u m m a r y I n f o r m a t i o n ( + t Corporation Sadie R. Jones @
yf @ SJ f @ f @ Microsoft Word 6.0 2 ; e = e - - j j j j j j j 1 ! # # # @ T C ?
j j j j j ! ~ j j j j ! y Abstract This proposal seeks support for research on
the development and validate of methods for establishing standards of student
preference eon statewide assessments that require students to produce, rather
than select, responses to examination exercises. Statewide assessments of
student performance are critical to the improvement of American education.
Through such assessments, state governments can assess the comparative strengths
and weaknesses of students' achievement and can guide school systems and schools
in the remediation of deficiencies in curriculum and instruction. Existing
standard-setting methods were developed for use with multiple-choice, pencil-
and-paper tests in which students select an answer from among those presented in
each test item. These methods are not directly applicable to modern performance
assessments that attempt to measure what students can do, not which answer they
can select. As more and more states modernize their assessments in lie with
newly-developed curriculum standards, such as those of the National Council of
Teachers o