* 9554949
* Development of Course Materials to Promote Collaborative    Learning through Interactive Animation for Mathematics
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* David Sher, Nassau Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1999
* USD 81,346.00

This project is developing materials that enhance the Harvard approach
curriculum and that of other reform projects for precalculus and calculus with
techniques borrowed from Sher and Wilkinson's adaptation of Treisman's approach.
The approach takes advantage of, but does not require, computer workstations
designed for group interaction with interactive animated demonstrations of ideas
in mathematics and computer science. These group stations, funded under the
Instrumentation and Laboratory Improvement Program, are specifically designated
for use by groups of three students. Groups work as a team to solve problems
posed by the instructor. The group stations are also available after class for
project preparation. The materials being developed illustrates precalculus and
calculus concepts. The project is evaluating this approach by measuring
retention rates, periodically surveying the students to measure changes in
attitudes, and measuring the effect of laboratory courses on student grades. A
variety of conference presentations and journal publications describe the
results from our project. A laboratory manual and other materials are being
produced for commercial publication as well as via the World Wide Web. The
project principals are conducting a week-long course for community college and
high school teachers to disseminate these ideas. Queensborough and Borough of
Manhattan Community Colleges are serving as beta test sites.