* 9554807
* Long-Term Field Studies for Undergraduate Education:  A     Snapshot in Time
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Gerald Saunders, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/2000
* USD 242,000.00

A common feature of ecological field and laboratory courses at the undergraduate
level is a lack of appropriate field experiences. In particular, field
experiences for the most part consists of mensurative habitat studies, e.g.,
making lists of species abundances from contrasting areas. However, much
ecological research and some of the most important conceptual advances have
arisen from manipulative experiments designed to meet rigorous statistical
standards of replication, dispersion of treatments, and avoiding the pitfalls of
pseudoreplication. To address this dichotomy between teaching and research, the
establishment of a long-term field experiment to improve undergraduate teaching
in ecology and environmental science is proposed. The long-term experiment is
designed to address topics of ecological succession contrasting the effects of
mowing and fertilizer treatments in upland and lowland abandoned farm fields.
Elementary, Middle and High school pre-service and in-service teachers, and
students taking courses in Southern Illinois University's Environmental Studies
Program (as a minor for a wide range of major degree programs) will participate
in the establishment, running, data collection and analysis of the field
experiment. The student's participating in the experience will assess the
advantages, disadvantages and limitations of field experiments, and be prepared
to integrate research data and results in an understanding of ecology. Because
of this intervention, students' will better appreciate the role of scientific
research in understanding the natural world. An important corollary is that the
students will be better able to describe and articulate one of the most
important ecological processes, i.e., succession. The improvements to the SIUC
undergraduate curriculum that will occur following the incorpora tion of the
field experiment into appropriate courses will be a model for other programs
nationally and internationally.