* 9554972
* Principals of Pollution Prevention
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1998
* Dale Rudd, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 01/31/1998
* USD 144,660.00

Pollution prevention is practiced in industry, but there appears to be no
coherent and generally applicable principles of pollution prevention about which
to organize instructional materials. The literature abounds mainly with
anecdotal and disconnected accounts of successful pollution prevention
campaigns. There is a need for educational material on pollution prevention. Our
goal is to design a course and prepare teaching materials suitable for students
from all engineering disciplines. Environmental engineering texts on pollution
control summarize state-of-the art knowledge in a way that does not foster
innovation because (1) they compartmentalize the treatment of wastewater, solid
wastes, gases, hazardous substances, etc. and (2) they typically do not deal
with pollution prevention and waste minimization. Chemical and mechanical
engineering texts on manufacturing process design typically ignore the
production of pollutants and pollution prevention. The systematic coordinated
view that is so valuable in solving real problems is not fostered by division
along these boundaries. This approach fails to convey to the young engineer the
notion that certain fundamentals apply to all processing systems. We seek to
amalgamate the subdivisions of process design, pollution prevention, and
pollution control, and integrate the management of various physical forms of
pollutants. The principles of pollution prevention common to all fields of
engineering involve the intelligent management of materials, energy, and
chemical reactivity. These principles guide the engineer in the search for
superior manufacturing processes. These rules of thumb are constrained by the
physical laws of conservation of mass, conservation of energy, and the
principles of managing chemical reactivity. These principles serve to identify
pollution prevention concepts that might be successful from those concepts that
cannot be successful. The most important part of the instructional material will
be ch apters on applications focusing on perhaps twenty areas of the economy.
The applications will serve to identify and limit the specific techniques of
mass ands energy balancing and the specific rules-of-thumb to be presented in
the introductory materials. This method of instruction emphasizes the role of
the engineer as a developer of technology that is economically competitive and
environmentally responsible. The principles can be a generally applicable basis
foe instruction in engineering. The final product will be a course syllabus with
an instruction manual, including practice problems and exercises, that can be
used to teach an integrated approach to pollution prevention and control. The
ultimate product will be a textbook because this is the only way to have the
course taught nationwide.