* 9554522
* Graduate Research Training in Plant Systematics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2000
* Michael Donoghue, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2000
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554522 Donoghue This program will provide broad graduate training in plant
systematics, thereby addressing widely recognized needs in plant biology and
environmental biology. The Department of Organismic and Evolutionary Biology
(OEB) is ideally suited to provide this training. Eight OEB faculty (three newly
appointed) will be primary participants in the program, along with five
associated personnel from outside the department. New molecular laboratories
complement the strengths, and growing interest on the part of outstanding
applicants, the development of a plant systematics program has been hindered by
limitations on internal funding. The program will bring eight new students into
the department and will provide flexible funding for other students to ensure
broad training and timely completion of the PhD. A rotation scheme and several
new courses will be initiated, targeting morphological and molecular techniques
and the teaching of plant systematics. Harvard will augment NSF funding by
supplementing tuition and providing field research assistantships, herbarium
traineeships, and resources for the new courses, workshops, rotations, and
recruitment activities. The participating faculty will allocate GRT funds to
meet these goals and will coordinate efforts to recruit and retain
underrepresented minority students.