* 9554903
* Development of Software to Assist Teaching Petrography to   Undergraduate Earth Science Students
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Eric Christiansen, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 12/31/1998
* USD 104,808.00

An important difficulty faced by undergraduate Earth Science students is
learning how to identify minerals in thin sections of rocks under a microscope.
We will develop computer software (PetroDisc) to help students understand
minerals and textures in thin sections of igneous, metamorphic, and sedimentary
rocks. The application will be an interactive tutorial that draws
photomicrographs from a CD-ROM or laser disk. Multiple images (plane and cross
polarized light, stage rotation, reflected light, interference figures,
cathodoluminescence, etc.) of the same thin section will simulate a petrographic
microscope and illustrate the fundamental properties of minerals in thin
sections. Each mineral grain on the image will be keyed to a database of mineral
names, optical, compositional, and x-ray properties. Students will be able to
interactively explore a series of thin sections, amplifying a laboratory
instructor's effectiveness. Extended work with this program should increase
their ability to identify minerals and manipulate various kinds of petrographic
data (including x-ray maps, back scattered electron images, modal abundances,
and crystal size distributions). PetroDisc will be constructed by a small team
of geologists and an instructional programmer. Early versions of the program
will be evaluated in laboratory classes, by other petrologists, and by making a
prototype available for use and comment on the Internet before it is released.
PetroDisc will be supplied by BYU to Earth Science departments at colleges and
universities for minimal cost.