* 9554870
* On-Line Server of Educational Resources
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1996,09/30/2000
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 09/30/2000
* USD 800,000.00

Recent concerns over problems in American science education have prompted rapid
development of new educational methods and technologies. Traditional modes of
information sharing, however, haven't been successful in producing widespread
educational reform--overcoming the inertia of instructors remains a significant
obstacle. To encourage adoption of educational innovations, we intend to widely
disseminate "hands-on" materials, i.e., materials that are ready for immediate
use in the classroom. The twofold goals of this collaborative project are 1) to
actively disseminate information and materials, and 2) to encourage discourse
across disciplines and institutions. We intend to exploit recent advances in
information technology to establish a World Wide Web server devoted solely to
achieving the above goals. To begin with, we will place on-line physics and
chemistry materials developed with previous NSF support. These materials, which
have proven to be highly effective in enhancing student learning and interest in
introductory college physics and chemistry courses, will be available for
immediate classroom use. In addition to the active dissemination of these
materials, the server will solicit user contributions, enriching the pool of
ideas for all users. Initially focused on physics and chemistry, the contents of
the server will later be expanded to other disciplines. With input from users
and an advisory board we will establish policies for the most effective use of
the Web site. By reaching a broad audience this project will encourage the
evaluation and adoption of shared material and thus help produce a broad and
lasting change.