* 9554240
* Partners in Science
* EHR,DRL
* 10/01/1995,05/31/1997
* Paul Reichardt, Fairbanks North Star Borough School District
* Standard Grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 05/31/1997
* USD 253,230.00

McMillan 95-54240 A project to link K-12 students and teachers to practicing
University, industry and agency scientists using networked technology, with the
aim of increasing the practice of authentic, project based math and science. A
significant portion of science and math teaching, inquiry, and application at
the primary and secondary grade levels can be furthered by the virtually
unlimited possibilities for information gathering and sharing via computer
networking. Yet teachers and their students often do not take advantage of the
facilities available, or do not have access to the technology that would make
this possible. Alaska, with its far flung population and limited road system can
especially benefit from networked technology. We should morph into the virtual
classroom where students, teachers, and practicing scientists from throughout
Alaska and the world engage in animated conversations, conduct experiments, and
exchange information using the information networking. The main goal of the
proposed Partners in Science project is to further math and science learning in
grades K-12 in the Fairbanks North Star Borough School District (FNSBSD), two
rural Alaskan school districts (Iditarod and Gateway), and among isolated home-
schoolers. In addition, the project will share the educational experiences and
new concepts developed on a statewide, national, and global level. To accomplish
this, the proposed project has been broken down into objectives that focus on
its three main components: the students, the teachers, and the technology. In
order to achieve these objectives, the proposed project will link practicing
scientists from higher education, government, and industry with teachers and
students, using the latest information networking technology. It will be
instrumental in igniting a redefinition of technology's place in the education
process in the targeted school districts. We are very hopeful that Partners in
Science is very effective in pulling in the most isolated student s in our state
-students in rural districts and students being taught at home by their parents
(homeschoolers). A central feature of this project is the creation of Virtual
Science and Math classrooms at the elementary, junior high and high school
level. Teachers will be intensively trained in these classrooms in the best
practices used to achieve the math and science standards expressed in Goals 2000
and Alaska 2000, using electronic and person-to-person networkworking to
practicing scientists. Several levels of training are proposed to allow the
opportunity to participate by our eager, yet inexperienced teachers to the most
able and ready staff.