* 9554533
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Photonics
* EDU,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Stephen Forrest, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554533 Forrest We propose an innovative program that provides unique
research and educational experiences for graduate students pursuing a career in
photonics at Princeton University. The requested five Graduate Research
Traineeships will accelerate the growth of a newly established division
concentrating on optics and optoelectronic engineering within the Department of
Electrical Engineering. This program forms the nucleus of an inter-institutional
multidisciplinary effort to provide educational and research opportunities in
optical sciences and engineering, including optical communications, advanced
photonic materials and devices, and biomedical applications. To promote and
facilitate this ambitious effort, the Advanced Technology Center for Photonics
and Optoelectronic Materials (ATC/POEM) was established at Princeton through a
grant from the State of New Jersey in 1989. This center tightly couples POEM
faculty and students with the photonics industry, who have been engaged over the
last several years in an effective program of technology transfer from academia
to the industrial sector. Hence, POEM forms the focus of these future careers in
both large and small photonics-based companies. As part of this proposal, we
will encourage students to work directly with these companies under direct,
joint supervision between the faculty of the Department of Electrical
Engineering and their industrial supervisor. In the Appendix we include four
letters of commitment from industrial participants to these Graduate Research
Traineeships. Furthermore, we will work closely with undergraduate institutions
which will act as "feeders" of highly qualified and interested undergraduates,
to provide both the student and their undergraduate advisor with relevant
experiences in optical sciences and technology. The northeast has a wealth of
undergraduate institutions which are world-renown for their quality of
education. Hence, Princeton is well-positioned to engage jointly with these
colleges in undergraduate summer internships in this rapidly advancing and
important technological area. As a starting point, we have already established
an agreement with Swathmore College to participate in our undergraduate intern
program to act as a supplier of future graduate students to the optics program
at Princeton.