* 9554909
* Interdisciplinary Laboratory Course in Non-Linear Dynamics
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* Nilgun Sungar, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 12/31/1998
* USD 76,412.00

During the past two decades the importance of geometrical methods in the
analysis of complex dynamical systems have been recognized. With the advent of
high speed computers, these methods are now being applied in a variety of
fields. Houever, existing courses in the undergraduate curriculum do not utilize
these powerful tools and only emphasize traditional methods for solving
differential equations. This project will develop an innovative,
interdisciplinary laboratory-based course on nonlinear dynamical systems at the
undergraduate level. The course is designed to teach the geometrical methods of
dynamical systems analysis to undergraduates in physics, mathematics, biology,
chemistry and the engineering sciences and to build an intuitive understanding
of the behavior of such systems. The innovative aspects of the course will be
interdisciplinary, experimental laboratory exercises and applications of
computers and visualization techniques. A significant portion of the development
effort is to create laboratory experiments which complement course lectures.
These experiments are drawn from a number of areas of dynamical systems theory,
including applications in physics, chemistry, biology and electrical and civil
engineering. The experiments are used to reinforce the material learned in class
and to illustrate the underlying similarities between seemingly unrelated
physical systems. This course will serve as a model for other universities and
will produce tested material that can be used to build the laboratory component
for similar courses.