* 9554570
* Graduate Research Traineeships in Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Vasilios Manousiouthakis, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554570 Manousiouthakis Irrevocable change is occurring in the way we
conceive, develop and design chemical technologies, whether for petrochemicals
production, bioprocessing, or electronic materials synthesis. The scientific and
economic arguments for development of clean technologies with minimal
environmental impact have become truly compelling if we are to enjoy further
improvement in our quality of life for the foreseeable future. Those engaged in
clean chemical process development confront revolutionary challenges in chemical
synthesis, separations, and process design for pollution prevention and the
minimization of waste. A new breed of chemical engineer must be educated and
trained in the area of Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing to meet these
challenges. Funds are requested for the support of five Graduate Research
Trainees pursuing PhD studies in Chemical Engineering in the area of
Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing. Two additional trainees will be
supported by UCLA matching funds. The Traineeships will be for five years and
will be administered through the Chemical Engineering Department. An integrated
program of cross-disciplinary research, classroom learning, industrial
internships, and teaching experience has been designed to train PhD students in
environmentally conscious manufacturing and pollution prevention research. Given
that the ultimate implementation of pollution prevention concepts will require
the participation of scientists and engineers trained in fields other than
chemical engineering, each of the Trainees will be jointly mentored by two
faculty members; one from chemical engineering, and one from another discipline.
This interdisciplinary approach in research and training will provide the
optimal means to contribute effectively to the engineering science and
technology base for environmentally conscious manufacturing, which is currently
in its infancy. A rigorous curriculum, a multimonth visit to a host research
institution, seminars, workshops and teaching assignments, and their daily
interactions with their mentors and each other, will prepare these students to
teach and do research in this field. Furthermore, their contributions to the
development of software, monographs, and case studies will help educated a new
generation of engineers that are environmentally aware and have the knowledge
base needed to prevent the generation of pollution.