* 9554467
* High Plains Rural Systemic Initiative
* EDU,ESR
* 09/01/1995,05/31/2001
* Gerald Monette, Turtle Mountain Community College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jody Chase
* 05/31/2001
* USD 10,336,718.00

9554467 Belgarde This proposal is to fund the High Plains Rural Systemic
Initiative (HPRSI). The Turtle Mountain Community College is serving as the
fiscal agent for a coalition of 17 tribally controlled colleges in a five-state
region of the Upper Great Plains that includes Montana, Nebraska, North Dakota,
South Dakota, and Wyoming. The initiative has four major components: 1)
Reservation Initiatives, that will establish a process to increase the native
cultural knowledge and content into the science and mathematics curriculum; 2)
Technology Development, to promote the development and use of technology as a
teaching tool by establishing networks across the region; 3) Partnership
Development, to increase the connections between RSI school and all interested
stakeholders; and 4) Commissioned Studies, a special initiative to support the
Reservation Initiatives component by providing teachers and faculty members an
opportunity to research and develop viable teaching models for tying science and
mathematics education to culturally appropriate materials and methodologies for
systemic change. The Reservation Initiatives component and the Commissioned
Studies are viewed as the "seedbed" to begin the process of change at each of
the 18 sites involved in the HPRSI (17 colleges, plus 1 reservation in Wyoming
that is not served by a college). It is important to acknowledge the differences
among these tribal communities, yet there are themes that provide a common
ground in their approach to educational reform, such as: understanding the
cultural behaviors in children and adults in order to facilitate a higher level
of learning; knowledge and understanding of Native/indigenous knowledge in
science, mathematics and technology; acknowledging and utilizing the wisdom and
knowledge of native elders and other cultural expertise to promote the
integration of the cultural knowledge base into a challenging science and
mathematics. The High Plains Rural Systemic Initiati ve will promote systemic
change in its five-state region by providing program coordination, staff
support, and program assessment that takes into account both science,
mathematics, and technology subject matter and the cultural knowledge of the
respective tribal group. During the first year the HPRSI will sponsor six
Reservation Initiatives at the Sinte Gleska University, South Dakota, Dull Knife
College, Montana; Nebraska Indian College, Nebraska; Turtle Mountain Community
College, North Dakota; and the Wind River Reservation in Wyoming. The activities
will improve curriculum and instruction for science and mathematics in grades
K-14 in collaboration with comprehensive initiatives in the 5 states; including
the AMP program at Montana State University; the Montana, Nebraska, and South
Dakota SSIs; and other reform initiatives.