* 9554205
* A Digital Library for Middle Schools: Supporting Authentic  Science Investigations
* EDU,DRL
* 10/01/1995,06/30/2001
* Ronald Marx, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/2001
* USD 1,511,725.00

Soloway 95-54205 The Middle Years Digital Library (MYDL) will be an extension of
the University of Michigan's Digital Library (UMDL), an NSF/NASA/ARPA funded
project. MYDL, via the Internet, will provide ready access to a broad range of
information resources, from traditional books, magazines, and journals, to data
sets, scientific instruments, computer-based research tools, and collaboration
with peers and mentors. In addition, MYDL will feature tools to support students
publishing their findings and tools to support teachers collaborating with
fellow teachers. To insure accessibility, MYDL interfaces will be developed
using Learner-Centered Design methodology. MYDL brings together, for the first
time, a critical mass of diverse resource "in one place" with an accessible
interface. MYDL is also a complementary, comprehensive plan of action to sustain
innovation. Technology per se is not enough. To sustain innovation requires
considerable resources and resourcefulness. We propose working with
participating schools to: (1) develop, deploy, and redesign model curriculum
through investigatory projects that make integral use of the MYDL, (2) integrate
into the classroom instructional practices that support investigation-based
science learning (3) work with teachers to change their attitudes, beliefs, and
practices from a more traditional didactic pedagogy to a more investigatory-
based pedagogy, and (4) evaluate, on an ongoing basis MYDL and its impact on
teaching and learning. The UM Collaboratory for Science Education has
significant experience in creating thriving, technology-based education
innovations. We will leverage these experiences to build the Middle Years
Digital Library. We will extend UMDL, thus, only incremental support is needed
to tailor MYDL to middle-school students and increase the kinds of "collections"
that are included. MYDL will provide a clear demonstration of the viability of
electronic libraries and the extent to which such libraries will play a pivota l
role in affording schools the opportunity to change and offer students and
teachers the opportunity to develop a working science literacy.