* 9554564
* Reforming Education Through Science and Design:  A PhD      Training Initiative
* EHR,DGE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/2001
* Andrea diSessa, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Paul Jennings
* 08/31/2001
* USD 562,500.00

GER-9554564 DiSessa Building on two well-developed and respected PhD training
programs in mathematics and science education research, we propose a new program
combining the best features of cumulative , scientific research and educational
innovation. This program will create researchers who expand our understanding of
science and mathematics education while contributing practical solutions to
problems. The Graduate Traineeship area for this proposal is: Research and
Technology for the Teaching and Learning of Science and Mathematics targeted
subdiscipline of Education and Human Resources. Current training in education is
polarized between abstract, basic principles and ad hoc innovation. We seek
instead to train students capable of (a) developing scientific principles
grounded in practice and (b) developing principled educational innovations by
conducting design experiments in diverse, authentic settings. We call our
approach the "Reforming Education through Science and Design" (RE:SD) paradigm.
RE:SD requires training in new inquiry methods that promote equity and
capitalize on authentic research contexts. Effective use of modern technology,
including computers and telecommunications, requires new, creative scientific
principles, but it also enables new methodologies of investigation and avenues
of practical impact. Innovative components of the proposed training include (a)
multidisciplinary collaboration between faculty in physical, mathematical,
cognitive, and instructional sciences; (b) an intense, apprenticeship- style
learning environment; (c) a proven, comprehensive commitment to equity; and (d)
success in preparing students for the full range of relevant careers including
university faculty, policy makers, curriculum reformers, and software designers.