* 9554973
* The Bigger Picture:  A Project-Based Course on EnvironmentalGeophysics and Geochemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/1996,08/31/1998
* Steven Semken, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 08/31/1998
* USD 75,908.00

A project-based course in environmental field methods will be develmped for
students in the second year of earth science programs, creating a new context
for students' first encounter with more complex, and in particular, more
quantitative science topics. By teaching geophysical and geochemical field
methods through a sequence of in-depth studies of current environmental
problems, presented in their historical and social context, we hope to keep
students, especially women and minorities, in the quantitative science pipeline
and make clear their own potential for such work. Students will work through in-
depth environmental "case-studies", or project modules, on topics such as salt
water intrusion in coastal Florida, uranium mining remediation in the Navajo
Nation, and eutrophication in a Georgia estuary. Students will process a subset
of the data, combine data sets, analyze and interpret the data, define limits to
their interpretations, and make and justify policy decisions. The course will be
built around six or seven sequential modules, with each module designed to
follow a classroom introduction to the relevant field methods. We plan to add
supporting materials to these modules so that they can also be used as
individual case studies in environmental geology, hydrology, geophysics, and
geochemistry courses, and will be in a form that can be disseminated on the WWW,
CD-rom, and hardcopy. This work will be a collaborative effort by four faculty
at disparate institutions (College of William and Mary, Navajo Community
College, and Georgia Tech). Each of us will design one or two modules, working
with undergraduates at our home institutions. We will collaboratively review and
revise each module as we develop the course as a whole. Thus students will
encounter a wider range of both geographic settings and cultural contexts for
environmental problems than is currently found in quantitative geo-science
courses.