* 9554819
* Controls Education Using Matlab: Tutorials on the World-WideWeb
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/2000
* Dawn Tilbury, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Margaret D. Weeks
* 01/31/2000
* USD 195,548.00

The objective of this project is to improve undergraduate controls engineering
education. Students frequently have difficulties in learning controls; it is
often the first subject in which they must use the properties of complex
variables and the fundamentals of linear algebra in a sophisticated manner. The
proposed education aids will illustrate control system design and analysis and
enable students to quickly use the knowledge presented to them. We will develop
useful, widely available, and easily accessible tutorials for undergraduate-
level controls courses using Matlab, a popular computation and visualization
software package, and the World Wide Web (WWW). These education aids would be a
valuable addition to the undergraduate engineering curriculum at any university.
Prototypes of these tutorials can be viewed on the WWW at
http://www.engin.umich.edu/~tilbury/matlab_tutorial.html. The main innovation of
these education aids is their implementation on the WWW. The tutorials will
combine explanatory text with sample Matlab commands and illustrative plots and
graphics. The outline of the tutorials will closely follow the outline of the
most popular textbooks for undergraduate controls courses, including modeling,
Laplace transforms, time-domain and frequency-domain relationships, root-locus
methods, frequency-domain methods, state-space methods, and digital control.
Analysis techniques such as determining the stability and steady-state error of
a control system will be incorporated throughout the tutorials. The tutorials
will contain example problems which are worked out in detail, showing all of the
necessary steps, and sample problems for the students to work on independently.
For these sample problems, several levels of hints will be included. There are
three advantages to the approach taken in this project for teaching students how
to use Matlab for control system design. First, the tutorials will be
immediately available to students across the country at no cost to them. Any
student with access to both the WWW through Mosaicing or Netscape "3" and to
Matlab on either a personal computer or a workstation will be able to follow a
tutorial while running Matlab and will be able to easily switch between the two
programs. Second, students will be able to grasp key concepts and design
techniques in a "learn by seeing and doing" manner. Commands shown in the
tutorials can be copied from the Netscape or Mosaic window and pasted into the
Matlab command window with a simple point and click of the mouse; there is no
need for time-consuming typing and editing. Students can immediately see the
result of an actual computation, compare it to the result shown on the tutorial,
and quickly experiment with modifications of the code and changes of parameters.
Third, by using the hypertext markup language on the WWW, the proposed on-line
education aids can be highly interconnected. There will be several paths through
a tutorial which have different levels of complexity or which emphasize
different methods. By making the education aids available on the WWW, not only
will they be easily integrated into an existing undergraduate controls
curriculum in a traditional four-year university, but they could also be used by
community colleges, industry, and individuals for continuing education. With the
education aids which we will develop, it will be easy for engineers in academia
and industry with access to the WWW and who currently know some classical
control theory to learn how to use Matlab to apply their knowledge and to
improve their skills and understanding.