* 9554710
* Undergraduate Faculty Workshop: Environmental Management
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/1996,02/28/1998
* Terry Baxter, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 02/28/1998
* USD 90,000.00

The objective of this workshop is to present both a course and develop a problem
workbook supporting undergraduate instruction in these critical and wide ranging
areas. Offering such a course to 20 undergraduate teaching faculty and involving
them in development of supporting teaching materials will significantly enhance
their understanding of current environmental management subjects and help them
update and develop new courses in this area. Problems and solutions generated by
an interdisciplinary team of engineering and applied science faculty invited to
attend the workshop will form the basis of the workbook generated from this
effort. Topics to be included in the workbook are: fundamentals, regulations,
risk assessment/risk communication, pollution prevention, sustainable
development, air/water/solid waste management, hazardous waste management,
indoor air pollution, environmental ethics, environmental justice, ISO14000 and
global environmental management. The first draft of the problem workbook will be
prepared during a two-week summer workshop at Utah State University in June,
1996. The 1996-1997 academic year will provide an opportunity for participants
to classroom test the effectiveness of the teaching materials provided to them
in the workshop, and the problems contained in the workbook. A three-day follow
up summer session in late June, 1997 is scheduled at Manhattan College to
provide an opportunity to revise, update, and edit the workbook, and finalize
production and distribution plans for implementation in undergraduate
engineering and applied science curricula. This project is proposed as a
collaborative effort between universities (Utah State University, Logan, Utah;
Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona) and a four-year undergraduate
college (Manhattan College, Riverdale, New York). The Program Director and co-
Directors have over 50 combined years of experience in environmental management,
have been successfully involved in NSF U ndergraduate Faculty Enhancement
projects in the past, and are involved in minority and Native American retention
and training efforts at their institutions.