* 9554975
* Introducing Parallel Programming Techniques into the        Freshman Curricula
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,12/31/1998
* C. Michael Allen, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 12/31/1998
* USD 114,975.00

The goal of this proposal is to restructure how parallel programming is taught
at universities. Parallel programming has been taught as a specialized topic at
the senior and graduate levels in research universities. However with the
growing importance of multiprocessor systems, it is now both feasible and
necessary to introduce parallel programming at a much earlier stage and to a
wider audience. This proposal will investigate introducing parallel programming
techniques at the freshman year, integrating the material with existing
sequential programming classes. The introduction of parallel programming
techniques and their application will be continued in a similar fashion
throughout the undergraduate curriculum wherever appropriate, in a gradual and
constructive way. Introducing parallel programming at an earlier stage has two
major problems which will be addressed in his proposal. First it requires
special attention to dissemination and integration of the material. Second it
requires a suitable computing platform. A major hindrance to teaching parallel
programming with large classes has been unavailability of suitable computing
platforms. Recent advances will be used in networked workstations and parallel
programming tools which enable the workstations to be used collectively. How
such networks can be used effectively in a parallel programming educational
setting will be explored. New educational material will be created, which will
be made freely available to other institutions. This proposal is intended to
influence not only computer science and engineering curricula but also many
aspects of other disciplines, as programming and its application are widely
dispersed among many disciplines, including the physical sciences, natural
sciences, business, and commerce.