* 9554472
* Native American Mathematics and Science Technology Project
* NONE,NONE
* 10/01/1995,12/31/1998
* Karen Buller, National Indian Telecommunication Institute
* Continuing grant
* Nora Sabelli
* 12/31/1998
* USD 1,295,054.00

Buller 95-54472 This project will provide interested Native American communities
and schools with relevant technology infrastructure, training for use of the
technology in the community and in mathematics and science education, training
to maintain the hardware during and beyond the project, on-going technical
assistance, technology needs-assessment assistance through community-school
alliances formulated through the project, and a variety of data bases containing
relevant information to Native Americans. Specifically, this project has three
interrelated objectives: 1 ) Provide infrastructure technology in rural and
reservation communities and schools in 15 Native American communities (5 per
year). This objective includes needsassessments, installation, training, and
technical assistance to develop their own wide area network; 2) Improve K- 12
mathematics and science education through the access and use of the Internet.
This objective includes preparing teams of educators and community members in
the use of the Internet to improve teaching and learning as well as daily
living. This project will prepare 150 K- 12 teachers (50 per year) and 75
community members (25 per year) in 15-20 Native American communities nationwide.
Action Plans for use of the Internet in the classroom will be developed and
follow-up site visits will occur; and, 3) Establish and maintain a variety of
data bases and specialized bulletin boards. Participants who lack local access
to the Internet will access it via 1-800 numbers through the Electronic Pathways
server funded by NSF in 1995 and housed and maintained at the University of
Colorado, Boulder Computer Center. The project also includes a three-pronged
approach to its evaluation: 1 ) Implementation Evaluation; 2) Progress
Evaluation; and 3) Summative Evaluation. Experts in technology and program
evaluation will evaluate the project. Sustainability has been addressed from the
beginning of the development of this project with input into its development by
numerous Native and non-Native American individuals with expertise in
technology, Indian Education, teacher enhancement, mathematics and science, and
community development. A critical component in this project is the exploration
with the end-users of the potential cultural implications of the technology they
will be employing. These discussions will occur prior to installation of any
hardware. Also, Electronic Pathways is committed to training Native Americans in
the technology and related aspects of this project and will include 12 interns
(four annually) in the program.