* 9554602
* Plymouth-Canton Elementary Systemic Science Reform Planning Grant
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Kathryn Harenda, Plymouth-Canton Community Schools
* Standard Grant
* Lowell J. Bethel
* 08/31/1998
* USD 49,855.00

*** 9554602 Harenda This project is for a one year planning grant to support
planning for systemic change in the area of science education. The focus of this
initiative is hands-on, inquiry science teaching and learning. The targeted
teachers are K-5. A team of stakeholders consisting of teachers, administrators,
business partners and community representatives will be identified and brought
together to develop a comprehensive plan to implement an elementary hands-on,
inquiry-based science program coordinated with grades K-12. Activities will
include: Self-study. A systematic and thorough district-wide (K-12) study of the
Plymouth-Canton Community School District to determine its strength and weakness
as it relates to science education reform. Identify internal funding sources and
a plan to sustain systemic reform. Research. Research of reform strategies,
existing science units, staff-development models, materials supply and
refurbishing systems, funding plans, and the goals and objectives of the
Michigan Statewide Systemic Initiative. The plan developed under this grant will
be presented to the National Science Foundation as a full grant proposal to
support systemic science education reform in the Plymouth-Canton Community
School District. Cost sharing will be $10,950. The project requested $49,805
from NSF with 21% cost sharing. ***