* 9554722
* Great Lakes Research Consortium Practicum in Applied        Environmental Problem-Solving:  New Approaches and          Techniques for Undergraduate Teaching Faculty
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Ronald Engel, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 12/31/1997
* USD 142,288.00

The Great Lakes Research Consortium (GLRC) proposes to immerse 20 undergraduate
faculty in a 3-week summer practicum that demonstrates environmental problem-
solving as an effective teaching strategy to stimulate undergraduates' interest
in environmental science. This model has proven to be effective during a summer
practicum for undergraduate environmental science teachers of two and four year
colleges who, as a result of the practicum, successfully incorporated
environmental problem solving curriculum into their courses. Undergraduate
faculty participants learn environmental analysis techniques and prepare
environmental impact statements (EIS) for a hypothetical development project in
a contaminated harbor of Lake Ontario. As they are being exposed to new
innovative theoretical concepts and techniques developed by the Great Lakes
research community to understand and solve environmental problems, participants
are shown how to integrate environmental problem-solving into curricula at their
home institutions. Special topics, based on the Great Lakes experience, will
include the theories and applications of cascading trophic interactions and
particle-size spectra in community ecology; analytical methods for determining
toxic chemical concentrations in sediments and fishes; and the use of
microcomputers for massbalance and bioenergetics modeling of large lake systems.
Through preparation of environmental impact statements for a realistic project,
these techniques will be integrated into the overall environmental analysis and
problem-solving approach that has stimulated undergraduate interest in science
at two GLRC campuses for a decade. Participants in the practicum will return to
their home institutions with expanded and updated professional skills and new
strategies, methods and techniques for improving undergraduate education and
addressing environmental problems in local communities.