* 9555202
* The Design of an Integrated Core Curriculum for Mathematics,Physics, and Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Pamela Mills, CUNY Hunter College
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2001
* USD 359,958.00

This project will integrate two semesters each of General Chemistry, College
Physics and Precalculus Mathematics into one four-semester pre-professional
science course, including both lectures and laboratories. This dramatic
restructuring experiment with the introductory level science courses is
motivated by the enormous failure rates in our standard introductory courses. At
present, these failure rates in our inner-city campus exceed 60%. A
disproportionate number of these students are women and/or minorities. Although
we attribute these failure rates to a multitude of factors, the salient feature
appears to be the students' inability to transfer and apply their knowledge
among topics within one course and between topics across disciplines (such as
mathematics and chemistry). The primary goal of an integrated sequence is the
explicit transfer and application of knowledge common to the analytical sciences
and mathematics. This approach will empower students to become effective
problem-solvers and critical thinkers in the physical sciences. The objectives
of this integration are 1) to take advantage of the natural connections among
mathematics, physics, and chemistry in order to reinforce the physical concepts
and the mathematical techniques employed in the quantitative sciences; 2) to
promote the development of effective learning strategies common to all
quantitative sciences; 3) to use the context of chemistry and physics to
motivate students to learn, apply, reinforce and transfer mathematical methods;
4) to introduce the fundamental physical concepts that underlie chemistry in a
unified, logical and coherent fashion; and 5) to create a block learning
environment that maintains a unified student population throughout the
quantitative sciences. We are well aware that the persistence of an integrated,
interdepartmental course is a major challenge. However, a solution to the
problem of high failure rates has clear advantages for the College and for each
of the three departments involved. We have received enthusiastic support from
the Chairs of all the involved disciplines and from the College Administration.
A careful assessment and documentation of improvement in the quantitative
reasoning skills of students are integral parts of the proposal. Evidence of
improvement can clearly have far-reaching impact on undergraduate science
education in the quantitative sciences.