* 9555091
* The Complete Geography:  A Model Curriculum for Pre-Service in Cultural, Physical, Techniques, and Regional Geography
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1999
* Cecil Keen, Minnesota State University, Mankato
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 09/30/1999
* USD 200,000.00

The Educate America Act of 1994 names geography as one of nine subject areas in
which high school graduates must achieve competency. The new competency
requirements necessitate a broader, more complete education of our nation's pre-
service social studies teachers. To date, very few comprehensive curriculum
materials have been developed to facilitate teaching pre-service geography
students. This proposal requests NSF funds for the development of a four-volume
manual of module exercises covering each of the four core areas of geographic
education-cultural, physical, geographic techniques, and world regional
geography. The manual will be developed by teams of geographers, education
faculty, technology consultants, and an advisory committee, with the goal of
producing the Cultural and Physical volumes in year 1, and the Techniques and
World Regional volumes in year 2. The manual will be ultimately tested by an
advisory committee for its consistency with the philosophies and objectives of
GEO-Teach, a pre-service geography education program funded by FIPSE and
currently being implemented at Mankato State University. GEO-Teach strives to
model for students successful approaches to interdisciplinary teaching and a
content- and process-based pedagogy that integrates up-to-date technology
instruction into the curriculum; it is expected that the same principles will be
integrated into this four-volume manual. Two external evaluators will conduct
testing in large and small university classes outside Mankato State University.
It is anticipated that the final product will be available for distribution to
other pre-service geography/social studies programs in the Spring of 1998.