* 9555691
* Creating A Community of Mathematics Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2003
* Jack Beal, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Monica M. Neagoy
* 08/31/2003
* USD 2,849,889.00

9555691 Gangolli Building on a prior planning grant, this five-year project aims
at systemic and lasting change in the way in which mathematics is taught in
middle and high schools in six school districts in and around Seattle
(Washington). As one of the initial projects funded under the guidelines for
Local Systemic Change through Teacher Enhancement in Mathematics, Grades 7-12,
the project involves all 595 middle and high school teachers of mathematics in
the six targeted districts. The project's three major goals are: 1. To provide
all middle and high school teachers with at least 132 hours of professional
development designed to deepen their knowledge of the mathematics they teach, as
well as to increase their understanding and appreciation of successful models of
pedagogy, exemplary instructional materials, successful uses of technology, and
various issues of assessment. 2. To set up a continuing culture of dialogue and
discussion between mathematics educators at all levels (K-16) in the region,
aimed at improving the learning environment in each school, with the mathematics
teachers in each school acting as the team that spearheads change. 3. To inform
parents and the community at large about the goals and methods of standards-
based mathematics education, and help them to become effective partners in the
enterprise of ensuring excellence in mathematics education. This collaborative
project is a partnership between the Department of Mathematics and the College
of Education at the University of Washington, and the Bellevue, Lake Washington,
Mercer Island, Northshore, Seattle, and Shoreline School Districts. The 310
middle school teachers and 285 high school teachers participating in the project
will engage in academic year workshops and discussion sessions, summer
institutes, informal working sessions, optional workshops for special purposes
(e.g., Internet training session), parent and community outreach meetings, etc.
A continuing electronic user group will be an i mportant strategic component of
the project. Estimated cost-sharing of $ 407,513 is derived from the
participating school districts and from the University of Washington, who
contribute in approximately equal proportions.