* 9555113
* Cryptography, The Science of Secret Writing:  An Innovative Approach to Introductory Mathematics for Non-Science Majors
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/2000
* Terri Lindquester, Rhodes College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2000
* USD 70,000.00

This project is designed to refine a course and develop a text in cryptography,
the science of designing methods to disguise secret messages. The goal is to
provide an innovative alternative in introductory mathematics for beginning
nonscience majors as well as students preparing for certification in elementary
and high school mathematics. Through this thematic approach, the objective is to
sharpen students' critical thinking skills and to stimulate their interest in
the use of mathematics in the daily operations of society. This course is
serving to replace more traditional beginning courses such as college algebra
and trigonometry and finite mathematics, and is appropriate for all entering
college students. The course covers classical cipher systems (systems used
during the World Wars, for example), modern encryption systems, and error-
correcting codes. Some of the topics being presented in the text are
substitution ciphers, transposition ciphers, the RSA Algorithm, digital
signatures, the Knapsack Algorithm, and one-way functions used for PIN security.
Mathematical topics to be presented at the beginning level are modular
arithmetic, probability and statistics, matrix arithmetic, number theory, and
combinatorics. In an active learning environment utilizing technology, these
mathematical tools are used to guide students in breaking and constructing
cipher systems, and in determining the strength and utility of ciphers. The
radical difference in this course and the "sampler" courses that have been
taught in the past is that many mathematical notions can be introduced under the
one canopy of cryptography, with its obvious historical significance and its
critical modem-day importance. The project is being disseminated via a
preliminary manual for the course to selected institutions that are beta testing
the materials in classes, presentations at national meetings, and preparation of
a text for commercial publication. An experienced evaluation team is providing
an intensive evaluation of the project.