* 9555053
* An Interactive Computer Graphics System for the Teaching of Undergraduate Optics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* John Foley, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1999
* USD 100,000.00

The purpose of our project is to develop an interactive computer graphics system
to be used in upper-level optics courses taught in physics departments and
various engineering departments.Currently physics and engineering students learn
about optics from textbooks which illustrate the basic principles by means of
two-dimensional black and white drawings, and from lectures in which figures are
drawn on the board or presented on overhead projectors. These traditional
methods for communication are less than ideal for imparting a comprehensive and
intuitive understanding of many optical phenomena. What is needed is a system in
which the user (be it the professor lecturing or students working on their own)
can call up the phenomenon of interest, enter the parameter values they are
interested in, and then watch a three-dimensional, animated visualization of the
phenomena. The goal of our project is to develop such a system, and we have
already made significant progress towards it. Our system, which we call The
Optics Project (TOP), is written in the C programming language, and it uses the
OpenGl and Motif libraries for, respectively, the graphics and the user
interface. When completed, TOP will contain eight modules which address eight
topics typically covered in a junior/senior optics course and two additional
modules which cover important topics which are usually omitted in a one-semester
course due to lack of time. Each module will contain several options which
investigate different phenomena. TOP will have a system of "help" screens to aid
the user run the visualizations and give him/her information on the phenomenon
being studied. These help screens will be similar to Mosaic and/or Netscape in
that they will be written in HTML and contain hypertext links. Our project will
have an advisory board of six optics and computer graphics experts who will look
at the modules and give us suggestions. Physics departments from seven
universities in the Southeast have agreed to look at TOP and consider it for use
in their optics courses.