* 9555605
* Molecular Science
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2001
* Orville Chapman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Susan H. Hixson
* 04/30/2001
* USD 2,150,000.00

The UCLA-CSUF-Community College Alliance (24 area community colleges that have
worked together for more than 15 years) proposes a sweeping restructuring of the
lower division chemistry curriculum and the auxiliary learning and assessment
processes. In forming our new curriculum, we reject the positivist approach to
science education in favor of a constructivist approach that emphasizes problem
solving and exploratory learning. We make this change in order to focus on the
developing key skills, traits, and abilities of our students. Our new
curriculum, the Molecular Science Curriculum, cuts across departmental and
disciplines to embrace all activities that involve the study of atoms and
molecules. In particular, environmental science, materials science, and
molecular life science, have important positions in the lower-division chemistry
curriculum. The new curriculum reflects accurately current practice in research
and the chemical industry where growth in occurring in these new fields. Today
information-technology-based learning enables a practical approach to discovery
learning, which educational theorists have long favored. Students can learn
science by doing science. In particular, we will produce problem-based modular
learning units that define the molecular science curriculum; data sets organized
for exploratory learning; prepackaged molecular, mathematical, and schematic
models illustrating important principles and phenomena; and a client/server
system that manages education. Client/server technology enables individualized
courses and frees students from rigid time constraints. The learning units will
be used immediately by several of the community colleges in technology programs,
such as those for science technicians and hazardous materials technicians at
Mount San Antonio CC. New assessment vehicles including cumulative electronic
portfolios of group and individual work provide new insight into student
development and potential. The project also addresses the preparation of primary
and secondary science teachers by involving them as active participants in the
lower division courses of molecular science curriculum. At both UCLA and CSUF,
these students will gain experience with the modules, associated learning
methods, and electronic delivery system. These experiences should result in
teachers with a practical perspective on science teaching as well as the ability
to utilize current technology to direct learning activities. The electronic
delivery system will allow students at UCLA to work with the science education
faculty at CSUF to obtain certification. Since 1990 two high schools (Aliso
Niguel and Crossroads) have become members of the Alliance. These schools have
the facilities to expose students, experienced teachers, and future teachers to
both the content and learning methods of the molecular science curriculum.