* 9555148
* Teaching Digital Integrated Circuits in a Simulated         Industrial Environmental
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* Richard Turpin, University of the Pacific
* Standard Grant
* Janet C. Rutledge
* 12/31/1997
* USD 34,313.00

The focus of this project is to develop course material for a Junior/Senior
level Electrical Engineering course (Digital Integrated Circuits) which will
expose students to all aspects of integrated circuit design and fabrication, and
to implement the course in a "simulated industrial environment." The course will
be developed based on input from an industrial advisory board consisting of
engineers and managers from IC-related companies. The goals of the proposed
course are to change the standard instructional environment, consisting of
lectures and individual homework, to one which will 1) provide practice
gathering technical information from various sources; 2) develop problem solving
skills; 3) emphasize teamwork; and 4) provide numerous opportunities to refine
oral and written communication skills. In the proposed course students will
participate as "employees" of an integrated circuit design company working in
small teams in the different divisions of the company (Design, Test and
Fabrication) to solve a common problem. "Project-chips" will be created by this
proposal allowing students to compare the design, simulation and actual
measurements of integrated circuits. Students will evaluate the problems, define
potential solutions, form their own plan of action, and communicate their ideas
with both peers and superiors in written, oral and electronic form (e- mail).
The company framework will be created using an existing local area network (LAN)
loaded with the software an IC company would use (word processing, presentation,
circuit simulation, circuit layout, and e-mail). Existing measurement equipment
will be used to test the companies "products." An introductory integrated
circuit course that covers basic IC fabrication and design is present in most
every electrical engineering curriculum in the country. The material generated
from this project ("project-chips" and all supporting computer files) will be in
standard formats such that it is pla tform independent, and thereby applicable
to the widest possible audience. The effectiveness of this simulated industrial
environment and project-centered approach will be critically evaluated by the
industrial advisors, faculty, and student participants.