* 9555084
* Visual and Interactive Tools Incorporated into the          Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Susan Rodger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 06/30/1998
* USD 69,844.00

Mathematical foundations provide the basis for computer science, yet many
undergraduates obtain a superficial understanding of these concepts due to the
pencil and paper environment in which these concepts are currently taught. The
main objective of this proposal is to provide an environment for presenting and
communicating abstract computer science concepts in a more efficient, visual and
interactive manner. It is crucial that students understand this material early
on, at the sophomore or junior level, as they will continue to build on this
material in courses on programming languages, algorithms, and compilers. For the
past five years, the PI has been designing and developing interactive and visual
software tools (FLAP. LLparse, LRparse) that allow students to experiment with
concepts in formal languages and automata, receiving immediate feedback. The PI
is currently using these tools in the classroom in an interactive lecture format
with a projector displaying the computer screen. In this lecture style we solve
problems during class on the computer with input from students, and answer
questions by showing the answer. The PI plans to continue to shift the format of
this class away from lectures to an all lab (no lecture) format to provide the
maximum interaction. Each lab period will introduce a concept and give students
time to think and experiment with this concept. The material to be developed
includes manuscripts for the lecture and lab presentation formats, problem sets,
and software tools. This material will be disseminated through computer science
education conferences and journals, and news groups and web pages on the
Internet.