* 9555188
* Workshop Physical Science:  Project Based Science Education for Future Teachers, Citizens, and Parents
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Priscilla Laws, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Frank A. Settle
* 01/31/2000
* USD 183,249.00

The Workshop Physical Science Project is a major effort to increase the
effectiveness of science education for our future K-8 teachers, parents, and
citizens by developing a sequence of introductory laboratory courses in physical
science. We seek to integrate guided inquiry with student- directed projects in
order to help students acquire a better understanding of what practicing
scientists actually do. This hands-on approach is aimed at changing the focus of
introductory science courses from covering a large number of topics-which
promotes memorizing facts and formulae- to helping students develop science
process skills that will give them the confidence to undertake future
investigations independently. A modular design of the curricular materials will
provide ample flexibility for instructors at other colleges and universities to
adapt the program to their own environments. These materials will be developed
for use in teacher preparation programs, general studies courses for non-science
majors, and courses designed to inspire freshmen and sophomores to pursue
science as a major. This proposed four-year project began in September 1994
under a three-year grant from the Charles A. Dana Foundation, with the
expectation that additional funds would be solicited for its completion. We are
asking FIPSE to underwrite approximately half of the costs for project years two
and three, and all of the costs for year four. This will allow us to create and
evaluate cutticular materials for a two- semester course sequence and to
complete a two-year pilot test of the materials at three different institutions,
Dickinson College, the University of Nebraska, and Moorhead State University in
Minnesota. In addition, a portion of the funds will be used to initiate an
active dissemination program in the fourth year of the project involving talks,
articles, and workshops, as well as consultations with several institutions
interested in using the materials.