* 9555089
* WWW and Internet Dissemination of Biology and Computer Labs for Prospective Elementary Teachers and of a Biology Test   for Conceptual Understanding
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Kathleen Fisher, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Terry S. Woodin
* 06/30/1999
* USD 202,531.00

The goals of this project are to: 1) Disseminate biology lessons that have been
developed for prospective elementary school teachers. Each of the lessons
includes a hands-on laboratory activity, a computer- based knowledge
construction activity, and a Teachers Guide; 2) Develop and disseminate a
multiple choice test for conceptual understanding of biology that will be useful
for assessing learning among prospective elementary school teachers, other non-
science majors, and biology majors so as to measure progress within a course and
comparisons among courses; and 3) Develop, refine and test several new biology
lessons designed to provide tools to elementary school teachers for teaching
about evolution through in-class studies of population. The biology lessons are
organized into three laboratory manuals: Molecular Biology; Organismal Biology;
and 3) Population Biology. Each biology laboratory is accompanied by "knowledge
construction exercises" supported by the SemNet software. These exercises
provide guidelines for organizing knowledge in the form of active, working
mental models and include a mix of individual and collaborative work.
Laboratories will be made available in both printed and electronic form.
Potential users include undergraduate instructors of prospective elementary
teachers, undergraduate education majors, pre-service and practicing teachers,
and other interested persons. The project will develop a two-tiered, multiple-
choice test to measure conceptual understanding of biology. The first part of
each question will assess student knowledge about a biological phenomenon such
as ability to predict the outcome when a carrot is placed in saturated salt
water. The second part of the question asks the student to explain the reasoning
s/he used to make that prediction. The test will be developed using items that
typically provide a brief description of a laboratory exercise with results
(including graphic representation), and that as k students for interpretation.
Open-ended responses obtained initially will be converted to multiple choice
items in which distracters represent common misconceptions.