* 9555239
* Course and Curriculum Design of Environmental Science       Baccalaureate Degree Program Incorporating Native American  Wisdom, Traditional Knowledge and Scientific Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Larry Lucas, Haskell Indian Nations University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 03/31/2001
* USD 502,994.00

Haskell Indian Nations University (HINU) will develop and implement a
comprehensive, interdisciplinary courses for a BS degree program in the
Environmental Sciences for Native Americans. This new program will have three
primary goals: (a) to help Native Americans attain mastery of the field of
environmental sciences, (b) to provide an opportunity for students majoring in
other disciplines to acquire basic knowledge of the natural sciences, and (c) to
help preserve Native American culture by incorporating historical and
traditional knowledge into course content. Student participation in designing
course content and pedagogy through summer student-faculty teams will be a major
part of the development of the new Environmental Science Curriculum. This facet
of the program will foster mentoring and the development of a strong peer
teaching nucleus. Participating students will include Environmental Science as
well as Elementary Education. This curriculum will be unique because it will
integrate traditional Native values and knowledge into the western scientific
method. Courses to be developed within the next two years will include
Applications of Mathematics for Scientists and Engineers I/II, Geographic
Information Systems, Geographic Information Systems Applications, Watershed and
Landscape Development, Water Quality and Water Chemistry, Native American
Geography, and Ethnobotany. Future courses will include Introduction to
Ecological Chemistry, Environmental Policy and Law, Indian Environmental Law,
Ethnoentomology, Native American Ecosystem Management, Cultural and
Archeological Resources, Resource Economics and Environmental Policy, and
Restoration and Conservation Ecology.