* 9555152
* The Restructuring at SUNY Cortland of Science, Mathematics, and Pedagogy Experiences for K-6 Pre-Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1996,12/31/2000
* Carolyn (Libby) Krussel, SUNY College at Cortland
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 12/31/2000
* USD 850,000.00

During the past academic year, fourteen faculty from the sciences, mathematics
and education departments at SUNY Cortland participated in an NSF Development
Grant. During this project, course outlines were developed for a restructured
math/science/pedigogy/composition program for K- 6 pre-teachers, SUNY Cortland
has the largest elementary teacher preparation program in the State of New York.
The proposed project would develop the curriculum and instructional materials to
implement a 27 cr. hr, block of experiences. in addition to the fourteen SUNY
Cortland staff, science/math faculty from five regional Community colleges would
be involved in the curriculum development and implementation phases of the
proposed project, A research/assessment team from Cornell University would
evaluate all aspects of the project. The Level One block contains content
courses specifically designed for the K-6 pre-teachers and will be taught
utilizing a conceptual change approach, Composition 101 will be taught in
conjunction with the Level One Science course. Pedagogy courses in both science
and math will be taught in conjunction with the Level One content courses. In
both pedagogy courses, the pre-teachers will be involved in experiences with
elementary school-aged students. The Level Two block is an integrated and
interdisciplinary math/science experience in which students will be introduced
to problem solving strategies and will utilize the strategies to investigate six
significant real world science problems, The mathematical concepts will be
developed through the context of science content, During the Level Two block,
pre-teachers will work with elementary-aged children in a math/science lab
setting. In a culminating math/science experience, the pre-teachers will
participate in a Science, Technology and Society (STS) block in which they will
be engaged in conducing real world STS research under the guidance of a faculty
facilitator and a business/industry mentor. Each c urricular block will be pilot
tested three times before the curriculum is integrated Into the academic program
of the host institution and that of the five satellite campuses.