* 9555401
* Long Island Consortium for Mathematical Sciences Throughout the Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/1996,03/31/2001
* Alan Tucker, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 03/31/2001
* USD 2,799,820.00

A consortium of faculty at ten colleges and universities on Long Island, in
conjunction with the State University of New York (SUNY) system, is designing a
comprehensive, multi- faceted project to develop an environment for
interconnected learning in mathematics courses and in mathematically based
disciplines. The consortium is headquartered at the State University of New York
at Stony Brook. The other consortium institutions are: C. W. Post College,
Dowling College, Nassau Community College, New York Institute of Technology, St.
Joseph's College, Suffolk Community College, SUNY Agricultural and Technology
College at Farmingdale, SUNY College at Old Westbury, and CUNY-York College. The
model for interconnected learning developed on Long Island is being extended to
SUNY-wide implementation (64 institutions), and actively disseminated to other
institutions inside and outside New York state. The enhanced learning
environment has three components: (i) systemic change in instructional
practices, (ii) creation of new courses and curricular materials, and (iii)
development of human resources. The interconnections in this project involve:
Collaboration and cooperation in instruction among faculty across quantitative
disciplines; Regional interconnectivity of energized faculty at different types
of institutions; and The enhanced effect of combining change in modes of
instruction with curricular reform, educational technology, and coordination of
instruction among departments. Major project activities include: * Changing
modes of faculty instruction and student learning; * Day-to-day and general
coordination of instruction across the curriculum; * Extensive use of
educational technology across the curriculum; * Completing reform throughout the
calculus sequence and undertaking reform before calculus; * Reworking all
aspects of the curriculum for future mathematics teachers to reflect the needs
of the NCTM Standards; * Developing new multidiscipl inary courses; * Addressing
student needs in Advanced Technological Education programs such as engineering
and science technology through the development of appropriate mathematics
courses and other mathematically oriented materials; * Assisting groups that are
underrepresented in quantitative disciplines; * Developing unified courses in
statistics and other mathematical sciences topics now taught in multiple
departments. This project for systemic change involves an extensive
organizational structure with (I) departmental teams at each institution, (ii)
institutional coordinating committees; (iii) Consortium-wide disciplinary
committees; and (iv) task forces for specific projects such as development of
new courses.