* 9555023
* Biology in a Human Context:  A New Course for Non-Science   Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2000
* John Spille, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 07/31/2000
* USD 400,000.00

It is increasingly obvious that today's citizens must be biologically literate
to make informed decisions affecting us individually and collectively. Too often
they are not. The aim of our project is to address this challenge by improving
undergraduate biology education for non-science majors in two-year and four-year
colleges. This will first be effected in our own two and four year colleges, and
then expanded to encourage other colleges and universities by sharing what we
have learned and accomplished. The specific goal is to create, fully develop,
and implement a new and innovative year long introductory biology course for
non-science majors entitled: Biology in a Human Context. To meet this goal, an
already existing team of faculty from all six academic units at the University
of Cincinnati which offer biology courses are working with faculty and staff
from the University Center for Academic Technologies, the College of Education,
the Office of Writing Across the Curriculum, and the General Education Council.
The course will be taught by the biology faculty in their respective units, and
will fulfill both the Collegiate and General Education natural science
requirements. Included are four, two-year and two, four-year colleges involving
over 1,000 undergraduates annually, including many pre-service teachers who are
preparing to teach grades K-8. Pre-service secondary teachers who are also
biology majors will act as instructional assistants. The new course will be a
significant departure in both content and pedagogy from the existing traditional
one, which it will eventually replace if determined to be successful through
careful evaluation.