* 9555194
* The Role of Randomness in Science:  An Interdisciplinary    Course for Nonscience Majors
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1996,07/31/2002
* H. Eugene Stanley, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 07/31/2002
* USD 450,000.00

This proposal responds to the national need for interdisciplinary science
courses for nonscience students in universities, colleges, community colleges,
and adult education centers. The course will also be suitable for meeting the
science requirements of elementary/early childhood education majors.It is
proposed to create a new undergraduate interdisciplinary course in which
students explore the key role of randomness in biology, chemistry, physics, and
earth science. By placing the student in the position of an independent
investigator, it is hoped to convey a feeling for "what science really is" to
individuals who may never enter scientific careers themselves. A version of
these curriculum materials experiments, simulations, and data analysis software
has already been developed as individual modules for high school science
classes. These materials have been used successfully in many schools, including
suburban and urban high schools in the Boston area and the classes of 35
teachers trained in a two-week summer workshop. These materials have also been
tested as part of a course for liberal arts undergraduates and to augment
existing physics, chemistry, and biology courses. These modules must now be
recast into a coherent one-semester course that is sufficiently challenging to
liberal arts undergraduates. The significant feature of the high school version,
i.e., a balanced combination of hands- on activities, experiments, and use of
computers for modelling and data analysis, will be retained. However, new topics
will be incorporated, and those high school modules that are retained will be
upscaled in content, will include more challenging exercises, and will have a
wider scope of application. More algebra will be incorporated into all modules
to allow deeper presentations of physics, chemistry, and biology. Preservice
students will participate in the development of course materials. Training
workshops will assist interested faculty from other institu tions to incorporate
these materials into new or existing courses. In addition to conventional
dissemination channels, selected portions of the teaching materials will be made
available on the internet, along with student research reports, software, and
teacher advice. Students and their teachers can share ideas and participate in a
mutually supportive nationwide community.