* 9555205
* Using Computer Technology and Multimedia Materials to       Develop an Integrated Systems Approach to the Earth Sciences
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/1996,04/30/2000
* Eugene Bierly, American Geophysical Union
* Continuing Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 04/30/2000
* USD 175,000.00

A series of computer modules will be developed to simulate the physical,
chemical, and biological processes active in Earth systems in ways not possible
with traditional instructional methods. These computer models not only will
supplement classroom instruction, they will help students visualize dynamic
processes that occur over geologic time, three dimensional structures, and
geologic phenomena on scales ranging from "microns to mountains". The goals of
this multi-media project are to develop curriculum materials that: 1) focus on
the physical, chemical, and biological processes at work in Earth systems, 2)
incorporate multiple learning approaches (hands-on activities, visual aids,
three dimensional models, and simulations of systems), and 3) contain relevant
and integrative problem solving . These materials will be part of an integrated
curriculum package in which the computer modules will enhance the learning
process. This project is a collaborative effort sponsored by the American
Geophysical Union, with field testing of the materials at the University of
Arizona, Glendale Community College, and other institutional settings. The
project will affect 2000 liberal arts and education majors per year at these
institutions. A primary focus of this project will be the development of new
instructional materials that will provide future teachers with a solid knowledge
base as well as an appreciation for the conduct of scientific inquiry. A CD-ROM
of the computer exercises, laboratory manual, and instructor's manual will be
developed for national dissemination.