* 9555033
* Using Autonomous Robots and the Perception-Action Problem   to Enhance Undergraduate Technical Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1998
* Kenneth Livingston, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Myra O. Smith
* 01/31/1998
* USD 89,659.00

The primary goal of this project is to develop a series of laboratory exercises
that use the broad appeal of actual behaving robots to draw students into a
deeper understanding of several key technical concepts of importance in
cognitive science. These concepts include key ideas from computer programming,
hardware design (including A to D and D to A conversion and basic DC
electronics), as well as some of the more technical concepts in the study of
perception and action in biological systems. Both of these areas often seem
daunting to students precisely because they require levels of technical
sophistication beyond those reached by most beginning undergraduates at liberal
arts colleges. This project is designed to provide students with a simple,
autonomous robot and a user interface for communication with the robot. The
basic strategies for the design of the robot itself have been well explored by
others; the innovative feature of this project will be in the design of the
interface for communicating with the robot. This will be a multi-layered system
capable of taking the student from a very intuitive point-and-click interface
for programming the robot through layers of increasing technical depth and
culminating in an understanding of both the software and the hardware that
implement the student's instructions. The materials to be prepared by the
conclusion of this project will be designed in modular fashion so that they may
be incorporated into courses other than cognitive science courses. In
particular, psychology and computer science curricula at many institutions would
benefit from inclusion of this laboratory. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94) i v