* 9555059
* Implementing the Standards for Introductory College         Mathematics Before Calculus
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1999
* Darrell Abney, American Mathematical Association of Two-Year College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/1999
* USD 120,014.00

Standards for Introductory College Mathematics Before Calculus was developed
with funding from the National Science and the Exxon Education Foundations to
address the special needs of, establish standards for, and make recommendations
about introductory college mathematics below the level of calculus. The
standards provide goals for introductory college mathematics and guidelines for
selecting content and instructional strategies for accomplishing these goals.
The goal of the project proposed is to facilitate the implementation of the
Standards. This will be accomplished by holding four regional workshops. The
purposes of these workshops include the following: to inform a wider audience of
the reform issues and proposed patterns and models for improving curriculum and
instruction, to encourage the formation of consortia of two- and four- year
colleges and universities in each of several regions which will continue to work
on implementation projects to review current exemplary programs, materials, and
activities at the introductory college mathematics level as well as relevant
secondary programs based on the NCTM Standards to provide workshop participants
information on relevant research in mathematics education, effective approaches
to change, and suggestions for working with their administrations to provide a
meaningful mathematics education for their students. to prepare a compilation of
reports on the implementation projects begun as a result of the regional
workshops and to make this available to all members of the mathematics
community. Introductory college mathematics is the mathematics that most of our
students study. It is mathematics for the workforce, for future teachers and for
those who plan to major in mathematics or a mathematics-dependent field but who
enter college unprepared to study calculus. It is also the gate-keeper or
critical filter for the majority. Greater numbers of students are entering the
mathematics "pipeline " at some point in introductory college mathematics but no
more are continuing to calculus and higher level courses. Mathematics education
at this level must change. Providing faculty with development opportunities is
essential if change is to occur. The workshops proposed will enable faculty and
administrators to learn about successful programs that embody the Standards, to
have an opportunity to observe or experience the process of learning through
working in groups, in a laboratory setting, or using technology, or to engage in
any of the active learning processes recommended by the Standards.