* 9555158
* Development of an Activity-Based Introductory College       Physics Curriculum Using Calculator-Based Laboratories
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/1999
* C. Trecia Markes, University of Nebraska at Kearney
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1999
* USD 68,793.00

Studies have indicated that the lecture/laboratory method of teaching
introductory physics is not as effective as many teachers would like for it to
be. Some non-traditional methods have recently been developed in an attempt to
remedy this problem; however, they depend heavily on the use of computers. Many
colleges and universities have neither the funds nor the facilities for
computer-based programs. There is an even more pressing need for low-cost
innovation and new technology in high school physics classes. A comparable, but
less expensive, program is needed. The goal of this project is to improve the
quality of algebra-based introductory physics at the college level (and
eventually at the high school level) by providing a more cost-effective way of
utilizing the benefits of new technology within an activity-based format. This
project will develop and test the effectiveness of an activity-based approach to
teaching algebra-based introductory college physics that makes extensive use of
the new calculator-based laboratory (CBL) system from Texas Instruments to
collect and analyze data. This approach results in considerable cost savings
compared to computer implementation. For twelve computer-based stations the cost
is approximately $50,000 compared to about $10,000 for twelve calculator-based
stations. The results of the evaluation will show the effectiveness of the
activity-based CBL approach to teaching introductory algebra- based physics as
compared to the traditional lecture/laboratory method. These results will be
submitted for publication to appropriate periodicals. The written materials will
be published in workbook form. The software that is developed will be available
on the internet through Texas Instruments' archives and the department's WWW
site.