* 9555724
* EPWG:  Plugged In:  An Interactive Program Designed to      Advance the Scientific, Mathematic and Computer Literacy of Girls
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/1996,04/30/2000
* Lawrence Gray, Girl Scouts of Mid-Continent Council
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 04/30/2000
* USD 603,073.00

9555734 Frierson The Valencia BRIDGES program (Building and Replicating an
Innovative Demonstration Model to Facilitate Gender Equity in Science) will
focus on activities that increase students, faculty, and counselors
understanding of the relationships between gender and the study of science. The
project will increase the academic, retention, and completion success rates of
female community college students enrolled in science courses, develop a new
instructional approach to better prepare females for upper division study and
careers involving scientific research, and increase the percentage of female
students enrolled in science courses by helping female students make informed
career choices and better course selection decisions. Curricular changes include
a new lower division research methods course, enriched lower division biological
and physical science courses with strategies and content that are free of gender
bias, mentoring opportunities for students, hands-on internships in research
laboratories at the University of Florida, scientific and equity workshops
targeted at the female student population, new recruitment and promotion
materials to targeted students, and specialized counseling and mentoring
interactions which focus on personal, transfer, career, and financial aid
issues. Community college students are less likely to have research and
mentoring experiences that lead to research-based scientific careers. This
project will reform lower level science courses to be more accessible for all
students and will partner with the state land grant institution to prepare
community college students for university-level science courses. Mentorships
will act as an informal network to increase student success. *** 9555807 Ash The
Chabot Observatory &amp; Science Center (COSC) will develop an environmental
curriculum implementation project called FIRST: Female Involvement in Real
Science and Technology. This comprehensive, sequential scientific initiati ve
will be developed and produced in collaboration with local school districts,
colleges, museums, and professional societies. FIRST will involve students in
grades 5 through 8, and their teachers, administrators, care givers, and the
families. The participants will explore critical environmental issues,
envisioning themselves as effective shapers of their environment now and in the
future. The program will reach 60 elementary schools and 15 junior high/middle
schools, with over 35,000 students total, and 1,200 teachers will receive
training each year. This project unites and builds upon the systemic reform
begun by previous NSF- funded projects at Mills College and Department of
Energy-funded collaborative education programs. Interactive environmental
studies allow middle and high school students and their families to enrich their
knowledge by discussing real life science questions. Teaching and learning in
both formal and informal settings will help teachers, students, and community
members of an urban multilingual, multicultural population explore environmental
issues that effect their lives on a daily basis. *** 9554188 Austin This project
will determine how transactional writing, i.e., writing used to develop,
construct and express mathematical understanding, effects females' achievement
in, and attitude toward, their college and middle school mathematics classes.
The project will target three different groups of student participants in the
basic and intermediate college algebra sequence, as well as in one group of
participants in a three-year middle school mathematics sequence. College level
achievement will be measured by the Elementary Algebra Skills test; the Stanford
Achievement Test will measure achievement on the middle school level. Attitude
toward math will be measured by the Revised Mathematics Attitude Scale. Teams of
mathematics and English faculty investigators, and their female students, from a
large, urban two-year college and participating middle schools from a large,
urban public school system will create an academic community through the use of
the college's electronic bulletin board. The project will intervene at the two
critical points that hinder girls staying with and succeeding at mathematics and
hence, women successfully pursing mathematics-based careers and reaching higher
income levels: lack of achievement and poor attitude. Transactional writing can
be an instrument in the construction of knowledge and the reshaping of beliefs.
Writing about math helps students more easily learn mathematical concepts.
Students from middle schools and a community college will use a technique called
transactional writing to make them active learners. This, along with mentoring
and career counseling, will help them become more interesting in math and
science careers. *** 9555817 Fontaine Elizabeth City State University and five
rural, economically disadvantaged, predominately African-American public school
systems will implement a comprehensive regional project, entitled the Dr. C.D.
Turnage Science, Math and Technology Scholars Program for Girls. The goals are
to create positive and permanent changes in academic, social, and scientific
climates in order to allow the interest and aptitude women and girls display in
science, engineering, and mathematics (SEM) to flourish and to add to our
knowledge about interactions between gender and the SEM infrastructure. The
program will include: teachers, counselors, and central office staff, female
eighth graders, parents, business and industry. The project will train 300
educators, 200 teachers, 50 administrators, 25 counselors, and 25 central office
staff members in the areas of enhancing access to equity education and equitable
opportunities, gender equity expectations for student achievement, EQUALS
Training, multidisciplinary mathematics and science, constructivism in science
and mathematics, and alterna tive assessment. 240 eighth grade girls will
participate in after school clubs, a Saturday academy, and a summer enrichment
institute designed to enhance their education and careers in the fields of
science, mathematics, and technology. Parents will attend activities with their
daughters to provide input in their educational programs. A Scholars Program
manual will be made available to each state's division of science, math and
technology to help them replicate this program. A partnership among university,
public school and local businesses will work to create a positive climate for
mathematics and science learning among middle school students. Led by Elizabeth
City State University faculty, school personnel will examine how to deliver
equitable education to all students. This will result in more students enrolling
and succeeding in upper level math and science courses. *** 9555724 Kraemer Girl
Scouts in grades K-12 will learn and apply science, engineering, and mathematics
principles using interactive computer systems in conjunction with math and
science badge work. PLUGGED IN! is a collaboration of Ottawa University and Mid-
Continent Council of Girl Scouts. Girls will advance in computer and science
literacy by completing age-appropriate computer assisted modules to develop
skills in computer science, problem- solving, research and critical thinking;
explore Internet communication and international perspectives of scientific data
gathering; experiment with microscopes, telescopes, weather station output
technology, and computer- interfaced data analysis; explore careers in science,
engineering and mathematics through mentoring; and completing Girl Scout science
and math activities from mobile units, as well as at remote sites. This project
will serve as a model for Girl Scouts of the USA, which serves a membership of
3.5 million. Ho