* 9555682
* Evaluating the Application of Virtual Realities in          Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Christopher Dede, University of Houston - Downtown
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth VanderPutten
* 10/31/2000
* USD 1,440,827.00

9555682 Loftin The major emphasis of this project is optimizing, evaluating, and
porting to classroom settings the immersive environments already created. An
overarching theme in this ScienceSpace research is to develop a theory of how
multisensory "immersion" aids learning. These virtual worlds can simultaneously
provide learners with 3-D representations; multiple perspectives/frames of
reference; a multimodal interface; simultaneous visual, auditory, and haptic
feedback; and types of interaction unavailable in the real world (e.g.,seeing
through objects, flying like superman). With careful design, these capabilities
all can synthesize to create a profound sense of motivation and concentration
conducive to mastering complex, abstract material. Studying this new type of
learning experience to chart its strengths and its limits is an important
frontier for cognitive science research and constructivist pedagogy. All
ScienceSpace virtual worlds are built using a polygonal geometry. Colored,
shaded polygons and textures are used to produce detailed objects. These objects
are linked together and given behaviors through the use of NASA-developed
software that defines the virtual worlds; connects them to underlying physical
simulations; and handles graphics rendering, collision detection, and lighting
models. Interactivity is achieved through the linkage of external devices (e.g.,
head-mounted display, 3-D mouse). The investigators have developed extensive
assessment methodologies and instruments, literally hundreds of pages in length,
for studying how and what users learn in the worlds we have created. Researchers
are videotaping the hours of time spent with each subject, then studying these
records for additional insights. This careful evaluation strategy is generating
detailed data from which a comprehensive picture is being constructed of how
multisensory immersion can enhance learning, as well as how virtual reality's
usability can be enhanced. In addition, the strategies underlying these
assessment methodologies and instruments are generalizable to a wide range of
synthetic environments and virtual worlds. This project makes a significant
contribution to knowledge and learning for at least three reasons: * the next
step in the evolution of constructivist pedagogy is the usage of multisensory in
synthetic environments * virtual reality interfaces provide a unique testbed for
transferring to educational settings capabilities from data visualization,
sonification, etc.; and * learning through multisensory immersion could leverage
a huge installed base of videogame technology as a means for the delivery of
education outside of school settings. ***