* 9555035
* Enhancement of Geographic Information System (GIS) and      Remote Sensing Curriculum and Development of "Across        Discipline" Lab Exercise Manuals
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1999
* Francisco San Juan, Elizabeth City State University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 05/31/1999
* USD 50,166.00

The goal of the proposal is the enhancement and improvement of the recently
developed and approved Minor Program in Geographic Information System (GIS) and
Remote Sensing. This goal will be accomplished by course content changes and the
development of "across discipline" laboratory exercise manuals for the
introductory courses in GIS and Remote Sensing. Through enrollment in workshops,
conferences, and courses in GIS and Remote Sensing, the Principal Investigator
will be able to continually improve the course content and subsequent syllabi of
the two courses in GIS and one in Remote Sensing. Consultants with expertise in
these fields will be used as information source and as evaluators. The second
goal, the development of an "across discipline" laboratory exercise manual each
for Introduction to GIS and Introduction to Remote Sensing that includes
exercises and case studies for the various disciplines (the sciences, business,
sociology, criminal justice and others) targeted for these courses will be
accomplished through several means. The expertise gained in attending the above
workshops, conferences and courses will be an important resource that will be
taken advantage of. The use of consultants, and the review of existing
laboratory exercises from various institutions, and organizations such as the
U.S. Forest Service and the National Center for Geographic Information and
Analysis (NCGIA) will be some of the methods that will be used for producing
these lab manuals. The resulting curriculum and laboratory manuals will
hopefully be used by other institutions that have these general introductory
courses in their programs that attract students from various disciplines.