* 9555233
* Interactive Video Resources for Learning Statistics
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Paul Velleman, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Continuing grant
* James H. Lightbourne
* 06/30/1998
* USD 51,598.00

Through this project, interactive video resources are being developed to enhance
a package of multimedia resources for learning statistics. Key components of
this package, developed under our previous NSF funding, are already in place: An
Electronic Encyclopedia of Statistical Examples and Exercises (EESEE) and an on-
line Data Archive and Story Library (DASL). Students today are used to learning
about the world from television. News broadcasts routinely provide information
that is statistical in nature. Graduates of an introductory statistics course
should be able to assess the quality of such information. Unfortunately,
students are not used to thinking critically about what they learn from
television news or special broadcasts. Worse yet, there are essentially no
current systematically-assembled resources available to help students learn to
recognize and critique statistical issues in material that they see or hear. The
purpose of this project is to introduce current video clips from news shows or
special broadcasts on television to create a unique set of resources for
learning statistics. Closed captioning of the video quotes will support hearing-
impaired students, those for whom English is a second language, and others who
may prefer to read the narrative script. The methods and organization developed
for EESEE and DASL will allow quick development and implementation of methods
and standards for sifting through current events video in search of suitable
stories and data, and for integrating the results into EESEE and DASL.