* 9555408
* Mathematics and Undergraduate Education:  A New Framework   for Mutual Invigoration
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/1996,12/31/2005
* Daniel Maki, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2005
* USD 2,842,755.00

The project is an Indiana University System effort to restructure the ways in
which mathematics relates to the rest of the undergraduate curriculum. The
collaborating institutions are IU-Bloomington, IUPUI/Indiana University- Purdue
University Indianapolis, IU-East, IU-Kokomo, IU- Northwest, IU-South Bend, IU-
Southeast, and IUPU-Fort Wayne. The ultimate goal of the project is to create a
new framework for collaboration between mathematics departments and the
faculties of other disciplines, as well as a new culture among undergraduates
that will revitalize the learning of mathematics and reinvigorate undergraduate
education. There are three interrelated objectives: 1) To create
interdisciplinary courses in which students learn new mathematical ideas and
acquire new tools through contextualizes problem solving and which involve the
cooperation of the mathematics faculty with other faculty from a variety of
disciplines. 2) To change student attitudes toward mathematics by developing an
academic and social infrastructure to encourage all students to see the
relationship to other subjects, the real world, and their own ambitions and
goals; 3) To change the academic infrastructure to make permanent positive
changes in the teaching and learning of mathematics on the eight Indiana
University campuses and beyond.