* 9555162
* Creating and Evaluating Interactive Formal Courseware for   Mathematics and Computing
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/1996,12/31/1998
* Robert Constable, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 12/31/1998
* USD 130,000.00

This is a proposal to produce a new medium for teaching college-level
mathematics and computing. The basis for this medium is an on-line interactive
data base of hypertext integrated with formal reference material built with a
modern proof development system (Nuprl1). This hybrid of text and formal
material animated by a computer system provides an entirely new kind of
courseware; it also presents new opportunities for teaching those mathematical
problem solving skills found to be fundamental in the educational literature. By
connecting the new medium to the emerging information infrastructure, the
possibilities for educational innovation are unprecedented. Funding is requested
to create an example of this medium, explore its educational value, and
disseminate it. The material will be deployed first in discrete mathematics
courses (offered in Mathematics, Computer Science and Electrical Engineering
departments). In such courses these tools will enable more relevant and
effective teaching of computational mathematics and of the increasingly
sophisticated mathematics of software engineering--both critical to U. S.
technology. The proposal includes a detailed technical case for the feasibility
of what is proposed and a pedagogical case based on the extensive teaching
experience of the investigator and on prior experimental efforts with limited
examples of the medium. The introduction summarizes the entire case whereas the
subsequent two sections elaborate. Section two details the new research
technology, and section three details the pedagogical basis for the proposal.
Pronounced "new pearl".