* 9555013
* A Process-Oriented Approach to Component-Based Software     Engineering
* EHR,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1997
* John Lewis, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 12/31/1997
* USD 121,008.00

The focus of software engineering as we move towards the 21st Century is on
Integrated Software Development. Large, industrial strength, software systems
that students are increasingly required to work on involve systems integration,
interpretability, component-based software, software architectures, and
application frameworks. However, if we look at the software engineering course
contents at universities, a number of the items listed above are not covered in
an integrated manner. The few that are covered are dealt with in different
courses, and no attempt is made to provide integration of these concepts in a
cohesive and systematic manner. In this proposal, we focus on integrative
software development through a cohesive two course sequence for sophomore and
junior level CS students. There are two main innovative ideas that provide the
underlying foundation for our proposal: 1. Incorporation of the "Component Based
Software" development paradigm, and, 2. Incorporation of "Personal Software
Process (PSP) " concepts in an integrated, cohesive software engineering course
sequence. This project is the first to evolve the state of the art of software
engineering instruction simultaneously along the two most important contemporary
dimensions in software engineering. The PSP is particularly useful in attracting
minorities to this sequence of SE courses. The results of our project will be of
great interest to a wide audience in U.S. Universities looking to advance their
instructional paradigms in the software engineering area.