* 9555142
* Process Workshops for General Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,12/31/1998
* David Hanson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 12/31/1998
* USD 150,000.00

The process skills needed by students will be addressed by developing
innovations in both content and methodology to replace recitation sessions
associated with large lecture courses by process workshops, specifically for
introductory chemistry courses. The novel format involves process skills,
student participation, and active learning at the forefront. Students will work
in cooperative-learning groups on lessons that involve discovery learning,
critical thinking, problem solving, reporting, and assessment. Computer-based
technology will be used to provide personalized quizzes, and the workshop
lessons will be transported to a computer network, multi-media format. The
objectives of this project are to develop teaching strategies that support a
successful cooperative-learning environment, develop lessons that enhance the
understanding of concepts and promote learning and problem solving through the
use of higher order thinking skills, develop lessons incorporating
interdisciplinary and real world perspectives, enhance learning with computer-
driven technology, develop process skills in key areas, promote positive
attitudes toward chemistry and science, help students develop confidence in
their ability to learn and perform well, create a supportive social environment
that will encourage students to involve themselves seriously and successfully in
learning, and promote a culture where the university is a community of learners.
The transformation of recitation sessions into workshops introduces the missing
element in large lecture courses. The lectures structure information and make it
available to the students, and the workshops complement that component by
facilitating the construction of understanding, the application of knowledge,
and the development of process skills. Such development is extremely significant
because intro ductory chemistry courses involve large numbers of students early
in their college careers. Among other things, summer teaching and authoring
institutes will be held to excite the interest of others in this approach and to
share ideas on the methodology, strategies, and lesson content.