* 9555230
* The Bigger Picture:  A Project-Based Course on Environmental Geophysics and Geochemistry
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/2000
* Philippe Van Cappellen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jill K. Singer
* 10/31/2000
* USD 47,047.00

A project-based course in environmental field methods will be developed for
students in the second year of earth science programs, creating a new context
for students' first encounter with more complex, and in particular, more
quantitative science topics. By teaching geophysical and geochemical field
methods through a sequence of in-depth studies of current environmental
problems, presented in their historical and social context, we hope to keep
students, especially women and minorities, in the quantitative science pipeline
and make clear their own potential for such work. Students will work through
environmental "case-studies", or project modules, on topics such as salt water
intrusion in coastal Florida, uranium mining remediation in the Navajo Nation,
and eutrophication in a Georgia estuary. Students will process a subset of the
data, combine data sets, analyze and interpret the data, define limits to their
interpretations, and make and justify policy decisions. The course will be built
around six or seven sequential modules, with each module designed to follow a
classroom introduction to the relevant field methods. We plan to add supporting
materials to these modules so that they can also `e used as individual case
studies in environmental geology, hydrology, geophysics, and geochemistry
courses, and will be in a form that can be disseminated on the WWW, CD-rom, and
hardcopy. This work will be a collaborative effort by four faculty at disparate
institutions (College of William and Mary, Navajo Community College, and Georgia
Tech). Each of us will design one or two modules, working with undergraduates at
our home institutions. We will collaboratively review and revise each module as
we develop the course as a whole. Thus students will encounter a wider range of
both geographic settings and cultural contexts for environmental problems than
is currently found in qua ntitative geoscience courses.