* 9555181
* LDAPS:  An Innovative Solution for a Low-Cost, Exciting     Laboratory Class in Engineering
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/1996,06/30/1998
* Chris Rogers, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Lee Zia
* 06/30/1998
* USD 99,705.00

The goal of this project is to develop a curriculum for engineering students and
liberal arts majors on laboratory experimentation. The curriculum spans two
courses: an introductory class geared for liberal arts students (mainly pre-
service teachers engaged in teacher preparation programs) and first-year
engineers, and a required junior-level mechanical engineering course. In the
introductory course, students concentrate on simple experimentation techniques,
learning how to interface a computer to an experiment and how to do simple
statistical analysis of the data. Students in the upper-level course learn the
electronics behind the data acquisition systems, learn more in-depth signal
processing, and work on oral and written skills. The curriculum is based on the
LDAPS, or LegoTM Data Acquisition and Prototyping System, which is a pedagogical
technique originally developed for K-6 science education. The LDAP System uses
LegoTM building blocks and a LabVIEWTM computer interface to provide the tools
for students to design, build, instrument, and execute their own experiments.
The LegoTM blocks give the student the freedom in designing the experimental
setup and LabVIEWTM gives the signal processing freedom needed to effectively
interrogate the data. For example, students learned advanced digital filtering
techniques by building a LegoTM gray-scale scanner and active control through
building a car which tries to drive around obstacles. This pedagogical technique
was successfully implemented in a pilot study, with excellent student reviews.