* 9555677
* Project LIFE:  A Professional Development Model for Systemic Reform in Science Education
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/1996,08/31/2001
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 08/31/2001
* USD 1,164,378.00

9555677 Radford Project Life focuses on the rural and poor in Arkansas,
Louisiana, and Texas, and is a professional development program for middle
grades and high school teachers of life sciences, focuses on ecology,
environmental science, and organismal biology. The 4-year program is designed to
provide 124 hours per teacher of inservice training in science content and
reform methodologies to a total of 192 teachers in 3 locations. Sixty of the
teachers and 6 interns will receive an additional 90 hours of additional
leadership training to prepare them to become workshop leaders and change
agents. The project strives to develop: teachers sufficiently to enhance their
understanding of science concepts and inquiry pedagogical skills. Teachers have
strong administrative support for systemic change, and resources that allow
local systems to independently continue the systemic change begun by the
project. The Project will purchase kit materials with which to provide
professional development. Equally important however, that teachers will be
sufficiently enhanced to transport science process skills across various
disciplines and concepts. This proposal is a request to clone what the PI's
claim is a successful TE project. Scientists and science educators (interns)
will be recruited, and paid a summer stipend, to become part of a team - the
members of which are classroom teachers. The interns will participate in summer
workshops alongside classroom teachers. Efforts will be made to have at least
two teachers from each participating school work as a team and collaborate on
the sharing of ideas and site based problem-solving. The rationale for
disseminating this project in the three targeted states based on their rural
similarity to the original Louisiana site out of which outcomes were successful
and funded by LaSIP. The participating SSI's support this project. They have not
however, offered cash.