* 9555062
* Addressing Software's Chronic Crisis in the Undergraduate   Computer Science Curriculum
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/1996,06/30/1999
* Bruce Weide, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Michael C. Mulder
* 06/30/1999
* USD 124,989.00

Since its inception, the software industry has languished in a perpetual state
of crisis. Academic computer science departments have contributed to this by
largely failing in their responsibility to appropriately educate and prepare
software professionals. We propose to address this failure with the following
three-pronged effort: A comprehensive and integrated four-semester software-
development curriculum will be created and installed within the undergraduate
computer science programs at The Ohio State University and at West Virginia
University. Fundamental to this curriculum is the guiding philosophy that
software is properly conceptualized and constructed in terms of carefully
engineered reusable software components. A software composition workbench,
consisting of an integrated set of software tools, will be developed. The
workbench will be capable of guiding and supporting students and software
developers in their use and application of the methodologies taught in the
software development curriculum. The proposed curriculum and workbench will be
rigorously evaluated through content-oriented, performance- oriented, and
attitude-oriented studies. Central to this effort will be development of
appropriate, longitudinal evaluation instruments for each of the courses in the
curriculum and for the workbench. The goal of this project is to create a system
capable of producing software professionals with greater awareness and
understanding of the technical issues faced by the software industry, and with
measurably better software design and development skills.