* 9555404
* Multimedia Mathematics:  Across the Curriculum and Across   the Nation
* EDU,DUE
* 09/15/1996,01/31/2003
* Steven Dunbar, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Lee Zia
* 01/31/2003
* USD 966,394.00

The goal of this consortium project led by the University of Nebraska and
Oklahoma State University is to integrate the teaching and learning of
mathematics and its applications in science, engineering, and quantitative
subjects. This will be accomplished through a modern curriculum that provides
students with a holistic view of mathematical science coherently tying together
fundamental concepts from many disciplines. A critical success factor is a
communications structure bringing together educators from many disciplines to
share ideas, goals, and strategies. The project will also put in place services
and materials that encourage experimentation with and development of curricular
innovations as well as new modes of presentation. From the outset the program
will focus on the needs of many students from many disciplines and backgrounds.
An especially important group will be those students preparing for careers in
K-12 teaching. The implementation plan provides for students who change majors
or institutions, and it will be easily adaptable to other colleges and
universities. The primary product of the Oklahoma-Nebraska Consortium will be an
enduring integrated core math, science and engineering curriculum based on a
collection of cross-curricular, multimedia mathematics learning module clusters.
Each module would be a topic or application in itself, but it would also be part
of a larger vertical and horizontal structure. The idea is to draw together and
focus horizontally on fundamental concepts from other disciplines that fit
naturally with fundamental mathematics concepts learned at the same time.
Vertically, students will revisit topics on more than one occasion and in more
than one course, showing the power of mathematics as it unfolds. Thus in a given
course, the student will witness several applications of a single mathematical
idea, but over several years he or she will also encounter a particular
application several times with increasing mathematical sophistication. This
structure wil l provide motivation for mathematical development, an appreciation
for topics students are currently studying, and an understanding of how
fundamental ideas from many disciplines fit together. Multimedia, defined
broadly to include computer algebra, graphing software, graphing calculators,
television, interactive digital video, CD-ROMs, and Internet connections serves
both as a device for focusing attention on changes that are needed and as a
vehicle for making them. The Consortium schools will combine their strengths in
this area throughout the program to establish new and more effective
presentations and expand the range of applications that are accessible to
students.