* 9555721
* EPWG: Geology In A Social and Historical Context:           Preforming Earth Science Education
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/1996,07/31/2001
* Margaret Rees, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Margrete S. Klein
* 07/31/2001
* USD 659,426.00

9555721 Rees This project is designed to transform both earth science courses
and pedagogy for the teaching of the social science of geolog" will be developed
and implemented. The new courses and pedagogy will help to reform the earth
science courses, teaching methods, and the classroom environment to make science
inviting for traditionally marginalized students, particularly women; place the
study of earth systems in a social and historical context; examine the race,
class, and gender dynamics that shape scientific knowledge; illuminate the
relationship between science, politics, and social policy; develop truly
interdisciplinary social science of geology courses by incorporating the
knowledge of the natural and social sciences. The goals of the reformed
curricula and pedagogy are to (1) attract and retain underrepresented groups m
earth science programs, (2) place the study of earth systems in a social and
historical context from high school through university, (3) enhance both
educators' and students' understanding( of natural and social systems and their
inter-relatedness and (4) increase social and scientific literacy. New resources
will be incorporated into newly created thematic modules that will illuminate
natural and social systems and their inter-relatedness; examine the race, class,
and gender dimensions of scientific inquiry and knowledge; and stimulate
students to apply their personal knowledge of the natural and social sciences to
local and environmental issues and policy making endeavors. The modules will
contain pedagogical recommendations and suggestions; suggested readings,
laboratory exercises, community-based activities, and field-trip localities; and
extensive resource guides. In order to recruit and retain more women to science
disciplines, new classroom resources and teaching methods should be used. This
project will enhance the teaching of earth sciences by looking at the
interelatedness of nature and society and at the ways science is rel evant to
the lives of a diverse student population. Teaching materials and plans will
help high school, community college, and university faculty improve the content
of their courses. ***