* 9555215
* "Let There Be Light!"  Introductory Experiments with        Electric and Magnetic Fields
* EHR,DUE
* 02/15/1996,01/31/1999
* Peter Heller, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 01/31/1999
* USD 120,033.00

"Let There Be Light!" Introductory experiments with Electric and Magnetic Fields
Problem: Students in the introductory calculus-based physics course have great
difficulty with the concepts of electric and magnetic fields, underlying the
nature of light. Objectives: Develop new laboratory and "corridor" experiments
to illustrate fundamental principles of electromagnetism, and in this context,
provide an integrated introduction to electrical measurements and
instrumentation. Methods: Based on hundreds of student interviews, prepare
experiments and write accompanying materials rich in questions for students.
Prepare illustrative video clips. Collaboration of Miami University and Brandeis
University capitalizes on the different student environments to develop
materials suited for many types of institutions. Significance/impact: Active
learning through hands-on experience gives students real understanding of
physics universally covered in the introductory course. Evaluation: by visits
from external reviewers, by comparing pilot sections with traditional lab
sections, and by Socratic questioning of individual students. Dissemination:
Scholarly publication and presentations. Workshops. Disseminable products
include written materials for students and faculty, plus video clips.