* 9555032
* Design First:  A Multimedia Freshman Engineering Design     Experience
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/1996,01/31/1998
* John Black, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel B. Hodge
* 01/31/1998
* USD 99,329.00

A substantial restructuring of the required first year "Introduction to
Engineering" course at Columbia University is proposed that emphasizes
multimedia design case studies and projects. Such restructuring is needed to
improve the computer, organizational, teamwork, and design skills taught in the
course and also to attract, motivate, and retain as many students as possible.
This proposal adds three important and innovative features to the notable
restructuring efforts at other institutions. First, the course and the design
problems will be presented and executed in a virtual, multimedia environment.
Although significant work has been done to reformulate the freshman design
experience and to develop multimedia tools, these two thrusts have not
previously been combined into a single sustained effort. We believe this
combined effort will improve the content and portability of the course. We also
believe this is how design needs to be and eventually will be taught. Second,
both formative and summative evaluations will be conducted by experienced
professionals from the Institute for Learning Technologies at Columbia's
Teachers College as an integral part of the development and assessment of the
course. This activity will ensure that the multimedia tools developed are
effective educational tools. Third, the social and historical aspects of the art
of engineering design will be contextualized through extensive multimedia case
studies. This third aspect of the proposal will give students a meaningful
exposure to real-world, interdisciplinary design problems that is often
neglected in engineering curricula and may be instrumental in attracting non-
engineering students to the course. This is a joint proposal between Columbia's
School of Engineering and Applied Science and Columbia's Teachers College that
gives equal weight to curriculum development and assessment. The curriculum and
multimedia tools will be incorporated, tested, and evaluated in the first year
and a half at Columbia and in the second and third years at several other
institutions. Drexel University has already committed itself to the project and
further commitments are being sought. NSF FORM 1358 (1/94)