* 9555095
* Teaching Neuroscience in the Laboratory
* EHR,DUE
* 02/01/1996,01/31/2000
* Bruce Johnson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Herbert Levitan
* 01/31/2000
* USD 259,163.00

Neurobiology is an emerging interdisciplinary study that attracts world-wide
attention in popular media. There is genuine curiosity abroad to understand the
dynamic linkage between one's brain and one's behavior that should be part of
the education, of not only scientists, but the lay public. Yet the teaching of
neurobiology, especially in a laboratory setting, has badly lagged the demand.
In part, this is because of the lack of availability of "teacher friendly"
instructional exercises as well as easy availability of ethically and
environmentally acceptable experimental animals. This project addresses these
problems by providing teachers of physiology, neuroscience, and introductory
biology, at the college and the high school level, with a new curriculum of
laboratory exercises in neuroscience. We are teaching teachers how to use these
exercises in their own labs by: (1) conducting a series of summer workshops in
our teaching laboratory at Cornell; (2) producing an instructional videotape of
our teaching exercises, aimed at teachers; and (3) setting-up an electronic
bulletin-board service that permits us to stay in close contact with any teacher
who is using or wants to use our teaching modules in his/her own laboratory
instruction. Our teaching labs are based on an integrated set of classroom-
tested labs that use the crayfish as the experimental animal. The crayfish is
ideal because it is very hardy and easy to dissect. In terms of laboratory
logistics, it is cheap, commercial, and easy to maintain. Pedagogically, the
crayfish is ideal because it permits the instructor to select from simple lab
exercises dealing with fundamental cellular properties of neural tissue to
intellectually stimulating and challenging exercises that deal with the
integrative properties of neural networks, synaptic computations, and learning
and memory. These teaching modules thus cover basic neuronal properties, such as
the ionic basis of bioelectric potentials to synaptic transfusion to elementary
forms of learning and synaptic plasticity. They take advantage of the fact of
the unity of neural function, the neuronal computations that lead to behavioral
change are similar, whether occurring in the brain of a crayfish or a college
freshman. The crayfish is therefore a suitable replacement for vertebrate
preparations, which are becoming controversial as laboratory subjects. This
project not only provides teachers with a set of conceptually-rich yet
technically simple lab exercises, but it provides direct instruction to
relatively inexperienced teachers via a "see and do" methodology. The proposal
has two parts. First, a hands-on workshop for laboratory instructors at Cornell.
Second, and very importantly, an instructional videotape for instructors showing
step-by-step how to make each preparation is being produced. The intended target
of these exercises include liberal arts college and university teachers, but our
experience tells us that high-school teachers are perfectly capable of learning
and employing these labs in their classes, and the workshop provides
opportunities for them, as well. In summary, this proposal seeks to disseminate
a thoroughly tested set of laboratory teaching exercises, proven to be
stimulating to undergraduate students in many settings, to any teacher who wants
to bring neuroscience content into his/her laboratory.