* 9555211
* AT-SLICE:  Advanced Technologies and Simulations for        Learning about Interactions in Complex Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/1996,08/31/2000
* Michael Ort, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Myles Boylan
* 08/31/2000
* USD 456,547.00

We recognize systemic science education problems: The majority of science
courses, grades K-16, offer only the "products" of science and sparse teaching
of the "process" of doing science. Due to this emphasis on products, college
introductory science courses often fail to retain students in science,
mathematics, and engineering majors, and fail in pre-service training for
teachers, and minority populations. Systematic change is problematic. The
different academic standards in different schools, colleges, and universities
prohibit real articulation among faculty at these different levels and places,
and there are few real systemic approaches to curriculum that are empirically
derived or driven. Our objective is to provide a multi-institutional process of
empirically driven curriculum development that emphasizes real-world scenarios
in environmental science. We will develop three research- rich, inquiry-based
courses and laboratories that will help students develop abilities to identify
environmental problems, to design and implement research to study environmental
problems, to develop functional literacy in the analysis and interpretation of
data, to attain functional literacy in the application and use of advanced
technologies, and to draft technical reports. These courses and laboratories are
based on societal environmental focal points: Nuclear Waste Storage, Coal Power
Plants, and Solid Waste Landfills. Our consortium of five institutions will form
an Interdisciplinary Faculty Institute to review and implement the simulations.
The Institute would create an across-institution infrastructure of professional
development and collaboration through curriculum seminars and practical
workshops for faculty. Our use of an outside review panel of industry and
government content experts grounds these courses in the real world processes,
and the model we will develop and quantify will be used at other institutions,
especially those with populations o f native Americans and hispanic-Americans.