* 9555216
* Proposal to Develop and Implement a Model Integrated        Introductory Science Course
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/1996,05/31/1998
* A.Tyrone Harrison, Westminster College of Salt Lake City
* Standard Grant
* David W. Mogk
* 05/31/1998
* USD 100,000.00

Science education faces a number of problems today: separating science into
discrete disciplines; mixing majors and non-majors in the same courses; creating
an adversarial, competitive climate which repels minority, female, and learning
disabled students; ignoring the need for special science preparation for
elementary education majors; failing to teach science skills and processes
directly; and passive lecture/demonstration teaching without students
experiencing much "real" science. The Natural World: Explorations in Science--an
introductory, integrated science course for non-science and elementary education
majors is laboratory-based and experientaly driven. It is designed around four
major concepts matter and energy, change and constancy, diversity and order, and
interactions with the following goals: To provide broad, integrated science
knowledge To foster the development of effective process learning skills in
science To prepare future elementary teachers * To create a continuing interest
in science Methods include extensive writing, concept mapping, guided discovery
laboratory experiences, reading in the history of science and popular journals,
collaborative teams, library/Internet research, quantifying, computer modeling,
problem solving, and critical thinking skills. Collaborations include teaming
physics, chemistry, and biology faculty and a writing specialist to create the
course with university science education faculty for project evaluation. The
integrated course may serve as a model for introductory science courses at
similar small colleges and teacher preparation institutions. Researchers plan to
write articles, make presentations, and collaborate on producing the guided
discovery materials for publication.