* 9555712
* The Cheche Konnen Center For Science Education Reform For   Language Minority Students, K-8
* EHR,DRL
* 04/15/1996,09/30/2003
* Beth Warren, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Julia Clark
* 09/30/2003
* USD 3,120,036.00

9555712 Rosebery TERC in collaboration with 13 school districts nationwide has
created the Cheche Konnen Center for Science Education Reform, The mission is to
spearhead a five-year national reform initiative in K-8 science education for
students whose first language is not English. The Center will be built on a
strong foundation of prior research and development: specifically, TERC's well-
known work on inquiry-based approaches to teaching science to language minority
students and teacher professional development, and their long record of
innovation in science and mathematics education. Language minority students
represent the fastest growing segment of the school age population and typically
receive an impoverished education in science. Science teachers too often have
little or no background in understanding issues of cultural and linguistic
diversity in relation to science teaching. With these concerns in mind, the
Center will focus on teacher professional development that integrates inquiry
and reflection on science, teaching and learning, culture and language. The
Center's work will emphasize technical support to school districts that seek to
include language minority students in their ongoing reform efforts, a "national
conversation" on issues of equity in science education reform, and development
of products, practices and knowledge to support fulfillment of the Center's
mission. The products will include articles, videos, and other professional
development materials. The outcomes of the Center's work will be: long-term,
inquiry-based professional development programs that are an ongoing, integral
part of teachers' professional work; vastly improved opportunities for language
minority children to learn science; an informed nation conversation on education
policy on equity in science education; and human, material and conceptual
resources to support districts nationwide that are engaged in reforming science
education for language minority students.