* 9555414
* Project Inter-Math
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/1996,01/31/2003
* Frank Giordano, Consortium For Mathematics & Its Applications Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 01/31/2003
* USD 2,050,001.00

The nation's undergraduate education system has often labeled the mathematics
curriculum as a "filter" that removes many motivated and talented students from
further study in science, engineering, and technology. At the institutional
level, this filter is built by an interdisciplinary culture with poor
communications among departments, lack of support for curricular activity,
different and distinct expectations of the curriculum, and lack of plans for
student growth and learning across the curriculum. To transform the ''filter''
into a "pump', for student success, a change in the culture of the mathematics,
science, and engineering teaching communities must occur. The activities in this
project which are affecting the necessary change build on successes of schools
comprising the consortium. Workshops are being conducted that enable faculty to
use projects, design curricula, model student growth, and present "lively"
pedagogy. The project is developing programs where students learn skills in
computing, writing, reasoning, and problem solving. The project vision is to
establish environments conducive to interdisciplinary cooperation for designing
and presenting instruction in all "partner" disciplines. Interdisciplinary
projects are being used as a vehicle to move in stages from disconnected
mathematics courses to a fully integrated experience in all partner disciplines.
Teams at each institution consisting of faculty from several disciplines are
collaborating to develop course materials, termed Interdisciplinary Lively
Applications (ILAP). A core set of ILAP material has already been developed
primarily at West Point and implemented over the past several years. Several
types of ILAPs are envisioned beginning with the basic ILAP Project and
culminating in ILAP Carry-Through Projects. The consortium is representative of
all types of the nation's undergraduate institutions: two-year colleges, liberal
arts colleges, engineering schools, historically black colleges, and research
universities . Through these joint efforts of the institutions involved, the
project is affecting thousands of undergraduate students by making a lasting
cultural change through national dissemination of our activities. The ultimate
goal is to develop an interdisciplinary culture that acts like a "pump" sending
students into mathematics, science, and engineering.