* 9555048
* Optics and Photonics for the 21st Century                   An Innovative Interdisciplinary Modular Laboratory          Curriculum
* EHR,DUE
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1999
* A. James Mallmann, Milwaukee School of Engineering
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/1999
* USD 130,000.00

Photonics is the use of photons to work with or replace electrons in
communications, computing, control, imaging, and information processing.
Milwaukee School of Engineering has initiated a significant program to
incorporate the principles and applications of modern optics and photonics into
the introductory and intermediate physics and engineering courses. An important
part of this program is the continuing development of new laboratories in
Undergraduate Applied Optics, Photonics and Sensors, and High Speed Vidography.
The main goal of the proposed curricular development program will be the
creation of a set of modern optics and photonics laboratory Modules for use in
undergraduate physics and engineering programs. Modules will be developed for 20
topics including beam splitters, Fabry-Perot interferometers, fiber optics,
speckle optics, high speed videography, and spatial ffltering. Some of these
modules will include associated computer-multimedia software packages. The
modules will be designed to stimulate students' enthusiasm and interest and to
optimize their conceptual understanding of the most important and fundamental
concepts in optics and photonics. In accord with the most recent pedagogical
research, the concepts will not only be embedded in the frameworks of basic
principles and history, but will also give students practical experience with
the tools and apparatus of modern optics and photonics. The design and
evaluation of the modules will be accomplished by an interdisciplinary team of
professors and selected students with advice and guidance from Professor Arthur
Western of Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology and Professor David Van Baak of
Calvin College. After a period of testing and revision, the modules will be used
in Undergraduate Faculty Enhancement programs that we will offer as part of our
dissemination plan. Later we will use the modules in outreach programs for pre-
college teachers and for engineers from industry. The modula r approach will
provide the flexibility and adaptability that should ensure use of the modules
by a wide variety of institutions, since each school may incorporate one or more
modules into their existing courses, or may use a collection of modules as
substrates to develop their own new courses.