* 9555644
* Teaching for Mathematics Learning:  K-12 Teacher Enhancement in Jones County, North Carolina
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/1996,10/31/2002
* Lee Stiff, Jones County Schools
* Continuing grant
* diane spresser
* 10/31/2002
* USD 518,583.00

9555644 Sermon-Boyd In a three-and-a-half-year project which builds on a prior
planning grant, Jones County Schools (NC) targets all 85 teachers of mathematics
and mathematics-related disciplines in grades K-12 throughout the school
district in a teacher enhancement program designed to improve their mathematical
content and pedagogical knowledge. With assistance and support from the North
Carolina Department of Public Instruction, the project assists teachers and
administrators (a) to develop a shared vision of mathematics learning that
empowers students in making sense of mathematics, (b) to become knowledgeable
about instructional materials developed by the NSF curriculum development
projects, (c) to build networking in the district to sustain improvements in
mathematics instruction, and (d) to build a cadre of lead teachers to provide
ongoing support for the network. During the first two years of the project, the
focus is on increasing teachers' content and pedagogical knowledge and on
familiarizing all teachers with some of the major curriculum projects supported
by NSF. During 1997-98, teachers actually teach selected units from 2-4
curriculum projects and prepare reflection papers of their successes with the
units, prior to selecting new instructional materials for district adoption
during late winter 1998. During the third year, a group of fifteen lead teachers
receives additional enhancement on the curriculum projects and on leadership.
During the final half year, the lead teachers receive continued support and
project evaluation is completed. Over the life of the project, the fifteen lead
teachers receive 423 hours of teacher enhancement and all other mathematics
teachers receive 303 hours. An additional ten teachers of mathematics-related
disciplines receive 147 hours of professional development. Project evaluation
addresses several key indicators of mathematics instruction: (a) teachers'
knowledge, attitudes, and beliefs about mathematics content and pedagogy, (b )
nature of the mathematics instruction delivered to the students, (c) quality of
workshop sessions, (d) student performance, and (e) view of parents and school
administrators about mathematics instruction in Jones County. Project partners
with the Jones County Schools are the North Carolina Department of Public
Instruction, Math Education Network, the North Carolina Science and Mathematics
Alliance, and the North Carolina SSI. Estimated cost-sharing from partners
represents 59% of the NSF award amount.