* 9555817
* EPWG:  The Turnage Science, Math and Technology             Scholars Program
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/1996,09/30/2003
* Shirley Turnage, Elizabeth City State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jolene Jesse
* 09/30/2003
* USD 888,916.00

9555817 Fontaine Elizabeth City State University and five rural, economically
disadvantaged, predominately African-American public school systems will
implement a comprehensive regional project, entitled the Dr. C.D. Turnage
Science, Math and Technology Scholars Program for Girls. The goals are to create
positive and permanent changes in academic, social, and scientific climates in
order to allow the interest and aptitude women and girls display in science,
engineering, and mathematics (SEM) to flourish and to add to our knowledge about
interactions between gender and the SEM infrastructure. The program will
include: teachers, counselors, and central office staff, female eighth graders,
parents, business and industry. The project will train 300 educators, 200
teachers, 50 administrators, 25 counselors, and 25 central office staff members
in the areas of enhancing access to equity education and equitable
opportunities, gender equity expectations for student achievement, EQUALS
Training, multidisciplinary mathematics and science, constructivism in science
and mathematics, and alternative assessment. 240 eighth grade girls will
participate in after school clubs, a Saturday academy, and a summer enrichment
institute designed to enhance their education and careers in the fields of
science, mathematics, and technology. Parents will attend activities with their
daughters to provide input in their educational programs. A Scholars Program
manual will be made available to each state's division of science, math and
technology to help them replicate this program. A partnership among university,
public school and local businesses will work to create a positive climate for
mathematics and science learning among middle school students. Led by Elizabeth
City State University faculty, school personnel will examine how to deliver
equitable education to all students. This will result in more students enrolling
and succeeding in upper level math and science courses. ***