* 9555753
* Engineering Concepts For The High School Classroom          Replication Project: Partners For Engineering Problem       Solving
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/1996,08/31/2000
* John Collier, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Sue Kemnitzer
* 08/31/2000
* USD 367,770.00

9555753 Muller The proposal seeks to implement, at 6-8 other engineering
schools, the highly successful problem-solving teaches training model developed
at Thayer School of Engineering at Dartmouth College. We propose an institute
for the summer of 1997 to introduce engineering faculty and others to the
Engineering Problem-Solving concepts and their applications to high school
instruction. Each team will include 1-2 engineering faculty members, 1-2 high
school teachers who have participated in past workshops; other team members
might include engineers working in industry and/or administrators from the
engineering school who would be involved in designing and/or operations of the
replication programs. All tea members of each team will come from the same
geographic area, and they will be recruited as team, with the explicit
understanding that they are interested in and committed to replicating the
institute (with appropriate adaptations for individual site locations and
considerations). The institute will not only offer experiential learning of the
methods, but will provide an intensive focus on developing plans for
replication, so that participants will leave with an outline of expectations for
the team as a whole, for individual team members, and specifications for the
technical assistance they would like from Thayer School as they proceed to
develop their replications. Following the institute technical assistance will be
available to those undertaking the replications, and their progress will be
tracked, with interventions as needed to assist the development of the
replications. We will establish electronic communications (listservs, web pages)
to allow participants readily to share their progress, request information, ask
questions, etc. ***