* 9558439
* NSF Young Investigator Award
* BIO,MCB
* 09/01/1995,08/31/1998
* Alexandra Newton, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Marcia Steinberg
* 08/31/1998
* USD 130,000.00

9558439 Newton Protein kinase C transduces signals that promote phospholipid
hydrolysis. Binding of a wide variety of signals to cell surface receptors
results in phospholipase C-catalyzed hydrolysis of phosphatidylinositol
bisphosphate, producing the water soluble head-group, inositol trisphosphate,
and the lipid backbone, diacylglycerol. Both molecules are critical second
messengers in the protein kinase C signalling pathway. Inositol trisphosphate
mobilizes intracellular Ca2+ thus causing protein kinase C, which is present in
the cytosol under resting conditions, to bind to the plasma membrane.
Diacylglycerol activates the kinase; activity also requires the amino
phospholipid, phosphatidylserine. The long-term objective of the proposed
research is to understand the mechanism of action of protein kinase C.
Specifically, the role of diayclglycerol in regulating the enzyme will be
addressed. The hypotheses that 1) diacylglycerol targets protein kinase C to the
plasma membrane, and 2) diacylglycerol is an allosteric activator of the kinase
will be tested. %%% The effect of diacylglycaerol on the protein kinase C
membrane interaction, and on the conformation of protein kinase C, will be
addressed with the aim of understanding how this second messenger regulates the
structure and function of protein kinase C, and in turn, signal transduction.
***