* 9560939
* SBIR PHASE I:  Mass Production of Periclinal Chimeric       Potatoes Containing New Multigenic Traits for Pest          Resistance
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Horia Groza, Tissue-Grown Corporation
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 68,442.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses the scale up
of a novel technology, the generation of periclinal chimeras. Tissue-Grown
Corporation scientists have developed a novel method for combining the best
characteristics of two varieties of potato by forming chimeras. The meristems of
dicotyledous plants are organized into three distinct cell layers. Established
in meristems, cell layers have set patterns of division and maintain their
distinctive organization throughout the plant. Chimeric plants are composed of
cell layers from different parents. Chimeras offer the ability to work with a
much broader choice of genetic donor germplasm in new variety development.
Chimeras provide a means for rapid incorporation of wild species epidermal
traits onto commercial varieties, without changing the tuber characteristics of
the original varieties. Breeders must use many generations of backcrossing, and
must often begin with somatic hybrids from protoplast fusion, in order to bring
a wild species gene into a commercial potato germplasm. Wild species contain a
wealth of disease resistance genes and genes of horticultural interest, but they
also come with a heavy burden of genes detrimental to potato tuber production,
such as delayed tuber set, odd colors, shapes and sizes of tubers, and excessive
tuber glycoalkaloids. Using chimeras, many well-established and valuable
varieties can be enhanced without disturbing or damaging their primary tuber
traits. This research is directed toward the development of methods for the mass
production of new potato varieties. The specific germplasm targets would combine
insect resistance from the wild Solanum species, S. berthaltii and the tuber
qualities of a commercial potato variety, cv. Shepody. If successful this would
result in rapid generation of new potato varieties that can take advantage of
wild germplasm traits for pest resistance without the undesirable wild tuber
traits. Pest resistance is often a multigenic trait with consequently complex
inheritance patterns. Candidates for improvement include fresh market (table
stock) as well as frozen and processed products (French fries, chips and
dehydrated products). Successful market penetration could generate annual
revenues exceeding $30 million.