* 9560712
* SBIR Phase I:  Interfacial Engineering for Advanced Solid   State Electronic Devices
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Tapesh Yadav, Nanomaterials Research LLC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-60712 Yadav This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses
on developing significantly better varistors by the engineering of interfaces.
The need for better varistors originates from the fact that almost all
electronic devices are subject to noise and high voltage surges from IC
integration, switching or electrostatic discharge. These surges and noises can
severely affect the performance of electrical and electronic devices. Varistors
based on metal oxides are commonly used to minimize this problem. However,
current metal oxide varistor device technology is not well suited for rapid
response, low voltages and high frequency applications. This program seeks to
direct efforts to remedy this. The proposed technical approach is to synthesize
and fabricate varistors from materials with very large interfacial area. The
resultant varistors are expected to be dramatically smaller, lighter, and yet
feature higher non-linear coefficient, lower leakage current, and higher
critical electric field values. These advantages are expected from increased
interfacial area, homogeneity, increased density, and potential quantum
confinement effects. During Phase I, the proof-of-concept will be established.
Phase II will develop, optimize and field test the varistors, and
commercialization of the devices will occur during Phase III. Proposed varistor
technology can enable system miniaturization without sacrificing electronic
component performance. Applications include varistors for protecting integrated
LSIs, ICs, telecommunications equipment, electric power and transmission
management, and for devices to dramatically improve reliability of energy and
automotive electronics.