* 9560603
* SBIR PHASE I: Plant-Assisted Removal of Chelated Heavy      Metals and Radionuclides from Water
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Slavik Dushenkov, Phytotech Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 69,109.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project will explore the use of
terrestrial plants for the removal of chelated heavy metals and radionuclides
from contaminated water streams. Heavy metal pollution of water is a major
environmental problem facing the modern world. Removing chelated heavy metals
and radionuclides in water is one of the most recalcitrant problems in water
treatment, since conventional methods are not very effective against metals
bound to organic compounds. The use of plant roots to remove toxic heavy metals
from water (rhizofiltration) is an emerging environmental clean-up approach.
This technology utilizes live roots of hydroponically grown terrestrial plants
e.g. Indian mustard (Brassica juncea (L.) Czern.), sunflower (Helianthus annuus
L.) and various grasses to effectively remove radionuclides and such heavy
metals as Cu+2, Cd+2, Cr+6, Ni+2, Pb+2 and Zn+2 from aqueous solutions. While
the treatment of soluble metal ions in water has been demonstrated, the use of
rhizofiltration for the removal of chelated heavy metals and radionuclides has
never been attempted. This project will evaluate the feasibility of using
hydroponically cultivated plant roots to extract chelated heavy metals and
radionuclides from water by exposing the roots to solutions of chelated metals
and measuring metal accumulation in the roots, the rate of metal removal from
solution and the residual metal concentrations after treatment. The expansion of
this application to the treatment of metal contaminated soils will also be
evaluated. Scale-up and commercialization efforts will immediately follow a
demonstration of feasibility for rhizofiltration of chelated heavy metals in
water. This company was founded solely to commercialize plant-based remediation
technology, and has secured sufficient financial resources to develop the most
promising applications. A successful demonstration of this technology will lead
to improved and lower cost methods for conserving water resources, restoring
water quality and providing a significant new use for existing crop plants