* 9560279
* SBIR PHASE I:  Low-Cost Silicon Carbide Fiber Development
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Makuteswara Srinivasan, Materials Solutions International Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,750.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will produce silicon
carbide fibers that can be used as reinforcements to toughen ceramics for use at
high temperatures.There are underlying sound technical and economic reasons why
the presently available fibers have not made headway commercially. These fibers
degrade both chemically and mechanically during manufacture of the ceramic
matrix composite. The cost of these fibers can range from $500 to $1,000 per kg.
depending upon the quality of the fiber and the quantity ordered. This high cost
prohibits technical development of much needed ceramic matrix composites in a
major way. The requirements for low-cost silicon carbide fiber manufacture by
the procedures disclosed are rather simple: 1) low-cost silicon and carbon
containing raw materials, 2) simple furnacing technique that involves self-
heating of the charge, and 3) complete avoidance of fiber spinning or drawing
and sintering methodology or polymer chemical conversion technology and chemical
vapor deposition (CVD) methods. The proposed process addresses all of the above
aspects. They include: 1) Potentially low-cost production relative to existing
technology due to the use of readily available, low-cost raw materials and novel
furnacing technique involving relatively low technology that can be practiced
world-wide, 2) potentially single-phase alpha or beta silicon carbide fiber that
will withstand high temperature (> 1400 oC) use, and 3) relatively low risk in
scale-up to large volume production methods. The silicon carbide fibers
resulting from this research can form ceramic composites used in heat exchangers
and chemical reactors which are subject to high-temperature, high-pressure, and
highly corrosive environments. These fibers can also be used in ceramic
composites for waste heat recovery air pre-heaters in aluminum re-melt
facilities, ceramic radiant tubes in aluminum melting furnaces, and applications
in high-temperature incineration of municipal and industrial waste systems.
Other applications include hazardous and toxic waste containment vessels made of
ceramic composites and high temperature ceramic filters.