* 9560600
* SBIR Phase I:  High Definition Raman Imaging Microscope
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Peter Miller, Cambridge Research & Instrumentation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 65,940.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop an ultra-
narrowband liquid crystal tunable filter (LCTF) as the basis of a Raman chemical
imaging microscopy station for non-invasive chemical characterization of solid-
state materials. The advantages in performance and practicality provided by this
technique will allow Raman chemical imaging to become a mainstream analytical
methodology for the first time, accessible even to non-experts and applicable
for routine industrial process monitoring and materials analysis. Raman chemical
imaging has the capability to characterize heterogeneous systems without the
need for significant sample preparation. Chemical imaging allows one to
visualize the composition and spatial distribution of constituents that dictate
material function, which is fundamental to characterizing advanced composite
materials. An optimized Raman imaging system based on an LCTF can readily be
used to analyze a wide variety of materials, including polymers, corrosion
resistant alloys, and pharmaceuticals. In Phase I, we will demonstrate
feasibility by constructing a high resolution filter and using it in a
microscope to obtain Raman images from test samples. A Raman chemical imaging
system will have broad applicability in the polymer and coatings industries for
chemically specific visualization of domains and defects without the need for
sample staining. In-situ monitoring of corrosion in ferrous alloys is another
important use, while a third application lies in quantitative studies of
polymorphism in pharmaceutical crystalline materials.