* 9560259
* SBIR Phase I: In-Situ Resistivity Measurement of Molecular  Beam Epitaxy (MBE)-Grown Layers
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Vladimir Sokolov, TLC Precision Wafer Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will produce a MM-wave
sensor that remotely measures sheet resistivity in real time of Molecular Beam
Epitaxy (MBE) grown wafers. Manufacturing high performance semiconductor
epitaxial wafers by MBE requires precision doping and layer thickness control to
obtain optimum device and circuit performance. High reproducibility requires the
precise doping and layer thickness to be the same every time. The u wafer sheet
resistivity is a key calibration parameter that indicates these variables are
correct in the final wafer structure. The current approach used for monitoring
this parameter is to measure the sheet resistivity on special calibration wafers
outside the ultra high vacuum (UHV) chamber of the MBE machine. If the sheet
resistivity is out of specification a new calibration run with adjusted growth
conditions must be performed before the actual product wafers may be further
processed. This entails extra loading and unloading of wafers through the load
locks and generally results in production delays and lower MBE throughput. This
innovative wave sensor approach eliminates all of this waste. The overall
objective for the Phase I effort is to demonstrate the feasibility of in situ
monitoring of sheet resistivity of GaAs or InP epitaxial wafers (typically used
for MMICs) inside an MBE machine with an instrument located completely outside
the UHV chamber. This capability will streamline the production process while
providing superior performance and precise reproducibility of the epi-wafers at
a reduced cost and higher throughput. This will allow consistent and reliable
optimum devices and circuits (e.g. microwave and mm-wave integrated circuits)
for various military and commercial system applications. The development of a
sheet resistivity sensor for in situ MBE measurements will result in product
improvement and reduction of manufacturing costs for high volume production of
GaAs and InP epitaxial wafers. The instrument's application, however, is not
restricted to any one semiconductor material. It has potential use for any
moderately to highly conducting epitaxial material grown on a host substrate
including silicon.