* 9560930
* SBIR Phase I:  A Fiber-Optic, Simultaneous, Multi-Point     Turbulent Kinetic Energy Rate Dissipation Sensor
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Yogesh Agrawal, Sequoia Scientific, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 10/31/1996
* USD 74,985.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project proposes a laser device
for the measurement of the dissipation rate of turbulent kinetic energy in the
sea as well as in the laboratory. The sensor would be valuable in a number of
oceanographic/fluid dynamics applications. For example, since the dissipation
rate scales typically with the third power of the friction velocity, it is the
most sensitive measure of dynamics in the ocean bottom and surface boundary
layers; it is similarly vital to observations in the ocean interior where mixing
in the ocean is of strong fundamental interest as well as of applied interest in
the study of carbon cycling via organic and geochemical particulate transport.
The new sensor concept is based on the unbiased, direct estimation of
acceleration variance for short-time segments, and subsequent conversion to
spatial gradients using Taylor's hypothesis for each segment. The laser device
will not only be able to operate from a fixed platform providing Eulerian
measurements of dissipation, it is also suitable for much higher dissipation
rates than can be measured with existing sensors. Finally, the capability
proposed here will not only provide measurements at a single point, it will be a
simultaneous multi-point sensor based on work in progress in another SBIR grant.
Because of the combined capabilities of extension to Eulerian measurement, high
range in dissipation rate and multi-point capability, the development could make
significant contributions to a broad range of science in oceanography/fluid
dynamics. The resulting instruments will also be useful in the study of dynamics
of marine aggregates which are postulated to break apart depending on the
dissipation microscales. The dissipation sensor resulting from this development
will be of broad use of to scientists studying boundary layer processes on the
ocean surface and bottom to other scientists studying biological primary
productivity and its interaction with turbulence and to those studying mixing
processes in the ocean interior.