* 9560358
* SBIR PHASE I: Nonlinear Optical Films on GaAs for           Integrated Optics
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Kolagani Harshavardhan, NEOCERA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,985.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project has the primary
objective of developing nonlinear optical (NLO) thin films on GaAs substrates.
NLO films on GaAs offer a number of potential applications in integrated optics.
With the thin film approach it is possible to develop an integrated optics
technology in which light sources, nonlinear optical components and detectors
may be developed on the same substrate. At present, the growth of device quality
films on GaAs remains a major technological challenge. Until now, the
performance of the NLO films on GaAs has not exceeded or equaled the performance
of the bulk counterparts. Therefore an immediate need exists for an improved
growth process for promoting superior quality films compared to those presently
available. Also, for integration with GaAs, lower growth temperatures are
required. The primary objective of the proposed Phase I effort is to explore the
potential of ion beam assisted pulsed laser deposition (IBPLD) as a new low
temperature technique for the growth of high quality nonlinear optical films on
GaAs substrates. The approach will require synthesis of NLO films by IBPLD
technique and identification of critical process parameters that are compatible
with GaAs processing leading to optimum nonlinear optical properties. As a
prototype, KTa 0.52 Nb0.48 O3 films with a Tc of 88 C will be epitaxially
deposited on GaAs substrates with MgO buffer layers and their nonlinear optical
performance will be evaluated. The nonlinear optical films on GaAs offer unique
device possibilities in optical signal processing, optical computing and beam
steering. The film process technology is generic and could lead to a new
generation of integrated optical devices. For Neocera, the nonlinear optical
thin film technologies and commercial IBPLD systems, as commodity products,
could further expand the existing market base.