* 9560428
* SBIR Phase I: A Fully-Depleted Complementary Metal Oxide    Semiconductor Technology for Scientific Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Everett King, ARACOR
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop a mixed-
mode Fully-Depleted Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (FD CMOS) technology
suitable for scientific applications. This technology will offer higher speed
performance at lower power dissipation and operate in more severe environments
than the present bulk CMOS technology. The approach is to keep the process
simple, utilize presently available processing equipment, avoid exotic materials
and transistor configurations, relax the design rules, and provide the ultra-
thin Silicon On Insulator (SOI) substrates, so that the technology can be
introduced quickly to the community and be made available from a wide variety of
sources. This project will verify the computer simulations of the FD CMOS
process and experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of processing FD channels
in its ultra-thin Bond and Etchback SOI (BESOI) material by fabricating and
evaluating MOS capacitors. The specific objectives are to adjust and validate
the channel implant and anneal parameters used to set the n-channel transistor
threshold voltage and to demonstrate that the ultra-thin SOI material made with
our BESOI process is suitable for processing the FD MOS transistors. An
additional Phase I objective will be to improve the quality and uniformity of
the epitaxial films used for manufacturing the ultra-thin BESOI material. The FD
CMOS technology is being considered for next-generation commercial products
which require high levels of integration and ultra-low power. The results of
this program will be commercialized through specialized detector products,
process licensing, and the manufacture of ultra-thin SOI substrates.