* 9560396
* SBIR Phase I: Fabrication of Transparent Aluminum Oxynitride by Pressureless Sintering
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Ender Savrun, Quest Integrated, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,795.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will use pressureless
reaction sintering to generate transparent aluminum oxynitride samples with a
minimum of 80 percent in-line light transmission and a maximum of 10 percent
haze. A thorough microstructural evaluation of AlON samples synthesized in an
earlier program will be carried out by x-ray diffraction, scanning electron
microscopy, transmission electron microscopy, electron energy loss spectroscopy,
and electron probe microanalysis. The effect of MgO addition on microstructures
and nanostructures, the lattice structure, and the lattice parameters will be
clarified. The nature of grain boundaries, i.e., the presence of a second phase,
will be investigated. The solid solubility limits for MgO in AlON will be
determined. The information gained will be used to slow down the fast grain-
boundary movement, which causes excessive grain growth and pore entrapment
within the grains, thereby preventing full densification and causing loss of
transparency. A stepwise reaction sintering will be used to improve the
densification-rate-to-reaction-rate ratio. Because pressureless sintering is
used to manufacture AlON, processing large panels with curvatures will be
practical. Sintered AlON is expected to cost 50 percent less than hot-pressed
MgAl2O4 of comparable size because of the ease of manufacturing AlON by
pressureless sintering. Potential applications include high-temperature windows
(AlON is also infrared transparent),high-pressure lamp envelopes, transparent
armor, watch glass (AlON's high hardness makes it scratch resistant), furnace
windows, and radiation windows in next-generation fusion reactors.