* 9560332
* SBIR Phase I: Nondestructive Evaluation for Seismic Damage  Assessments Using Real-Time X-Ray and Gamma-Ray Imaging     System
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Wei-lou Cao, INOVIX Imaging Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,886.00

9560332 Cao Quick and effective laboratory and field nondestructive evaluation
of structural damage is important for earthquake studies. A conceptual design
using the CSL high sensitivity, direct photon-electron conversion x-ray or
gamma-ray image system is proposed to investigate a novel real-time
nondestructive structural damage measurement technique. This new technique is to
develop an x-ray or gamma-ray image detecting and processing system to directly
visualize and quantify the structural damage, including damage location, damage
pattern and sizes. A real-time assessment of the earthquake damaging process is
also possible to be monitored by this fast respond x-ray or gamma-ray detector
and the associated system. The proposed system can be used either in the
Laboratory or in the field. During the proposed Phase I effort, CSL will work
together with the National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research at Suny
Buffalo to conduct a series of experiments to quantify the major design
parameters of the system to prove the practicality of this novel technique. This
research shall result in a portable, effective, low cost and easy to use x-ray
or gamma-ray inspection system for structural damage assessment. This system
will benefit both laboratory and field work, and reduce the cost of earthquake
damage assessment significantly. The proposed research would lead to better
understanding of structural damages caused by earthquake. The technique, once
developed, offers a very useful tool for laboratory studies and field
inspection, monitoring and measurement of earthquake damages. The proposed real-
time, nondistortion, high spatial/temporal, and portable x-ray and gamma-ray
system shall also help generate business opportunities for inspection and
monitoring of public structures, utilities and component production.