* 9560747
* SBIR PHASE I:  Lithium Ion Conductor Films for              Electrochromic Windows by Spray Coating
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Michael Badding, SAGE ELECTROCHROMICS,INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project is proposed by SAGE Electrochromics, Inc. to evaluate
the feasibility of using spray coating technology to produce solution-derived,
ceramic lithium-ion conductor (IC) films for electrochromic windows. The
worldwide development of electrochromic (EC) glazing technology has been
severely impeded by the inability to identify and develop an electrolyte that
satisfies the performance, durability and cost requirements demanded for
architectural glass applications. SAGE believes it has uniquely achieved the
performance and stability objectives with a patented solution-derived IC.
Although used to some extent in commercial applications, dip coating is an
expensive and impractical batch process when production throughput, handling and
manufacturing costs are critical to the ultimate commercial potential. A
technology well-developed by the automotive industry, spray coating has
tremendous potential in the extremely demanding EC window application. A key
challenge will be to adapt this continuous process technology to the difficult-
to-process thin-film ceramic materials in a way that preserves the essential
functionality and performance of SAGE's dip coating developed IC. Specific
issues associated with this include microstructure, composition, thickness,
ionic and electronic conductivity's and surface morphology. During Phase I,
SAGE's principal objective is to demonstrate the feasibility of spray coating
for lithium ion-conductor films by successfully making a functional small-area
EC device. To achieve this goal, SAGE will 1) spray coat lithium IC films on
glass substrates to evaluate uniformity, thickness, and composition, 2)
fabricate partial device structures to establish compositional uniformity, ion
conductivity, electronic resistance and functionality of the relevant
interfaces, and 3) incorporate the spray coated IC into a complete EC device to
demonstrate the performance of the integrated system. If successful, this
research will raise production rates, improve safety and process reliability,
and reduce manufacturing costs - resolving the one major technological barrier
to cost-effective electrochromic glazing. These results are estimated to
represent a 25% cost savings based on costs at full market penetration.
Electrochromicglazing will have a large impact on the architectural glass
industry since, for the first time, building occupants and owners will have the
ability to electronically control the shading of their window glass - anywhere
from clear to heavily darkened. EC glazing will find application in any window
where solar control is an issue - benefiting the residential, commercial and
government building sectors by providing substantial energy savings and enhanced
comfort. In addition to architectural windows, EC glazing will be ideally suited
for automobiles and other transportation vehicles, and also for numerous
specialty applications - including large-area electronic displays, recreational
products, and consumer appliances and gadgetry. Beyond its application in
electrochromics, this proposed spray coating technology may find uses in other
large-area thin-film applications that include rechargeable lithium batteries,
sensors, and optical coatings.