* 9560986
* SBIR PHASE I:  The Phosgene-Free Synthesis of Isocyanates/  Urethanes
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Richard Sapienza, Materials Engrng & Tech Support Svcs Corporation (METSS Corp)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 11/30/1996
* USD 71,797.00

9560986 Sapienza This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
addresses a pollution prevention problem in the existing commercial synthesis of
isocyanates. The manufacture of these important raw materials for the
manufacture of polyurethane entails the hydrogen reduction of a nitroaromatic
compound to the corresponding amine and its subsequent reaction with phosgene to
the urethane monomer. This process represents the primary use of phosgene in
which over eighty-five percent of the world's output is consumed. The demand for
this chemistry continues to grow due to the properties of the polyurethanes, but
the toxic hazard of phosgene has created difficulties in plant location
approvals. This project will investigate an alternative chemical synthesis that
bypasses the toxic feedstock by directly reducing and carbonylating the
nitroaromatic using an alkaline promoted homogeneous metal carbonyl catalyst
system. Systems derived from homogeneous water-gas-shift catalysts in alcohol-
water solutions of alkaline salts and amines will be investigated under various
conditions of temperature and carbon monoxide pressure. Direct carbonylation of
the aromatic nitro compounds offers an attractive commercial alternative to
synthesize isocyanates and urethanes which avoids the use of large quantities of
hydrogen and the need for expensive and toxic phosgene. This nonphosgene
preparation is needed by industry because restrictions involving chlorine and
phosgene are being increasingly enforced.