* 9560501
* SBIR PHASE I:  An Ultra-Sensitive mRNA Quantitation Method
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Anil Dhundale, Oncogene Science Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9560501 Dhundale Messenger RNA (mRNA) analysis is a critically important
technique in molecular biology. The goal of this project is the development of
an ultra-sensitive method enabling direct measurement of endogenous mRNA in cell
lines or primary cells present in a 96 well microplate. The procedure will
negate the need for mRNA purification, thermocycling, or other forms of target
amplification such as required with Q-PCR. A defined biotinylated DNA
oligonucleotide probe will specifically hybridize to the target mRNA in fixed
cells. Background or nonspecifically bound signal will be minimized by 1)
requiring two specific hybridization events and 2) washing and subsequent
release of the specifically bound probe which is then transferred and recaptured
in a streptavidin coated plate. A sandwich-type assay will be employed with an
ultra-sensitive, novel, enzymatic amplification system to increase the signal
and yield a luminescent end-point. The method should be sensitive enough to
measure an mRNA with ten copies per cell, 10,000 cells per well, i.e.-
subattomole mRNA levels or 100,000 mRNA molecules per well. The method has
generic utility since each new target mRNA simply requires synthesis of an
appropriate oligonucleotide and use of standardized fixation, hybridization, and
signal amplification procedures. Oncogene Science Inc. will offer reagent
systems through the Research Products Division to provide a powerful tool for
the molecular and cellular bioscience research community. ***