* 9560383
* SBIR Phase I: Diamond Composite Materials for Use as Cold   Cathode Emitters
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Donald Patterson, SI Diamond Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,237.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores the
feasibility of a new class of diamond composite field effect, electron emitters,
that can be made at a low cost into cold cathodes with high emission uniformity,
low threshold fields, and low power consumption. Diamond has many unique
properties that are superior to any other known materials. One such property of
n-type diamond is a potential for negative electron affinity, possibly enabling
its use as a cold cathode electron emitter. However, no verifiable n-type
diamond has been produced and electron emission from diamond presently relies on
the use of expensive p-type diamond, that must have specific crystal
orientations and delicate surface treatments. This project investigate
commercially available undoped diamond powder and a variety of electronically
conductive matrices to fabricate simple cold cathode materials that can be
placed uniformly and in patterns over large area substrates. Preliminary tests
on some of these materials have shown that such diamond-based cathodes have good
electron field effect properties. These composites have potential utility in
many vacuum-microelectronics applications that require a low power-consuming,
high transconductance field effect device. Potential applications for diamond
composite emitter include flat panel displays, microwave amplifiers, power
triodes, and other similar devices.