* 9560904
* SBIR Phase I:  Permanent Erasable Optical-Recording Material
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Daniel Smithey, Bend Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1996
* USD 74,983.00

This SBIR Phase I project is directed toward developing new materials for
optical recording. At present, no optical recording material is available that
meets all of the requirements for applications such as optical data storage,
high resolution spatial light modulators and reconfigurable optical
interconnects. The ideal optical recording material would have high resolution,
permanent information storage, read without erase capability, high sensitivity,
high photochemical and thermal stability, and optical erase capability.
Photochromic materials are promising optical recording materials since they
exhibit high resolution, are easy to fabricate, are inexpensive, and are
relatively sensitive to recording light. However, information recorded in
current photochromic materials cannot be read without erasure unless a different
wavelength of light is used for reading and recording. The recorded information
also tends to fade with time and use, and the materials photodegrade. The
overall goal for this program is to overcome the limitations of existing optical
recording materials through the development of a novel photochromic material
that meets all of the above requirements for optical recording. This project
will show that information can be permanently recorded into this material and
subsequently read without erasure using the same wavelength of light. This will
be accomplished by developing a novel, reversible fixing method. In addition,
the project will show that recorded information can be erased and re-recorded.
In Phase II, the firm will develop these materials with respect to the fixing
method, recording sensitivity, and other important optical properties, and
demonstrate the utility of these materials by investigating relevant
applications, such as holography and optical computing. The successful
development of the optical recording material proposed here would enable the
production of high-density optical memories with the potential to store 1
terabit of information within a volume as small as 1 cm3. Very high resolution
spatial light modulators. reconfigurable optical interconnects, holographic
recording materials, and optical switching materials would also benefit from
this material.