* 9560563
* SBIR Phase I:  Ultra-Sensitive Airborne Detection of Trace  Gas Chemical Species Using Counter-Propagating              Phase-Sensitive Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* James Leitch, Ophir Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 10/31/1996
* USD 74,989.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes a new airborne
trace gas sensing spectroscopic technique called Counter-Propagating Phase-
Sensitive Spectroscopy. Unlike present conventional spectroscopic methods which
utilize molecular absorption (based on the imaginary part of the complex index
of refraction), this method relies on the anomalous dispersion which is also
associated with every molecular resonance line (based on the real part of the
complex index of refraction) as quantified by the Kramers-Kronig relationship.
The instrument will thus sense gas concentration via beam phase and fringe
shifts in a uniquely ultra-stable interferometer rather than by total beam
attenuation. Using this new technique, the proposed instrument theoretically
provides sensitivities approaching the quantum noise limit and about 3 orders of
magnitude better than presently available molecular absorption measuring
instruments. The anticipated result will be that trace gases can be selectively
sensed in air at the parts per trillion level. The instrument is conceptually
small, robust, vibration-insensitive and thus airworthy. Any atmospheric trace
gas with a molecular absorption line in the visible, near-IR or infrared can
theoretically be sensed. This includes virtually every chemical compound. The
sensor is theoretically capable of measuring atmospheric pollution at the parts
per trillion level. It is anticipated that Counter-Propagating Phase-Sensitive
spectroscopy will yield trace-gas sensitivities 3 orders of magnitude better
than traditionally used approaches. This instrument promises to be reliable,
stable, tunable to a host of chemical compounds, and thus able to provide
improved industrial safety monitoring, pollution monitoring, and increased
sensitivity for measurements of trace gas atmospheric pollutants and chemical
tracers.