* 9560996
* SBIR PHASE I:  Hand-Held, Spatially Unrestricted Force      Feedback
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Charles Jacobus, CYBERNET SYSTEMS CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 73,909.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
fundamental problem with the application of force feedback in immersive
environments, which is immobility. The problem is addresssed by proposing an
extreme innovation in force feedback technology: hand-held, spatially
unrestricted force feedback. The state of-the-art in force feedback devices are
table mounted. These devices require mounting to generate leverage for
forces/torques and to support large masses. Consequently, no existing force
feedback devices allow mobility and force generation concurrently. This is a
fundamental problem since many virtual reality applications require large
working volumes and the ability to move freely within the volumes. Currently,
the most immersive virtual reality systems provide realistic visual and audio
feedback during walk through scenarios. These large environments lack one
primary component, haptic feedback, primarily because the current technology
will not support unrestricted motion. The proposed innovation is fundamental for
the use of force feedback in future human-computer interactions, better known as
virtual reality. The development of the proposed innovation will have
significant commercial success. Immersive force feedback has lagged behind other
virtual reality technologies such as visualization and tracking. The proposed
project will advance force feedback such that it can easily be integrated with
existing commercial applications.