* 9560954
* SBIR PHASE I:  Inert Metal Anodes for Aluminum              Electrowinning
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,08/31/1996
* James Oxley, Oxley Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9560954 Oxley This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project aims to
establish the feasibility of improved copper-base alloys as inert, oxygen
evolving anodes for aluminum electrowinning from molten cryolite-alumina. The
search for an inert anode has previously focused mainly on ceramic oxides,
cermets and in situ formed ceramic oxides. The most serious problems with these
materials are, (a) dissolution into the cryolite with subsequent contamination
of the product aluminum, and (b) mechanical fracture. An alternative approach is
to use a material which actually thrives in the hostile molten salt/O2
environment. This concept was demonstrated recently using metal anodes. This
work included experiments with binary Cu-Al alloys. Under oxygen evolution
conditions, these alloys should form stable, protective Al2O3-based films.
However, the alloys exhibited only partial stability and suffered periodic film
failure. This problem will be solved by using ternary and/or quaternary alloying
additives to a Cu-Al base. Retrofitting US aluminum smelters with inert anodes
could reduce energy consumption significantly. Eliminating carbon anode use
would also avoid formation of the perfluorocarbons CF4 and C2F6, greenhouse
gases with lifetimes of greater than many thousands of years in the atmosphere.
U.S. aluminum producers have committed to reduce emission of these gases
significantly by the year 2000.