* 9560539
* SBIR PHASE I:  Novel Bridgman Growth of Tungsten Bronze     Crystals for Emerging Nonlinear Optical Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Jeffrey Wilde, 3D Technology Labs
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,967.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses novel
vertical Bridgman growth of ferro-electric tungsten bronze materials which are
known to have large electro-optic and photorefractive effects. They comprise a
class of optical materials that are very promising for applications such as
tunable holographic wavelength filtering, holographic mass data storage,
electro-optic modulation and beam steering, phase conjugation, and integrated
optical switching. Most tungsten bronze crystals are currently grown by the
Czochralski method where the main problems are refractive index striations,
diameter instability, and susceptibility to volatilization loss of hazardous
constituents. Striations can cause significant light scattering and degrade
device performance. They arise from spurious growth rate fluctuations,
principally due to temperature variations at the melt-solid interface. The
dominant source of these variations is crystal rotation in a non-axisymmetric
temperature profile. We propose to develop a vertical Bridgman system for
growing SBN and PBN because this method inherently avoids crystal rotation and
minimizes buoyancy-driven melt convection, thereby minimizing striations.
Furthermore, the crystal diameter is determined by the crucible walls so that
diameter instability is not an issue, and volatilization can be eliminated by
using a sealed-crucible technique. Vertical Bridgman growth of SBN, PBN, and
other tungsten bronze crystals will provide higher optical quality samples with
larger sizes and significantly lower cost. This technology will help to further
advance numerous electro-optic and photorefractive applications.