* 9560574
* SBIR PHASE I: Asynchronous Integration of Processors and    Hardware for Real-Time Simulation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Clare Savaglio, APPLIED DYNAMICS INTERNATIONAL
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,498.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project deals with a new
methodology for real-time testing of embedded controllers and other actual
system hardware using simulation of major parts of the system. For example, a
jet engine controller might be interfaced to the real-time simulation of a jet
engine to test the engine controller over the full operating envelop of the
engine. Simulations of dynamic systems involving `hard-in-the-loop` are commonly
called HIL simulations. This new methodology involves completely asynchronous
operation of processors and hardware subsystems and has the potential for
producing enormous simplifications and gains in efficiency for HIL simulations.
In this new methodology, variable step-size integration methods are used for the
first time in hard real-time HIL simulations. This is a major breakthrough for
this type of simulation. The extrapolation techniques used in the asynchronous
methodology compensate for latencies inherent in a simulation having multiple
processors and external hardware, thus providing greater simulation accuracy.
The basic concepts of the asynchronous methodology can now be demonstrated in a
multi-processor environment. A commercial software package containing a
development shell, run-time system, and debug/monitor package that incorporates
this new asynchronous methodology is envisioned. The primary output for this
research would be a specification for such a software package. An example
simulation with external hardware interfaced to it will be developed and used to
test the asynchronous methodology concepts and in experiments that help define
various aspects of the proposed software package, particularly in the areas of
debugging tools and the interpretation of calculated estimates of dynamic errors
in the simulation. The use of embedded microprocessor-based controllers for all
types of products has literally exploded over the past few years. HIL simulation
is a proven tool for reducing time to market for new products, improving product
quality, and reducing the potential for product liability claims by making it
possible to test embedded controllers faster and much more thoroughly than
through the use of other types of testing. The software product to be defined in
this project would enable the cost of developing HIL simulations to be reduced
significantly, thus encouraging ever greater use of HIL simulations in testing
embedded controllers. This would be highly beneficial to the developers of both
commercial and military products.