* 9560452
* SBIR Phase I: Rock Art Data Recording, Management and       Analysis: An Integrated System Incorporating 3-dimensional  Digitizing, Geographic Information Systems &amp; Photogramme
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,11/30/1996
* James Ebert, Ebert and Associates
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1996
* USD 74,779.00

9560452 Ebert This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on
the current lack of integrated techniques and methods by which rock art data can
be completely and accurately recorded three-dimensionally, managed within a
three-dimensional database, and analyzed with respect not only to formal
features of individual rock art elements, but also to interrelationships among
figures, the rock on which they are placed, and associated sites, places, and
views. The research investigates the feasibility of developing an integrated
system for rock art data recording, management, and analysis incorporating
infield three-dimensional digitizing, the use of electronic distance measurement
(EDM) and global positioning systems (GPS) for control and site mapping,
computer-assisted drawing (CAD) and geographic information systems (GIS)
technologies for data input and database management, and computerized
photogrammetry and such additional technical adjuncts as analog and digital
photography, all linked by specially designed software and methods. Research
objectives include an exhaustive survey of current data user needs as well as an
assessment of new data possibilities and theoretical directions that such a
system would provide. The appropriateness and feasibility of integrating both
off-the-shelf and modified technologies, including hardware and software, will
also be investigated. Finally, the nature of software specifically designed to
link systems components, as well as methods by which these will all be used as a
consolidated system, will be examined. Systems components and integrative
software and methods will be preliminarily tested in rock art data field
situations. Rock art researchers, cultural resource managers, Native American
groups, anthropologists, art historians, and other rock art and rock art data
users-- in the United States and worldwide--will benefit from the development of
such methods. An additional, related field of study and social concern, graffiti
studies an d control, offers another potential market.