* 9560782
* SBIR PHASE I: A Global Multi-Grid GMRES Scheme for an       Adaptive Cartesian/Prism Flow Solver on Distributed Memory  Machines
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Z.J. Wang, CFD RESEARCH CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9560782 Wang This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes to develop and demonstrate a parallel algorithm for a newly developed
adaptive Cartesian/prism grid flow solver on distributed memory parallel
machines. A global Generalized Minimal RESidual algorithm (GMRES) will be
utilized in combination with an explicit multi-grid pre-conditioner to drive
flow to steady state. A hybrid domain decomposition method, i.e., a recursive
eigenvector bisection (RSB) method on the coarsest grid and a divide and conquer
type local cell migration method (LCM) on the finest grid, will be implemented
to balance load on the finest grid. The strategy ensures that the original
structure of the coarsest grid is not destroyed with domain decomposition.
Overlap of one cell deep at each multi-grid level between domains is provided
for data communication. Message passing will be provided through a parallel
virtual machine (PVM) package. In addition, a novel communication and
computation overlap (CCO) procedure is proposed to achieve data synchronization
and zero wait time by processors. Since both the GMRES algorithm and the
explicit multi-grid pre-conditioner can be effectively parallelized, the overall
approach is expected to perform very well on distributed memory parallel
machines, both homogeneous and heterogeneous. The automatic grid generation and
load balancing approaches drastically reduce the overhead cost associated with
grid generation and domain decomposition for parallel computers. The
parallelizable GMRES multi-grid solution algorithm is ideally suited for
distributed memory machines and is expected to further speed up convergence of
flow to steady state. If the concept is successfully proven in Phase I, it will
be extended to 3D in later phases. The key commercial objective is to develop a
computational fluid dynamics (CFD) code that is specially designed for
distributed memory machines, which are viewed by many as the most cost-effective
computer archit ecture for large scientific and engineering simulations. ***