* 9560125
* SBIR PHASE I:  Diatom Transformation for Product Enhancement
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1996
* F. C. Thomas Allnutt, Martek Biosciences Corporation
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop tools
necessary for the molecular manipulation of diatoms and, potentially, other
marine algae (e.g., green algae, brown algae and chrysophytes) that have
commercial potential. The molecular biological manipulation of algal systems has
seriously lagged behind other systems. Many of the techniques that have been
developed for the introduction of DNA into bacterial, yeast, insect and animal
cells have not been transferred to algal systems. Much of the reason for this
has been a lack of sufficient funds for the study of algal systems. As diatoms
(and other algae) that synthesize valuable molecules are discovered, it is
crucial to establish sophisticated methods for their genetic manipulation, which
in turn, will enable the development of economical production methods. In Phase
I, the potential of each of the diatom target organisms chosen for this study
will be evaluated by examining their susceptibility to antibiotics and
herbicides. Potential marker and reporter genes (some of which will be isolated
directly from diatoms) in diatom transformation will also be constructed and
evaluated. Transformation protocols that have shown promise in other systems
will be tested in transient expression systems and the best methods for
transformation identified. An attempt will also be made to use various marker
genes for the stable transformation of economically promising diatoms. Phase I
research should demonstrate if transformation is possible and set the stage for
the use of molecular technology in the development of commercially important
products from marine algae. This research should lead to the establishment of
methods for enhancing the production of specific products in marine algae.
Martek is currently marketing two oils, one from an alga and the other from a
fungus and has identified diatoms that produce oils of considerable value;
markets for these oils would be in the fields of nutritional supplements and
pharmaceuticals. However, the existing production costs for these oils are
prohibitive. This study is to decrease the costs associated with their
production. Martek has also been trying to develop diatom cultures as
inexpensive aquaculture feeds. The genetic manipulation of these algae to
provide a better product (e.g., higher oil content, more balanced protein
composition, antibiotic production) and/or to develop a less expensive method of
production would lead to significant advances in the manufacture of higher
quality and more cost-effective aquacultural feeds.