* 9560643
* SBIR Phase I: Brushless, Exciterless, Alternator with       Self-Induced Excitation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Joseph Vithayathil, Carmel Electric Company
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project has for its objective
the feasibility study of an exciterless, brushless, three phase alternator. The
alternator will generate three phase AC at the standard power system frequency
of 60 Hz. or any other. Unlike conventional alternators, which need a separate
exciter machine, or an external source of DC, to supply its field windings, the
machine to be built in this project, will be a self excited machine, which will
not need a separate exciter or any external source to supply its field circuit.
The excitation system is incorporated in the atternator itself, using the
concept of dual rotating fields embodied in a US Patent of the Principal
Investigator. For this, the alternator will have an auxiliary winding on the
stator which will produce a rotating field at a different speed and induce AC
voltages in an auxiliary winding on the rotor. Rectification of this AC, by
rotor mounted diodes, serves to provide the DC excitation. The machine will
self-excite and quickly build up voltage regeneratively as in a conventional DC
shunt generator, by residual magnetism. An electronic automatic voltage
regulator, which will maintain the output AC voltage constant under changing
load conditions, is also included in the project.