* 9560420
* SBIR Phase I: Supercritical Water Oxidation Based Dissolved Organic Carbon Analyzer
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* James Akse, Umpqua Research Company
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on the
development of a Supercritical Water Oxidation (SCWO) based Total Organic Carbon
(TOC) analyzer is proposed for the determination of Dissolved Organic Carbon
(DOC) in seawater. The proposed innovation takes advantage of the unique
chemical properties of supercritical water to achieve an extremely rigorous and
thorough oxidation of complex organic substances. It is anticipated that this
new methodology will provide chemical oceanographers with a useful alternative
to current instrumental techniques. On occasion there has been relatively poor
agreement among the DOC results derived by different measurement techniques when
applied to seawater samples. Current analytical instruments for the
determination of DOC in seawater suffer from inconsistent carbon recoveries,
degradation of performance with time, calibration difficulties, and deleterious
matrix effects. The SCWO based DOC analyzer (SCWO-DOC) is intended to provide a
means for the mitigation of these difficulties. In principal, the SCWO-DOC
analyzer utilizes oxygen saturated water which has been heated and pressurized
to values greater than the respective critical points for the complete 'deep
oxidation' or mineralization of dissolved organic molecules, resulting in the
formation of inorganic species including: CO2, H20, NO3-, SO4=, and PO4-3. The
CO2 is then removed in the vapor phase and quantified very accurately using a
non-dispersive infrared (NDIR) detector. The proposed analyzer embodies a
simple, reliable, reagentless, rapid, one step method of DOC determination with
strong potential for extremely rigorous oxidation of refractory dissolved
organics and with minimal susceptibility to interferences. The Phase I effort
will demonstrate the feasibility of the concept for the analysis of seawater
samples. It is anticipated that follow-on work at the Phase II level will
culminate in the development and testing of a prototype which can be evaluated
by members of the chemical oceanographic community. A more accurate and reliable
instrumental means of determining total organic carbon (TOC) would find wide
application throughout analytical chemistry. This new technology will be of
particular interest in biotechnology, pharmaceutical, semiconductor, and
oceanographic analytical applications which require quantitation of very low
levels of un-characterized and often refractory dissolved organic substances.