* 9560834
* SBIR PHASE I: Wireless Remote Evaluation of Bridge Abutmentsand Piers (WREBAP)
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Kenneth Maser, INFRASENSE, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,907.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop and
demonstrate a low cost system for Wireless Remote Evaluation of Abutments and
Piers (WREBAP). The WREBAP system addresses the most common cause of bridge
failure: i.e., from floods, during which scour of bridge foundations causes
failure of piers and abutments. Accurate and timely evaluation of these critical
bridge abutment and pier conditions that can lead to such failures is a critical
part of implementing a cost-effective, safety conscious bridge management
program. The WREBAP system is based on long-term monitoring of pier and abutment
movements caused by thermal and dead loading. These movements, and their
relationship to measured distortions, are combined with parameter estimation
models to determine the characteristics of unknown foundations and overall
condition of the pier or abutment. The information is transmitted autonomously
to the Department of Transportation bridge management database where it could be
used for rehabilitation planning and budgeting, prioritization, and rapid and
emergency response. By eliminating wires and using low cost, mass produced
electronic components, the system will be low cost (target = $5000-$10000 per
bridge). This price range makes the system affordable for implementation on a
large number of structures, so that the population of bridges can be effectively
monitored. The key technical issues to be faced in the development of the WREBAP
system are: (1) the reliability and accuracy of pier and abutment evaluations
using long term monitoring data; and (2) the ability of the proposed system to
provide data of adequate quality. The Phase I program will address these two
issues by (1) conducting simulation pier and abutment evaluations using simple
models and synthesized data; and (2) designing and demonstrating field data
collection using an experimental prototype system mounted to an in-service
bridge. The proposed system, when fully developed, will be applicable to all
bridges owned by State and Local departments of transportation, railroad
companies, and toll and tunnel authorities.