* 9560424
* SBIR Phase I: Ultrasensitive Elemental Mercury Pollution    Monitor
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Scott Hunter, Consultec Scientific, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will develop a novel
type of miniature mercury sensor utilizing very recent developments in
microcantilevers. Sensors based on this technology will be up to 103 times
smaller, considerably more sensitive, and less expensive than currently
available mercury sensors. Microcantilevers that are 50-200 (m long, 10-40 (m
wide, and 0.3-3 (m thick and possessing resonance frequencies in the range
10-300 kHz, have recently been used in scanning force microscopy to detect
extremely small changes in force in the range of 10-12-10-9 N. The resonance
frequency (and bending) of the microcantilever varies reproducibly and
sensitively due to adsorption of molecules on the cantilever surfaces making it
an ideal chemical sensor with picogram sensitivity and parts per billion
detection. Preliminary mercury detection studies, have demonstrated detection of
ppb of Hg, and have shown that selective adsorption of mercury on gold coated
cantilevers (end loading) produces a linear variation in resonance frequency
with a sensitivity of 0.8 pg/Hz. Simultaneous bending measurements resulted in a
sensitivity of 0.6 pg/mV. The recyclability of the mercury sensor will be
demonstrated by removing the adsorbed mercury by heating the sensor. Exploiting
the microcantilever response, combined with selective removal of interfering
molecules (such as H2S) using filters, microcantilevers will be shown to be
extremely versatile and novel mercury pollution sensors. We plan to demonstrate
that the sensor can be vibrated in liquid environments with a reasonable Q,
allowing it to be used to detect the presence of mercury in these environments.
Additionally, due to the extremely small size of the sensor, the development of
a personal monitor that is highly sensitive may be possible. The proposed work
will provide a highly significant advance in microcantilever sensor technology
with possibilities of developing new sensors for other chemicals. Commercial
applications of mercury sensors include industrial hygiene, air and water
pollution control, mining industry, submarines, air quality monitoring, etc.