* 9560439
* SBIR Phase I: A General 3-Dimensional Quantitative          Structure-Property Relationship (QSPR) Algorithm
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* John Tokarski, Chem 21 Group Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,595.00

This Small Business Innovation Research project will produce a general
algorithm, and corresponding software package, based upon tensor representation
of multidimensional data blocks, to express relationships between dependent
properties and independent molecular feature measures. The solutions to these
data riet problems are three-dimensional quantitative structure-property
relationships, 3D-QSPRs. While this proposal focuses on three-dimensional
relationships, the formalism can easily be extended to higher dimensions. The
molecular features are partitioned into the intrinsic molecular shape tensor,
the molecular field tensor, a non-shape/field feature tensor, and an
experimental feature tensor. The intrinsic molecular shape tensor contains
information on the shape of a molecule within the contact surface while the
molecular field tensor contains information outside of the contact surface.
Molecular features not directly related to molecular shape are placed in the
non-shape/field tensor. Experimental measures not being used as dependent
variables can be considered as independent molecular features in the
experimental tensor. The 3D-QSPR is realized by constructing the transformation
tensor which optimizes the statistical significance between the dependent and
independent variables. Factor analysis, partial least squares regression and
multidimensional linear regression analyses will be explored individually, and
in combination, to determine the transformation tensors. The proposed formalism
has beran applied (in a limited fashion) to a raet of flexible M2/M3 muscarinic
inhibitors leading to a 3D-QSA (Property=Activity) R in which an active
conformation has been identified, and to a set of benzylpyrimidine inhibitors of
dihydrofolate reductase where the enzyme bound conformation and alignment have
been correctly identified. Other data sets to further explore the utility of the
proposed formalism are presented. The proposed algorithm has far-reaching
implications in the field of computer-aided molecular design. It is the only
method proposed to date, which once developed, will provide the researcher with
general, analytical functions which quantitatively relate structure to
properties of members of sets of flexible molecules which can assume multiple
alignments. The proposed 3D-QSPR algorithm product is likely to be purchased by
all sites currently used CoMFA in order to facilitate treatment of
conformational flexibility and multiple alignments. In addition, the general
features to compute molecular shape propertles (molecular shape analysis) make
the package a stand-alone 3D-QSPR product. More than installations have been
targeted as likely within 18 months of version 1.0 product release.