* 9560876
* SBIR Phase I:  Theory and Simulation of Strongly Anisotropic Turbulence:  Applications to Separation and Purification   Technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Ilya Staroselsky, Cambridge Hydrodynamics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9560876 Staroselsky This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
will capitalize upon the success of the renormalization group (RNG)-based
turbulence models recently developed by Cambridge Hydrodynamics in order to
develop an effective approach to predict the behavior of difficult, highly
anisotropic turbulent flows often encountered in chemical engineering devices.
Although existing RNG models have already demonstrated superior performance in
physical situations where the anisotropy of turbulence scales is moderate, they
require an extension to handle significant body forces due to high swirl,
buoyancy, etc. The primary technical objectives include the extension of RNG
two-equation models to a tensorial framework to handle significant small-scale
anisotropy induced by high swirl. These models will then be tested and refined
on a variety of prototype cases. Finally, proof-of-concept studies of separation
and/or purification devices will be performed followed by detailed comparisons
with experimental data and alternative prediction techniques. If Phase II is
approved, the models will be extended to handle other sources of anisotropy such
as strong stratification effects. The final product of the Phase I-III effort
will be a commercially viable design and analysis tool for chemical engineering
applications which should yield a major improvement in the confidence level for
flow prediction in complex real-world devices. The prediction of the behavior of
advanced separation and purification devices remains a difficult problem. The
work proposed here will replace empirical estimation by predictive capability
and should find wide applications throughout chemical engineering. The
implementation of Cambridge HydrodynamicsO new models in the commercially viable
computer code FLUENT, marketed by our Phase III partner Fluent, Inc., will
ensure wide application of project results.