* 9560822
* SBIR Phase I:  Membrane Surface Modification to Reduce      Fouling
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Melvin Swanson, SurModics, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,740.00

9560822 Swanson This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop reagents and methods for surface modifying membranes with hydrophilic
photoactivatable polymers to reduce fouling. One of the greatest problems,
particularly with ultrafiltration (UF) membranes, is fouling, which is largely
caused by solute interactions with the membranes. Fouling reduces the flux and
use life of membranes and increases the solute retention, thus changing the
selectivity during use. The primary goal of this project is to achieve greatly
reduced fouling with minimal or no reduction in flux. The polymers to be
developed are expected to be useful for UF as well as for microfiltration (MF)
and reverse osmosis (RO) membranes. The primary types of membranes to be used
during the Phase I project will be polysulfone UF membranes; however, the method
is expected to be useful for other types of membranes, including MF and RO
membranes as well as membranes made from other materials (e.g., polycarbonate
and PVDF). The method for modifying the membranes involves synthesis of
hydrophilic polymers containing photoactivatable moieties (e.g., benzophenone
derivatives) at one end and hydrophilic polymer chains at the other end. These
polymers are expected to have surfactant characteristics such that they will wet
hydrophobic membrane surfaces from aqueous solutions and orient with the
photogroups associated with the membrane surface and the hydrophilic ends
oriented away from the membrane surface. They will then be covalently coupled to
the membrane surfaces photochemically. The performance characteristics of the
modified membranes will be compared with other commercially available similar
membranes for fouling characteristics. Membrane filtration is an important
technique for many industrial processes. However, fouling limits the usefulness
of ultrafiltration and other membrane separations, including reverse osmosis and
microfiltration. Success of this project is expected to make an important
contrib ution to improving efficiencies of membrane filtrations by reducing
fouling of membranes made from hydrophobic materials such as polysulfone and
polyvinylidene difluoride. This surface modification technology is expected to
have significant commercial potential for improving membranes.