* 9560661
* SBIR Phase I: Disposable Dipstick Fiber for Rapid Food      Inspection
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Zonh-Zen Ho, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will greatly simplify
and enhance the sensitivity of food inspection equipment. Toxins and pathogens,
such as aflatoxin, T-2 toxin, zearalenone, E. coli 0157:H7, and salmonella, have
been responsible for outbreaks of foodborne illness, some cases of which have
been fatal. Physical Optics Corporation (POC) will develop novel photonic
techniques for detecting such organisms, and reducing the time required for food
testing. The novelty of the proposed method lies in its use of disposable
dipstick tapered fiber optic sensors (optrodes), long lifetime chelates, and a
highly sensitive optical system to detect a small number of toxins and organisms
in juices/milk and preenrichment cultures. The multiple tapered fiber probes
with in-situ multi-analyte `rapid` monitoring capability are designed for
optimal optical delivery and collection efficiency, and for maximal detection
sensitivity. Evanescent wave sensing and long lifetime chelate eliminate the
fluorescence from the bulk sample, which is often the limiting factor of
sensitivity. Food inspection will directly benefit from the unique
characteristics of this approach (modified in-situ inspection, no biofouling,
small sample size, minimal background, and high sensitivity), which give it
specific advantages over existing chemical and biochemical sensing technologies.
The Phase I project will focus on the feasibility demonstration of the proposed
technology based on the detection of aflatoxin B I in solution. The proposed
technique can be adapted to detect various biological materials in foods,
including spoilage, pathogens, parasites, hormones, toxins, pesticides, and
vitamins. The world food quality detection market is estimated to be $275M for
1995 and $475M by the year 2000, of which $15M and $100M, respectively, are
expected to be directly addressed by on-line biosensors. The commercial
potential of this device in health and environmental safety applications is
immense. This technology also has potential for the detection of infectious
agents such as HIV, staph, and ebola virus.