* 9560922
* SBIR Phase I:  Paragenetic Chemical Limits on Asbestiform   Material
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Robert Vinopal, Standard Geological Services Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,385.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to develop an
approach for identification of asbestos which uses polarized light microscopy
preceded by a major-minor elemental analysis of at least 100 mg of ashed sample.
The reliability of current methods of identification of asbestos depend upon the
raw skill and experience of microscopists, the variations caused by sample
heterogeneity based upon a few micrograms of materials examined under a
microscope, or the need for extremely expensive and often slow equipment to
overcome the variable human error that arises from variable skills of
microscopists. The major-minor elemental analyses can be done rapidly with
inexpensive, low maintenance, nonspecialized equipment such as atomic absorption
spectrophotometers. A pilot study with a few samples has shown that this
combined system easily eliminates the most common sources of error that
microscopy alone produces in analyses of building materials for asbestos. Many
individual building materials have mineral fillers that come from a restricted
paragenesis based upon local sources. Thus mineralogy, major, minor and trace
elements should be indicative of a rock source that is or is not likely to
contain asbestos minerals. This project seeks to extend the elemental analysis
in conjunction with the microscopy to back-calculate likely mineral percentages
present based upon the most reasonable of several computer models that are
written to calculate minerals from analyses based on assumptions of particular
paragenetic suites. This would tend to eliminate many false positives,
especially in the difficult samples that contain asbestos at low levels.
Inexpensive, time-saving procedures which improve the reliability of asbestiform
mineral analysis have immediate commercial application. Entities performing
asbestos analysis such as government agencies, industrial hygienists, consulting
laboratories, and educational institutions are a potential market.