* 9560759
* SBIR Phase I: High Performance Liquid Chromatography (HPLC) with Attomole Sensitivity
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Andrzej Drukier, BioTraces Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,999.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will adapt the
proprietary Multi Photon Detection (MPD) technology to high performance liquid
chromatography (HPLC) techniques, thereby significantly improving the detection
limits of HPLC. Current HPLC sensitivity is limited by the performance of the
detectors used, and is typically in the range of 10-12 g/ml. Preliminary
experimental results suggest the possibility of achieving detection limits of
better than 10-15 g/ml. The proposed research focuses on the development of
derivatizing agents and techniques to introduce MPD-compatible labels to
analytes which are present at subattomole/ml concentrations. If successful, this
R&D effort will yield an ultra-high sensitivity detector and reagents for
research and analysis using HPLC. The resulting HPLC/MPD system will enable
researchers to isolate, detect and measure substances at levels which were
previously unattainable. Ultra-sensitive HPLC/MPD instrumentation will
significantly facilitate the study of the role and function of biologically
important substances such as neurotransmitters, steroidal hormones,
angiotensins, and others. It will also greatly facilitate pharmaco-kinetic
studies leading to a better understanding of drug interactions and the safety
and effectiveness of new pharmaceuticals. Thus HPLC/MPD instrumentation should
find application in both academic and industrial laboratories.