* 9560768
* SBIR Phase I: Telling Mathematical Stories: A Combination of Research and Technology
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Marjorie Cappo, Learning in Motion, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,890.00

9560768 Cappo This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on
the ability to conjoin current research with the latest technology into a
multimedia environment that allows early learners to gain the conceptual
understanding of number sense that will prepare them for more formal
mathematics. Current research has defined four foci which are at the center of
this project: realistic problems, models, own productions, and acoustics.
Realistic problems are those mathematical situations that actually occur in a
child's daily experience and so hold meaning for him or her. Models are any
number of representations that allow children to apply their own understanding
of mathematics. These may include their own invented and informal strategies,
use of the number line or blank number line, or other models such as the bead
string, arithmetic rack, etc. Own productions refers to children's constructions
of mathematical situations or descriptions of them in their own terms. Acoustics
refers to studies of how children learn through sound, rhythm, and movement and
how this affects their understanding of numbers as structural representations.
According to current research on early learning, all of these have an affect on
the way in which children develop their understanding of mathematics. In
addition, it is known that this understanding progresses gradually through
varying levels of abstraction, such as the following: mathematizing concrete
problems through the use of invented or normal strategies, to the use of models,
and then to formal or abstract mathematics. This project intends to study the
feasibility of creating an active and realistic learning environment in which
students are able to build upon the levels of understanding. New advancements in
technology, including the use of video (which students can manipulate and 'edit'
to portray mathematics), graphics (to use as constructed models or
representations of mathematical situations), sound (for vocal descriptions or as
r einforcement of acoustic implications in learning), and text tools can all
amplify the learning potential of primary grade students as defined through the
research. A major objective is to exploit these technologies to their fullest
advantage while maintaining an interface that is friendly to the primary
student. A K-2 Math program which incorporates highly visual and realistic video
and sound with intriguing mathematics problems is needed in the school market. A
program that goes beyond drill and practice and integrates new research on
learning, especially those aspects identified above, could make a great impact
on mathematics instruction and the development of number sense in the primary
years. Also, the proposed product could conceivably cross over to the Home
Market.