* 9560478
* SBIR PHASE I: A Compact Betatron for Nondestructive         Evaluation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Louis Lombardo, Adelphi Technology, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9560478 Lombardo This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project could
significantly reduce the cost of radiological nondestructive assessment. An
inexpensive compact betatron will be used as a high-flux x-ray source for the
purpose of nondestructive evaluation (NDE) in civil structures. The x-ray source
would replace more expensive RF linacs and thereby reduce the cost of
radiological equipment. In conventional betatrons, eddy-current losses in the
iron limit the frequency and the maximum field, thereby limiting the output beam
power. With the use of proprietary low-loss, high-frequency materials, it has
been determined that higher driving frequencies permit much higher x-ray fluxes.
Radiological NDE requires just such an x-ray source to provide rapid, high
signal-to-noise analyses. Phase I will determine the necessary betatron design
parameters including the electromagnet dimensions, the pole shapes, pole gap,
and the optimum placement of the electron gun for injection. Computer programs
recently developed by Adelphi Technology, Inc. for the Department of Energy will
be used for high repetition-rate betatrons. The analysis will attempt to
demonstrate that an inexpensive betatron will provide the x-ray flux necessary
to examine concrete structures up to 70 cm thick. The proposed research will
demonstrate the commercial and technical feasibility of an inexpensive compact
betatron suitable for the NDE of civil structures. Other commercial applications
of such a betatron include cancer radiotherapy, medical imaging,
microlithography of integrated circuits, and compact baggage scanners.