* 9560695
* SBIR Phase I: Erythropoientin Cell Therapy in Chronic Renal Failure
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Deborah Cieslinski, Nephros Therapeutics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-60695 Cieslinski This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
provides a plan to develop early prototype devices to implant erythropoietin-
producing cells in an animal to treat erythropoietin deficient anemias.
Erythropoietin is a hormone produced in specialized cells in the kidney and is
released when oxygen delivery to these cells declines secondary to hypoxia or
anemia. thereby stimulating red cell progenitor proliferation to increase red
blood cell volume in the circulation. This hormone is deficient in many chronic
diseases, including chronic renal failure, AIDs and cancer. This formulation
will ultimately be cost effective (current annual cost is $1.5 billion) as well
as a more optimal treatment strategy for this disease process. Accordingly, the
project aims to construct an early hollow fiber prototype to immunoisolate cells
of an established human hepatoma cell line, HepG2, which produces erythropoietin
in an oxygen sensitive manner for implantation into the systemic circulation of
an animal. The project has three specific aims: 1) To identify the best geometry
of hollow fiber encapsulation of HepG2 cells to grow to maximum packed cell
density without compromise of cell viability in vitro; and once optimum hollow
fiber geometry is determined; 2) To demonstrate that erythropoietin gene
expression and protein production by these encapsulated cells in a single hollow
fiber bioreactor can be regulated by varying oxygen tension or oxygen carrying
capacity in vitro; and 3) To scale up these studies to a cartridge of
encapsulated cells in a hundred hollow fibers in order to test viability and
oxygen responsivity ex vivo in preparation for cartridge implantation of
encapsulated HepG2 cells into the systemic circulation of an animal in vivo
during the phase II component of this program. This Phase I project will,
therefore, support the important transition phase from basic to applied research
and the preliminary design of a testable device designed to provide cell therapy
f or erythropoietin deficient anemias. The ultimate goal of this research is to
produce a cell therapeutic device to treat erythropoietin deficient anemia. This
technology may optimize the treatment of anemia of patients on dialysis in a
cost effective manner, with a potential cost savings in the hundreds of millions
of dollars.