* 9560621
* SBIR Phase I:  Improved Accuracy for Student/Scientist      Networks
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Judith Armstrong, ADA Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/1996
* USD 72,612.00

9560621 Armstrong It is challenging to enable students to collect accurate,
valid data without sacrificing the educational aspects of the program. This
Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project addresses this fundamental
difficulty encountered by a number of groups that desire to have networked
students collect data which are appropriate for use by scientists. An example of
such desired measurement capability by networked students is the pH, dissolved
oxygen, and temperature in a river from its head waters to its outlet as an
indication of the river's environmental condition. ADA Technologies proposes to
address this issue of data accuracy and validation by using a unique set of
hardware currently under development by ADA along with unique software
algorithms to be developed in this project. The hardware includes a low-cost,
hand-held, four-channel data logger with a set of self-identifying sensor
modules. The unique calibration and data tagging aspects of this system provide
an opportunity for data tracking that does not exist for any other product. All
this information will be processed using innovative software algorithms which
will perform a number of internal consistency tests to validate the data. These
checks will be part of an education organizational model that will help students
learn critical thinking skills and can be replicated in all the network
programs. This model will link students with scientists and promote direct
interaction focused around a specific scientific goal. The aim of this program
is to develop an organizational model combined with unique hardware and software
that can aid networks in gathering scientifically valid data while insuring an
educationally significant experience for the students. This project offers an
innovative approach for improving the scientific skills of students and for
helping to promote the use of scientific tools in education. It will enable
students to gain critical thinking skills and to engage in active communicatio n
with scientists. .A market for innovative curricula and advanced educational
materials will be created as a result of the research to be conducted during the
proposed program. The successful implementation of the described system will be
of great benefit to a wide range of scientific programs in the United States and
will supply innovative tools for conducting research