* 9560667
* SBIR Phase I: Super Thin Film/High Free Volume Composite    Membranes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Stuart Nemser, COMPACT MEMBRANE SYSTEMS, INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,686.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will evaluate various
fabrication techniques to develop a three layer `super thin film composite`
membrane with both high selectivity and high flux. At present this firm has
demonstrated an ability to fabricate thin films (less than .5 micron) of glassy
fluoropolymer onto microporous supports. By placing a super thin layer (50A to
200A) of high selectivity polymer on top of our non-porous glass fluoropolymer,
the firm expects to fabricate membranes with both high selectivity and high
flux. Techniques to establish this super thin layer (50A to 200A) include (a)
chemical modification of surface, (b) coating of ultrathin layer on surface and
(c) densification of top layer. To date, this concept has been very limited in
that stable, high flux, high free volume non-porous membranes did not exist. In
Phase I the firm will demonstrate the concept of super thin film composites. New
glassy, high free volume fluoropolymers are described which show very high
permeability to permeant gases, low permeability to volatile organics, good
selectivity and excellent stability. The glassy nature allows easy fabrication
into high flux non-porous thin film membranes. These unique fluoropolymers allow
fabrication of novel and valuable membrane structures. Based on the excellent
film forming capability, excellent gas flux and high selectivity of this glassy
fluoropolymer, applications include production of oxygen enriched air for (I)
industrial applications (i.e. glass/steel), (2) enhanced automotive power, fuel
efficiency and reduced pollution, and (3) enhanced heating efficiency. The
excellent chemical stability will be used in harsh chemical gas separations like
H2/Cl2 in chlor-alkali processes or HF-fluorine separations.