* 9560978
* SBIR PHASE I:  Environmentally Safe Destruction of          Chlorinated Aromatic Compounds by a Novel Photothermal      Process
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Moshe Lavid, M.L. Energia, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9560978 Lavid This SBIR Phase I project offers a novel reductive photothermal
process for environmentally safe destruction of chlorinated aromatic compounds
such as Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs). It utilizes UV light to photo-initiate
hydrodechlorination of PCBs at moderate temperature, leading to their complete
conversion into valuable hydrocarbons and HCl. The process is conducted in a
reducing atmosphere of hydrogen, providing the necessary radical chain-carriers
and circumventing production of soot and toxic oxychlorinated species. A large
number of sites are contaminated with chlorinated hazardous wastes such as TCA,
TCE, PCE, PCB, etc. These compounds have been widely used and their presence
entails severe environmental concerns. All current remedial technologies are
inadequate. They suffer from high cost, incomplete destruction, emission of
toxic products, and disposal/liability problems. Consequently, there is a clear
need for the proposed new process for the treatment of these compounds. The main
objective of Phase I is to experimentally demonstrate the feasibility of
converting PCBs into environmentally benign products. This objective will be met
by a five-stage work plan. .Unique UV light sources will be employed and two
proprietary options pursued, single-stage and two-stage processes. A detailed
kinetic model for a representative PCB will be developed, and computer
predictions will provide guidance to the experimental effort. Experiments with
two representative PCBs will be performed in a bench-scale photo-thermal flow
reactor. Successful completion of Phase I will provide the technical foundation
for a comprehensive Phase II, in which a prototype demonstration unit will be
designed, constructed, and tested. This novel reductive photothermal process
will lead to a "green" technology for environmentally safe conversion of
aromatic chlorohydrocarbons (e.g., PCBs). It will provide a unique and cost-
effective clean-up technology circumventing all the problems associ ated with
current methods, such as high cost and emission of soot and other toxic
products. Consequently, it will be of great benefit to Federal and State
governments and to the private sector in their remediation efforts.