* 9560717
* SBIR Phase I: Fuzzy CMAC for Real-Time Enhancement of       Scanning Probe Microscope Images
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* ChiMan Kwan, Intelligent Automation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 74,551.00

This SBIR Phase 1 project will exploit a new type of neural net to improve the
accuracy of images captured using scanning probe microscopes (SPMs). Scanning
probe microscopes view materials down to atomic dimensions, and this ability is
becoming increasingly important in many industries. A primary source of error in
the images obtained from atomic force microscopes is caused by probe geometry.
Current `probe calibration` systems yield some benefits but much more can be
done. Probe calibration systems use mathematical models to compute the geometry
of the probe based on measurements of known samples. If the microscope output
indicated the contact between the surface of the probe and the known standard
sample when a sample is scanned, then it would be possible to compute the probe
shape from the measured sample geometry. In practice, however, this does not
work well. The force sensed by the atomic force microscope does not depend only
on the interaction between the surface of the probe and the sample. All of the
forces involved depend non-linearly on the shape, size, magnetization,
electrostatic charge, and on other characteristics of the probe. The Phase 1
effort will validate the feasibility of the fuzzy CMAC based error compensation
approach for atomic force microscopes. The beauty of using a neural-net
approach, and particularly a Fuzzy CMAC, is that it is not necessary to develop
a closed form relationship between the measurements made on the standard sample
and a model of the probe geometry. All that is necessary is to scan the standard
sample providing enough learning sets to train the net. Likewise it is not
necessary to develop closed form relations to exploit a computed error model to
correct measured data. The output of the Fuzzy CMAC will generate the correction
values in real-time based on the learned relationship between ideal and measured
data. Scanning probe microscope sales are increasing worldwide at approximately
40 to 60% per year, and they are being used in an increasing number of
industries. This technology will improve the accuracy of these machines and
increase a user's ability to observe the atomic structure of whatever they are
producing. This firm has a joint development agreement in place with one of the
world's leading suppliers of SPMs, thereby providing a natural path to early
commercialization.