* 9560789
* SBIR PHASE I: A Probability Network Language for Machine    Learning and Knowledge Discovery Applications
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Wray Buntine, Heuristic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Anthony A. Centodocati
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,687.00

9560789 Buntine This Small Business Innovation research Phase I project is to
develop efficient, effective applications of machine learning which is an
expensive, error-prone process even for highly-trained experts. It has been
previously shown that probability networks can represent a broad variety of
learning and discovery problems, and manually transforming a network can yield
algorithms for recovering or discovering model parameters from data. This new
approach has been demonstrated in basic research, but not yet generalized and
automated in order to test applicability and feasibility. This effort will
complete the research and development to turn these results into a commercial
application: an automated CASE-tool for researchers and developers in machine
learning and knowledge discovery. The design goal is a Probability Network
Language (PNL), a front-end graphical prototyping tool, and a PNL compiler that
emits efficient C or C++ code for learning and discovery applications. If the
initial effort is successful, The follow on effort will produce end-to-end
functionality in a complete prototype for PNL. PNL is precisely what is needed
to make machine learning and knowledge discovery a practical technology,
accessible to a wide range of application programmers. PNL promises significant
benefits to engineers and scientists in the U.S., particularly those involved in
data analysis, but also those faced with complex diagnostic problems, real-time
control problems, and voluminous or heterogeneous data. If it proves to be a
viable and effective tool for rapid prototyping of learning and discovery
applications, PNL will provide the missing tools needed for efficient
development of state-of-the-art applications in diagnosis control and data
analysis. It is intended to use and license PNL in commercial applications for
scientific research, financial services and biotechnology.