* 9560415
* SBIR PHASE I: High Performance Nondestructive Evaluation    System Using a Giant Magnetoresistance Sensor Array
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Timothy Tiernan, TPL, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9560415 Tiernan This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop a nondestructive evaluation (NDE) method based on sensors containing
elements of giant magnetoresistance (GMR) material. New techniques are needed
for the NDE of anomalies and stresses in metal structures used in buildings,
bridges, and aircraft components. Current techniques based on visual
inspections, eddy current, X-ray radiography, and acoustic emissions suffer from
limitations in inspection capability, speed of inspection, and cost of
inspection. The GMR effect has resulted in the development of magnetic field
sensors with extremely high signal-to-noise levels capable of detecting
extremely weak magnetic fields under ambient conditions. The microfabrication
techniques used to form these sensors are well suited to the construction of low
cost sensor arrays with a wide range of geometries. Magnetic methods have been
shown to be capable of detecting anomalies such as cracks and for estimating the
stresses in and around welds in steel components. With proper sensor design it
is possible to use magnetometry to obtain high resolution, three-dimensional
information concerning the internal structure and stress of a component. This
project will develop a sensor array based on GMR material and combine it with
instrumentation and analytical concepts that will permit the 3-D imaging of
metal components. A predictive capability will be developed to assess the
mechanical integrity of components analyzed with the NDE system. A simple-to-
use, field-portable NDE technique for metallic structures would find many
applications including the inspection of bridges, buildings, and aircraft. The
flexible sensor would permit the inspection of a wide range of different sample
shapes. Rapid, high resolution images would permit practical cost effective
inspections. The ability to predict mechanical degradation would provide
critical insight concerning which structures are severely damaged and which can
rem ain in service. The sensors will be simple and inexpensive to fabricate and
the support electronics required is available so, in addition to high
performance, it should be possible to manufacture the system at a reasonable
cost.