* 9560213
* SBIR Phase I: Investigation of Phase Change Materials       Microcapsules for High Temperature Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Yvonne Bryant, Triangle Research and Development Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,631.00

9560213 Bryant This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
will investigate microencapsulation of phase change materials (PCMs) in a form
stable enough to withstand the melt spinning process. If micro PCMs could be
incorporated into melt-spun fibers, the resulting fabrics (polypropylene, nylon,
polyester) would have greatly enlarged thermal storage capacities. Micro PCMs
have been successfully incorporated into low temperature, solution-spun acrylic
fibers and fabric samples, increasing their thermal storage tenfold. However, at
melt spinning temperatures (higher than 200oC) micro PCMs particles lose their
core material, which corrupts the melt spinning process. Before these materials
can successfully be incorporated into melt spun fiber, capsules must be
available with more stable wall structure. Phase I will use differential
scanning calorimetric (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) to establish
the behavior of current micro PCMs at temperatures exceeding 200oC and to
understand the mechanism of microcapsule failure. On this basis microcapsules
will be produced with modified wall structures. Their stability at high
temperature will be compared to that of existing microcapsules. The most
promising concepts for thermal stability of micro-PCMs would be pursued in Phase
II. As micro-PCMs that are stable at high melt-spinning temperatures are made,
thermally enhanced materials can be fabricated and marketed from melt spun
fibers for apparel and industrial insulation materials, where hot or cold
thermal control is needed.