* 9560154
* SBIR Phase I: Combustion of Natural Gas with Improved Heat  Recovery and Zero NOx Production
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Richard Lyon, Energy & Environmental Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,998.00

9560154 Lyon The purpose of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project is to develop a novel combustor that would allow the combustion of
natural gas to be done with air as the oxidizing agent, without mixing of the
air and fuel, thereby allowing C0 and H2O to be recovered in an undiluted state.
This combustor also has the advantage of zero NOx production. Presently
available technologies for natural gas combustion are subject to a number of
limitations. While the amount of NOx produced by natural gas combustion varies
from one technology to another, they are all similar in that some NOx is
produced. In regions such as Southern California in which the air quality
problems are critical, preventable NOx emissions are likely to be intolerable
even if they are relatively small. Available natural gas combustion technology
is also unsatisfactory in that it involves mixing the natural gas with air prior
to or during the combustion process. This causes the C02 and H20 produced by the
combustion process to be diluted with nitrogen from the air. This lowers the
partial pressure of water vapor in the postcombustion gases, decreasing the dew
point to such an extent that useful recovery of the heat of vaporization of
water is not practically possible. The dilution of the combustion products with
nitrogen also makes it impractical to recover and sell the C02. This is
regrettable both because there is a substantial market for C02, and because of
the possible problem of global warming. If a technology which could economically
recover and sell C02 from combustion gases were fully developed, it would then
be available as a method of controlling C02 emissions in the event that such
control was discovered to be necessary. Initial applications of this technology
are likely to be limited to regions with critical air quality problems such as
Southern California and to situations in which it is practical to sell the
recovered C02. Very wide spread application is to be expected if it bec omes
necessary to control C02 emissions.