* 9560360
* SBIR Phase I:  High Temperature Superconducting Materials   Development for High Power RF and Microwave Components
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Kolagani Harshavardhan, NEOCERA, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,960.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will develop high
temperature superconducting (HTS) films with a high power handling capability
for high power RF and microwave components. RF and microwave passive components
derived from HTS thin film technology offer several advantages in performance
over the conventional metallic components. However, even though HTS thin film
components exhibit very high-Q values, their power handling capability is often
limited, imposing restrictions on the range of possible applications. Innovative
approaches in HTS thin film process technology are required to obtain the film
quality needed to overcome this problem. The proposed approach combines improved
thin film processing techniques with the design flexibility offered by a low
dielectric constant substrate (MgF2) in achieving this goal. Ag-doped YBCO films
on low dielectric constant MgF2 substrates (dielectric constant 5.4) with
Sr2(Al,T)aO6 structural template, proposed in this feasibility effort are
expected to result in at least an order of magnitude enhancement in the RF power
handling capability of the films compared to those currently available. HTS
films with a high power handling capability would enable the design of high
power HTS filters, multiplexers and filter banks. The major reduction in volume
and weight together with improved performance of such devices in emerging high
performance Transmit/ Receive systems is expected to outweigh the cost of
cooling HTS circuitry to 77K.