* 9560738
* SBIR Phase I: An Automated Tool for Probability Elicitation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Jonathan Weiss, Information Extraction and Transport Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1996
* USD 74,857.00

9560738 Weiss This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses
a need that arises out of the recent advances in probability modeling algorithms
and software and the increasing capabilities and decreasing costs of computer
hardware: It is now computationally feasible to construct and apply large
probability models, but the elicitation of probabilities to populate those
models is still labor-intensive and inefficient. The solution to this problem
lies in an automated probability elicitation tool that can help the modeler to
structure probability models (Bayes nets) in ways that require fewer and simpler
probability assessments; that can support a variety of elicitation modes
(numerical, graphical, verbal, etc.) for both discrete and continuous random
variables; that can help avoid or remedy the biases, inconsistencies, and
miscalibrations that may characterize various elicitation modes; and that can
use test cases or scenarios as a global-level check on the consistency and
accuracy of the locally assessed probabilities in the model. This Phase I effort
will help establish the technical validity of the basic concepts underlying such
an automated probability elicitation tool. Its research objectives are to
develop (1) a measure of the magnitude of an assessment task which can be
applied to estimate elicitation requirements and to restructure the probability
model for greater efficiency; (2) a characterization of random variable domains
and the most appropriate elicitation modes for each; (3) a list of potential
biases and errors associated with each elicitation mode; and (4) an approach
that uses test cases or scenarios to highlight and measure discrepancies between
domain experts' global case-based judgments and the model-based computed values.
A variety of analytic techniques will be used, including mathematical and
statistical analyses, value-of-information analysis, fuzzy sets to improve the
discretization of continuous distributions, and Gaussian parametric approximati
ons to continuous distributions. In addition, empirical psychological research
to characterize assessment biases and errors will be initiated. The potential
applications of an automated probability elicitation tool extend throughout
government and industry, virtually anywhere probability models are used; current
and near-term prospects include military intelligence analysis, medical
diagnosis, fault diagnosis for industrial or transportation systems, and
financial applications. Once fully developed, the elicitation tool may be
marketed as a stand-alone software product, licensed as proprietary code to
developers of probability modeling software, or used as a building block for
domain-specific applications to be marketed directly to companies using
probability models.