* 9560778
* SBIR Phase I: High-Selectivity Membranes for Separations in the Chemical Process Industry
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Scott McCray, Bend Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1996
* USD 74,883.00

95-60778 McCray This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
directed toward the development of highly selective membranes for use in the
chemical process industry (CPI). The potential advantages of simple and
efficient membrane separation processes are well known. Membranes, however, have
not made major inroads into the CPI for three reasons: 1) many CPI feed streams
contain components that dissolve or swell current membranes or module materials,
2) many CPI separations occur at temperatures too high for commercial modules to
withstand, and 3) many membranes that show high selectivity when tested on pure-
component feed streams lose this selectivity when operated on multicomponent
feed streams. The proposed membrane is a new type of hybrid polymeric material
that can be used to make membrane coatings for a wide range of organic/organic
separations in the CPI. These coatings will be applied to unique solvent- and
temperature-resistant hollow-fiber supports (developed in previous work) to form
thin-film-composite (TFC) membranes. These, in turn, will be used in high-
efficiency, solvent-resistant modules that will enable the use of membrane
technology in many applications for the first time. During Phase I, the hybrid
materials will be developed, tested as flat-sheet membranes, and applied to the
most promising material as a coating on a solvent-resistant support in a hollow-
fiber module. In Phase II, the use of hybrid coatings for a wide range of
separations and conduct parametric and long-range tests of modules will be
examined. Research conducted during Phases I and II will provide the foundation
for field testing and commercialization of the technology in Phase III. Annual
CPI expenditures (largely for separation unit operations) exceed $23 billion,
with key separations including the separation of mixtures of organics, such as
aromatics from aliphatics and olefins from paraffins. Additionally, separation
processes account for more than 40% of the energy consumption in t he CPI. TFC
membranes based on the proposed hybrid materials could be applied to a wide
range of separations in the CPI, including the separation of aromatics from
aliphatics (e.g., benzene from gasoline) and olefins from paraffins (e.g.,
propane from propylene). Examples of potential separation applications range
from the treatment of natural gas at the wellhead through the refining process
to the production of finished chemicals.