* 9560868
* SBIR Phase I:  Design of an Efficient, Variable Energy,     Variable Intensity Photon Beam
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Phil Morton, RxD, Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 73,946.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses development
of a comparatively inexpensive system that can produce a tunable
quasimonochromatic high energy photon source. Because such beams can be
polarized, have low emittance and small energy bandwidth, they are applicable to
a broad spectrum of commercial and medical uses. The ideas to be explored in
this proposal can also be used to provide compact, stable, efficient, intense
particle beams, further enhancing their commercial prospects. The key elements
of this proposal are the RF electron gun, recirculation of the electrons with
acceleration, wigglers, chicanes and achromatic bends based on permanent
magnetic materials, and the recirculation of the intermediate photons generated
by the wigglers. The technique of Compton backscattering to boost the
intermediate photon energy gives the variable, quasimonochromatic source of high
energy photons. The basic goal of the Phase I effort is to design the photon
source and simulate the behavior of the electrons and the UV photons as they
circulate within their respective structures. The purpose of Phase I is to
design and fabricate one period of the short period helical wiggler
demonstrating the feasibility of a significantly improved wiggler capability
both from the standpoint of wavelength and variable polarization. Phase I effort
will also develop detailed specifications for the magnetic, optical, and RF
components of the design for Phase II testing at an existing facility. RXD has
identified a number of areas such as isotope production, nuclear waste
remediation, food, water, and medical instrument sterilization, and accelerator
based medical treatment of diseases, which would benefit directly and quickly
from breakthroughs in access, safety, affordability, and flexibility such as
might be provided with this photon source.