* 9560642
* SBIR Phase I: Interface Control in Vapor-Grown Carbon       Fiber/Polymer Composites
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Jyh-Ming Ting, APPLIED SCIENCES, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1996
* USD 74,724.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is aimed at developing
an understanding of and modifications to the surface state, surface chemistry,
and development of sizings for vapor-grown carbon fibers for interface control
in composites. In contrast to brittle matrix composites, polymer matrix
composites generally require a high degree of fiber-matrix adhesion in order to
provide good composite strength and toughness. The majority of commercial
reinforcing fibers, both carbon and glass, are treated during or after
manufacture with various surface treatments as well as a sizing to increase
compatibility with and bonding to the matrix polymer. A new class of carbon
fiber has been developed and is being produced in pilot scale quantities. This
vapor-grown carbon fiber (VGCF) holds the promise of a highly graphitic fiber
reinforcement at costs significantly lower than other carbon fibers. However,
due to the high graphitization of this fiber, the fiber surface is generally
unreactive and will not bond with polymer matrices. Thus, various treatments
will be evaluated for their effect in enabling fiber/matrix bonding in polymer
matrix composites. Specifically, various degrees of surface oxidation will be
effected onto the fibers followed by application of commercial sizings. The
surface chemistry will be quantified and also verified from composite testing.
As a low cost fiber, VGCF can potentially be used as a composite reinforcement
for many elastomeric and polymeric matrices. The solution of the problem of low
fiber-matrix adhesion will allow for the development of, at least one,
commercially viable material for use in automotive parts, materials requiring
EMI shielding, and innovative composites requiring small diameter fibers.