* 9560808
* SBIR PHASE I: A Unique High Accuracy Means of Locating      Cellular Telephones Using the Existing Cellular             Infrastructure
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Steen Parl, Signatron Technology Corp
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,996.00

9560808 Parl This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project involves an
investigation into the application of a new, innovative, passive radio-based
geolocation technique, developed by the proposing firm, to the problem of
locating and tracking cellular telephones and other emerging wireless personal
communication devices without requiring modification to the mobile phones. The
new signal processing method is based on a technique developed in part under NIH
funding, which was designed for use in locating wandering elderly and mental
patients. The technique employs a maximum-likelihood estimation of the emitter
location which is based on joint estimation of signal parameters at multiple
existing cellular base stations. The proposed approach offers a potential order
of magnitude increase in location accuracy over existing techniques and also
promises to permit location of in-building emitters. The new technique promises
to be inexpensive in implementation and will not require costly wide-band
dedicated line connection to a central processing facility, as do some current
techniques, nor will it require signal processing at the mobile terminal, as do
existing GPS and Loran-C location determination devices. It is proposed that the
new signal processing technique be adapted to use existing control signals that
are periodically emitted from cellular telephones; such proposal ensures that no
modification of the cellular telephones or existing cellular infrastructure is
required to implement a final system. Phase I of the program comprises the
development a computer simulation of a multiple base station cellular telephone
system. The simulation will be used to study the performance in terms of
accuracy, building penetration, and required complexity of the proposed
technique under various realistic radio propagation conditions. The results will
be used to determine the minimum hardware configuration for Phase II prototype
implementation. Performance models for the proposed system using cellular
telephone transmissions will be developed and implementation costs estimated.
The Phase I program will conclude with the preliminary design of the base
station hardware, plans for remote monitoring and control of the base station
units, and estimation of system costs based on the preliminary design. A
competitive analysis comparing the proposed technique to other geolocation
techniques and an in-depth commercialization plan will be developed. The
proposed geolocation technique will have application in low-cost implementation
of enhanced 9-1-1 services to locate wireless telephones in emergency
situations, medical condition monitoring/location, low-cost vehicle tracking and
navigation systems (including automated dispatch), tracking of mobile computers
for network management, child location devices, criminal tracking, pet location
devices, stolen vehicle recovery, lost/stolen cellular telephone recovery, and a
wide range of Intelligent Transportation System (ITS) location-based service
systems.