* 9560950
* SBIR Phase I:  Controlled Atmosphere Disinfestation of Raw  Agricultural Products
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Larry Swette, GINER, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1996
* USD 74,980.00

95-60950 Swette This Small Business Research Phase I project is directed to
development of a method for disinfestation of raw agricultural products. The use
of containerized cargo transport in which containers carry a dedicated
refrigeration unit ("reefers") has presented the opportunity to employ
controlled-atmospheres for preservation of perishable products. Giner, Inc. has
developed and is currently testing a system for active continuous removal of
oxygen leaking into "sealed" reefers to very low levels (&lt; 1000 ppm) to
extend controlled-atmosphere technology to other food preservation applications.
This is being implemented with an on-board Electrochemical Oxygen Removal (EOR)
system developed by Giner, Inc. The confluence of refrigerated, sealed
controlled-atmosphere shipping containers and active oxygen removal now presents
the further opportunity to implement disinfestation by controlled-atmosphere
modification, typically low oxygen and high carbon dioxide. The oxygen level
must be lowered sufficiently for disinfestation but not below the tolerance
level of the respiring produce. Building upon the EOR currently under
development by Giner, Inc. for on-board low-oxygen maintenance, this Phase I
project will attempt to design and construct a prototype Electrochemical Oxygen
Control (EOC) system suitable for disinfestation. Development of a land-based
independent system whose control is based on intrinsic sensing of the oxygen
concentration is proposed and a feasibility demonstration with fresh produce
will be performed. The advent of containerized refrigerated cargo transport has
allowed fresh agricultural products to be shipped to ever more distant markets
and conferred the ability to readily transfer containers between different modes
of transport as required without rehandling of the cargo. Insect infestation of
raw agricultural products is a universal problem in produce storage, processing
and shipping that must be effectively addressed to minimize health concerns and
to mainta in an appetizing appearance, shelf life and marketability. Cargos that
cross state and national boundaries are also generally subject to stringent
regulations for all the same reasons as well as to prevent the importation of
harmful new agricultural pests. The anticipated benefits of this line of
research are greater availability of fresh healthy agricultural products without
the loss of quality associated with disinfestation by heating or freezing or the
chemical residues from pesticides. There should also be substantial cost savings
associated with the prevention of losses that would otherwise occur for
producers, shippers and consumers. This technology may also open more distant
markets for American products by ship transport that are now only accessible by
limited, expensive air transport. In addition, the technology developed is
anticipated to find application for disinfestation in many other environments
where insect infestation is a problem.