* 9560558
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Solar Photocatalysts for Air Pollution Control
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* James Kittrell, KSE Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,992.00

9560558 Kittrell This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
exploits novel photocatalysts for air pollution control. Technological
innovation is required to effectively manage dilute sources of air pollution
from industrial operations and remediation of contaminated groundwater and
soils. Emissions controls are needed which are cost effective, use energy
efficiently, are suitable for remote locations, and produce no hazardous by-
products. Photocatalysis potentially has these characteristics, employing
ultraviolet (UV) light to destroy chemical compounds at ambient temperatures and
pressures. Photocatalysis would be particularly attractive if an efficient solar
technology were available, exploiting inexpensive and abundant UV radiation from
the sun. To date, solar photocatalysis has not been sufficiently efficient or
effective for large scale adoption. KSE, Inc., the proposing firm, has developed
novel photocatalyst formulations which are about 50 times as active as
conventional titania photocatalysts. The efficiency of use of solar radiation in
the W spectrum should be greatly increased by such photocatalysts. The objective
of the Phase I research is to establish the technical feasibility of exploiting
these unique photocatalyst formulations to capture the potential of solar
radiation for the destruction of environmentally hazardous gaseous emissions in
air. The performance of the photocatalysts to be developed will enable effective
utilization of solar UV radiation and efficient scale-up to capacities of
relevance to practical applications. Phase I will focus on chlorinated volatile
compounds (CVOC's) and toluene as model compounds, with extension in Phase II to
the full spectrum of industrial hazardous emissions. The environmental control
equipment market in the United States is forecast to grow to sales of $1.6
billion by the year 2000. The solar photocatalytic air pollution control
products to be developed will find broad application in that marketplace.
Initiall y, solar photocatalytic units will be installed to control air
emissions from soil and groundwater remediation due to the superior economics
and ready adaptability to remote locations. Future products will address
industrial tailpipe emissions control and indoor air quality maintenance.