* 9560908
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Membranes for the Seperation of Carbon Dioxide/Hydrogen Mixtures
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Ingo Pinnau, MEMBRANE TECHNOLOGY & RESEARCH, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9560908 Pinnau This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses
on the development of high-performance membranes for the separation of carbon
dioxide/hydrogen mixtures. This separation is performed on a massive scale in
every refinery as part of the production process for hydrogen. Current best
technologies are amine absorption or pressure swing adsorption, both expensive,
energy-intensive processes. The membranes to be developed are based on rubbery,
highly hydrophilic polyether-polyamide block copolymers. Preliminary data show
that the membranes are exceptionally selective for the separation of
polar/nonpolar gas mixtures such as carbon dioxide/hydrogen. The Phase I project
will be the first quantitative evaluation of the gas transport properties of
polyether-polyamide block copolymers for this industrially important
application. To demonstrate the feasibility of the approach, the new polymers
will be made into thin-film composite membranes on a laboratory scale. Phase II,
if successful, will develop techniques to make thin-film composite membranes and
modules on a commercial scale, and evaluate the modules in pilot scale systems.
High-performance, hydrophilic rubbery polymers that exhibit higher selectivity
and higher gas permeability than conventional hydrophobic polymers could have a
significant impact on many polar/nonpolar gas separation applications, such as
the removal of carbon dioxide from hydrogen. Availability of these novel
polymers in thin-film composite membranes and modules would dramatically improve
the process economics and make membrane systems competitive with conventional
separation methods in these applications.