* 9560997
* SBIR PHASE I:  Hybrid Steam-Plasma Torch
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Lawrence Farrar, RESODYN CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project explores a novel
hybrid steam-plasma (HSP) torch that has broad application for advanced
materials synthesis, chemical conversion, waste redemption, coating deposition,
and gasification. The research objectives aim at a prototype HSP torch and focus
on demonstrating its application in plasma spray operations. The demonstration
focuses on reliability and ease of use in an industrial environment. The Phase I
research will address issues like requirements for a durable electrode material
for the steam-plasma environment. Plasma spraying is expected to have a large
market potential. Phase II is planned to include detailed evaluations on the
metallurgical nature of the sprayed metal and of its bonding characteristics
with substrates. Use of the HSP torch is expected to improve process
productivity and open new applications for plasma spray technology. As a generic
processing tool, it may open a broad range of chemical processing applications.
These include nano-powered synthesis, conversion of methane to acetylene, and
gasification of black liquor in the pulp industry. A significant market for this
technology may be found in the treatment of hazardous chemical and biological
agents, including CFC's, PCB's, and other toxic or carcinogenic substances.