* 9560344
* SBIR PHASE I: New Photogrammetry Data Acquisition and       Processing Technology for Highway Design and Maintenance
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Daeyong Lee, CamSys Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 73,500.00

9560344 Lee This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will examine
the feasibility of developing an innovative motion video-based Photogrammetry
Data Acquisition and Processing System for special areas of highway design and
maintenance. To design and maintain transportation systems, three-dimensional
data on specific areas are collected usually by means of aerial photography,
manual surveys, and labor intensive data processing. The current aerial
photography methods cannot effectively collect data on areas that may not be
seen readily from an aerial position. These areas include bridges, rock face
slopes, river banks, and tunnels. The goal of this project is to develop a
portable, easy-to-use, motion video based system that uses close-range
terrestrial photogrammetry techniques to accurately model areas not covered by
aerial methods. In addition to a motion video camera, the hardware of the data
acquisition system will consist of a Global Positioning System (GPS), encoders,
and a laptop computer. A novel feature of the method is that the system will be
tailored to the accuracy desired for different applications through the use of a
mathematical model. The main research objectives focus on developing methods to
obtain accurate camera position and orientation data, and to automatically
identify and correspond 2D points between video images. The new system will
offer significant labor and time savings in gathering photogrammetry, ground
survey, and surface description data. CamSys, Inc. has extensive experience in
producing and marketing automated measurement equipment for acquiring
photogrammetry data, and has distinct capabilities needed to develop the
proposed new system. Benefits of this new system will include innovative
hardware-software methods to acquire and process video data to produce
photogrammetry and surface description information for assessing the condition
of bridges and tunnels, and modeling rock face slopes and river banks. The
system will make the process of designing and maintaining transportation related
systems more efficient and reliable. Additional commercial applications exist in
industries such as transportation, construction, architecture, education, and
entertainment.