* 9560623
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Class of Ceramic Materials with        Superior Resistance to Fracture
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Michael Sheppard, Ushers Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 12/31/1996
* USD 74,137.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will apply reinforcing
agents in a robust structural composite. When fully developed, this concept will
foster a new class of reinforced materials with superior resistance to fracture
when compared to conventional materials reinforced with platelets, whiskers and
continuous fibers. These conventional materials have failed to deliver the
strength and toughness necessary to overcome market resistance to so-called
`brittle` materials. This project will deliver major increases in fracture
resistance of matrix materials by close-packing these novel particles so that,
unlike the 2-dimensional or planar toughness of conventional reinforcements,
true 3-dimensional toughness may be obtained. Unlike platelets, whiskers and
continuous fibers, these reinforcements are inherently sound architecturally,
and nest, or pack together on a co-planar basis. The resulting crack path
between these reinforcements is highly tortuous and 3-dimensional. This proposed
solution to the strength and toughness problems of conventional ceramics offers
lower cost manufacturing possibilities as well an improved lifetime. Potential
uses of the results of this research include: 1) refractory composites for the
heat treating industry for bricks, castables, gunnables, and monolithic linings,
2) cementitous matrix composites for radioactive or hazardous waste containment,
3) high strength-to-weight composites for critical load-bearing industrial
construction applications, 4) road repair materials, 5) critical aircraft
takeoff and landing area materials, and 6) in non-structural areas, catalytic
support components and fluidized bed components will benefit from the superior
surface-to-volume of these shapes.