* 9560046
* SBIR Phase I: A Bottleneck Dynamics Decision Support System for Scheduling and Control
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Thomas Morton, Parsifal Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,956.00

9560046 Morton This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
develops a new simulation-oriented methodology for fast, accurate, and intuitive
scheduling in manufacturing operations. Under escalating pressures of zero
inventories, time based competition, and make-to-order requirements, finite
scheduling is emerging in industrial practice. However, current methods are
simple simulation approached with manual control or else rather complex and
expensive automatic schedulers that allow little interaction with the user. This
methodology, called bottleneck dynamics, is expected to allow a full range of
manual, automatic, or mixed control and work fast. Bottleneck dynamics is
intuitive in many shops where individual activities do not dominate, i.e., the
structure is close to convex (in the aggregate). This suggests that: (a)
heuristic dual prices are meaningful, providing approximate sensitivity
analysis, (b) such prices can be used to fashion a broad variety of heuristics,
including transfer pricing between different levels and parts of the shop, and
(c) heuristic prices can be improved by iteration (hill climbing). This approach
to scheduling has been explored in computational studies on automatic sequencing
for a variety of objectives. The SBIR Phase I will extend bottleneck dynamics to
routing, parallel machines, and sequence dependent setups through laboratory
testing. Phase II is projected to add a decision support interface and two-level
scheduling and control, and to test a prototype of a commercial system.
Bottleneck dynamics is expected to provide small manufacturers with planning and
scheduling software tools in manual, automatic and mixed modes of use. It is
expected to support them in fast, accurate, easy-to-implement-and-use finite
capacity scheduling opereations at affodable costs.