* 9561408
* SBIR PHASE I:  Utilization of Deep Ocean Water for Water    Desalination:  The Hurricane Tower
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Patrick Sullivan, OCEANIT LABORATORIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-61408 Garshnek This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop a simple, portable and efficient water desalination device that takes
full advantage of abundant natural resources of cold deep ocean water, solar
energy, and the unique aspect of utilizing the dynamics of generated secondary
vortices of the type commonly encountered when stirring a cup of tea or, on a
larger scale, within a hurricane. In nature, a hurricane is actually a "solar
still" whose efficiency is greatly enhanced by secondary vortices which rapidly
transport moisture-laden air to the cooler upper atmosphere where it
precipitates as rain. The proposed device is a smaller version of a contained
hurricane whose efficiency is increased by rotor-generated vortices. Phase I
research will focus on the fabrication of a half-scale Hurricane Tower
desalination plant pilot system, generation of a secondary vortex in a closed
system, and engineering/feasibility tests of the system distillation efficiency
utilizing deep ocean water (4-6 C) as the coolant to condense rapidly rising
vapor and solar-heated ocean salt water (for desalination). Phase II will
develop an operational full-scale demonstration unit that could lead to the
commercial development of a low-cost, low energy, desalination plant capable of
operating on floating barges, in fixed locations, or mobile platforms to service
geographic areas where water desalination is needed and where deep ocean water
is available. Commercial applications of the Hurricane Tower device include
desalination plants for military applications, oil rigs, coastal regions, and
island and inter-island water supply; emergency water supply during disasters,
water contamination, or drought; and reliable water supply for atolls, island
states, and Third World nations. Hurricane Tower water desalination systems
could also replace aged and expensive fixed water desalination plants in use
today_providing an economical source of fresh water supply for everyday use or
emergen cies situations.