* 9561662
* SBIR PHASE I:  Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Methanol on    Microparticles in Polypyrrole
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/1996,10/31/1996
* Krzysztof Franaszczuk, Lynntech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will explore the
synthesis of polymer-based catalysts for methanol electro-oxidation to carbon
dioxide. A novel in situ electrochemical nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) method
will be used for characterization of the catalyst. The research will address
molecular principles of reactivity enhancement in heterogeneous oxidative
electrocatalysis with bimetal platinum/ruthenium (Pt/Ru) electrodes and with the
electrodes supplemented by ternary components. The objectives will be to
synthesize polypyrrole-embedded Pt/Ru nanoparticles to produce an efficient
catalysis and to characterize the catalyst and how it works. The research will
drawn upon recent progress in electrocatalysis, such as: (i) the demonstration
of promising carbon monoxide poison-tolerant properties of polymer-embedded
metal particles in methanol electro-oxidation; (ii) an ability to form micro-
and nano-scale particles of platinum metals reproducibly in conducting polymers;
and (iii) progress in solid-state NMR and electro-analytical methodology in
electrochemical surface science. Phase I will study the particle size effect on
the methanol oxidative electrocatalysis, as well as the particle composition in
terms of the Pt/Ru ratio, and the addition of ternary copper and rhodium.
Polypyrrole-embedded Pt/Ru nanoparticles will be used, supported on a gold
substrate. The principal methods will be voltammetry, chrono-amperometry, and
electrochemical NMR. High reactivity is expected to be obtained as well as
insights into the fuel cell electrode process and oxidative heterogeneous
electrocatalysis. This research will provide a base for new alloy- and
chemically-modified electrode materials in conducting polymeric matrices for
poison-free current generation in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs). Mobil
electric power uses of DMFCs may be used in the electric-car Next Generation
Vehicle (NGV). Phase II of this project would provide scale-up of selected
catalysts for commercialization.