* 9561562
* SBIR Phase I:  High Pressure Sintering of Nanocrystalline   Diamond Compacts
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Oleg Voronov, DIAMOND MATERIALS INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,995.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will address sintering
of `binderless` Nanocrystalline Diamond Compacts (NDCs). Sintering will be
performed using an advanced high pressure/high temperature synthesis method with
capabilities of 15 GPa at 1800 oK. Currently. Polycrystalline Diamond Compacts
(PDCs) are produced commercially from 20-70 micron size diamond powder by high
pressure compaction methods, using metal binders (Co, Si Ni). Use of the metal
binder reduces the thermal stability of the compacts, while use of large diamond
powder particles reduces the toughness and ductility. This limits the
applications for the PDCs. This project will develop an economical method for
fabricating Nanocrystalline Diamond Compacts (NDCs), without any binder from < 5
nm diamond particle powders. The hardness and toughness of the material should
match those of naturally formed polycrystalline diamond - `carbonado`. The
ultra-fine grained diamond compacts are candidate materials for precision
manufacturing tools, which can be used for high rate machining and fabrication
of hard materials. The project will demonstrate the feasibility of producing
test samples of NDCs using highly purified nano-diamond powder as starting
material, and our in-house ultrahigh pressure unit for powder compaction
purposes. This project will determine the physical and mechanical properties of
the NDC samples. Routine production of large volumes of binderless
nanocrystalline diamond compacts will significantly improve the high temperature
stability and precision performance of cutting tools.