* 9561199
* SBIR Phase I: Marker Gene Directed Substrates for Cell      Regulation
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1996
* John Naleway, MARKER GENE TECHNOLOGIES, INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,175.00

9561199 Naleway This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project aims to
investigate the feasibility of developing new compounds capable of utilizing
common marker gene expression in transformed cells to control the growth and
character of cells in living tissue. If successful, the research will provide
breakthroughs needed to advance the promising commercial uses of recombinant
genes. Marker Gene Technologies will establish the feasibility of the technology
by preparing new galactoside and Cephalosporin conjugates of common growth
regulators, drugs and enzyme inhibitors, for administration to a variety of
animal cells or bacteria that contain either the B-galactosidase (lac Z) or
ampicillin resistance (B-lactamase, amp) genes as gene fusion markers. These new
conjugates will provide innovative methods of detecting gene fusion's and
utilizing these fusion systems in transformed cells to control selected
biological properties of the cells. The new conjugates will be assayed in tissue
culture and in vivo for their ability to cause specific and localized inhibition
or improvement of cell growth in culture and to deliver these conjugates in a
cell- or tissue-specific manner. This work will provide the foundation for the
next phase of the project in which the conjugates will be tested in a variety of
commercial applications. Marker Gene Technologies brings 12 years of experience
in the area of marker gene research to this project. The company sells a variety
of market gene-directed conjugates, molecular biology kits, and inhibitors to
the worldwide scientific community. The success of this project opens up
significant commercial possibilities in the fields of plant and crop production,
medical intervention in genetic diseases, immunoadjuvant therapy for cancer
treatment, and biotechnological production of new proteins and drugs in cell-
culture systems. In addition, it contributes new information and techniques for
basic cell-biology research.