* 9561190
* SBIR PHASE I:  Electronic Beam Steering for Ground Probing  Radar
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Scott Thompson, ChT Engineering Systems
* Standard Grant
* George P. Johnson
* 10/31/1996
* USD 48,770.00

9561190 Thompson This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
attempt to substantially improve ground probing radar (GPR) by providing beam
steering capability to existing GPR systems. Ground-probing radar is a proven
technology for the investigation of structures and targets in the subsurface.
Existing GPR systems utilize a method (referred to as linear profiling) of
dragging the transmitter along a surveillance path and gathering reflection time
data to detect dielectric interfaces in the subsurface. The system to be
developed in this project will sequentially trigger a linear array of
transmitter antenna elements to form a single imaging beam from coherent
superpositions of the element transmissions to provide beam steering for wider
transmitter coverage, greater depth penetration at high frequencies (100 to 500
MHz), and higher probing resolution. These improvements are also expected to
permit ground probing from a mobile platform which will greatly reduce costs of
gathering areal data. Due to low antenna cost (of those designed by TWS
engineers), the system can be permanently affixed to areas requiring periodic
monitoring to detect potentially hazardous movements in the earth's surface
(such as underground mines) at a greatly reduced cost. Preliminary development
of each task will be performed simultaneously by the principal and co-principal
investigators during the first 3 months of the proposed project. The results of
each task will then be evaluated to develop a single unit for testing during the
second half of the project. Testing of the GPR system will be performed in the
field using the natural laboratory of the Black Hills of South Dakota to
determine beam steering accuracy of the improved system. The transmission field
will be measured directly after it has interacted with earth materials.
Receiving antennas will be placed to determine the resultant field from the
transmitting antennas. During beam steering, it is anticipated that sensors
placed i n target locations will receive strong signals as the imaging beam is
aimed in their directions while those in areas outside the steered beam will
receive weak signals. The results of Phase I will be used to develop and test a
commercially marketable GPR system during the Phase II effort. This GPR system
represents an innovative approach that will improve and broaden the application
of GPR to near-surface earth exploration. Applications of this technology
include location of underground utilities, static monitoring of key underground
structures to predict failure, subsurface fluid-front migration that may be
associated with environmental concerns, multiphase groundwater flow and
contaminant transport in geomaterials, soil structure interaction, and location
of hazardous waste containers - particularly those constructed of dielectric
materials for which an abundance of data is necessary for detection and
identification. When employed as a mobile platform, the system would greatly
reduce the cost of data acquisition for areal targets while enhancing data
quality. The system will be designed to enhance to existing commercial GPR
systems. Its low-cost fixed antennas will add to its market potential because
they can be thought of as "consumables."