* 9561553
* SBIR PHASE I:  Electrochemical Purification of              Metallofullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* John Alford, TDA Research, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-61553 Alford This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
attempt to demonstrate that metallofullerenes can be efficiently and
economically purified via electrochemical processes. Metallofullerenes are
closed carbon cage molecules containing a trapped metal atom or atoms. They are
a unique new class of molecules with a variety of potential industrial
applications. Because the encapsulated metal atom transfers its electrons to the
fullerene shell, metallofullerenes have a substantially different electronic
structure than empty fullerenes. An electrochemical purification process based
on this large difference has the potential of radically reducing the cost of
purifying metallofullerenes as compared to the current purification method which
utilizes a very expensive and time consuming two step chromatography process.
The prohibitive cost of this chromatography process has prevented pure
metallofullerenes from being commercially available_making research on
industrial applications of metallofullerenes economically infeasible to date.
Development of a relatively inexpensive electrochemical purification process
that could be scaled to much larger capactities would help spur the development
of industrial applications for metallofullerenes in such fields as
superconductors, electronics, nonlinear optics, and pharmaceuticals. During
Phase I, the feasibility of electrochemical purification of metallofullerenes
will be determined, with further optimization and scale-up of this process
planned for Phase II.