* 9561076
* SBIR PHASE I:  Lightweight Composites for High Performance  Vanes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* T. Sudarshan, Materials Modification Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project will examine the
fabrication of rotary engine parts using carbon-carbon (C-C) composite
materials. The innovative rotary engine for which these parts will be designed
operates on what is known as the `true Diesel` compression ignition cycle.
Successful adaptation of these C-C components will result in this engine not
only being more compact, significantly lighter in weight, quieter and more fuel
efficient, but also costing less than presently available piston or Wankel type
engines. Finite element thermal and stress analysis of these parts will be done
after the operating conditions of the engine have been analyzed. Phase II would
concentrate on further development with strategic partners. Potential commercial
applications for C-C composites include wear and corrosion resistant capacitors
in battery and combustion components, bearings, gears, shafts, nozzles,
crucibles, high temperature alloy production, high temperature tape and wire
drawing dies, sensors, read-write heads in computers, brushes in electric
motors, and superior thermal management devices for microelectronics. The rotary
engine has numerous applications in power, refrigeration, helicopter, and
materials handling industries and is a global market due to high horsepower per
unit weight.