* 9561398
* SBIR PHASE I:  A Compact, Intense Positron Beam Source for  Materials Analysis
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1997
* Ruth Shefer, Newton Scientific Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1997
* USD 74,999.00

This SBIR Phase project will develop the first turn-key, self-shielded
accelerator-based intense positron beam source for use in research and
industrial laboratories. Positron beams are powerful diagnostic probes for the
nondestructive evaluation of metals, semiconductors, and polymers as well as for
fundamental investigations of materials structure. A major impediment to the
further development and use of positron-based diagnostics is the present lack of
suitable sources of intense (> 107 e+/sec) slow positron beams. Presently-
available radioisotope or electron LINAC sources are much too large and
expensive for use in a laboratory or industrial environment. The proposed source
is based on a new approach to the generation of intense slow positron beams: the
production of the short-lived (+-emitter 13N via the light ion reaction
12C(d,n)13N. A compact, low energy deuteron accelerator with a specially-
designed target and tungsten moderator will provide slow positron fluxes of
greater than 107 e+/sec. A field assisted moderator which has the potential for
providing >108 e+/sec will also be investigated. The proposed Phase I study will
determine the maximum positron beam intensity which is feasible with this
source. The initial market for the 3N-based intense slow positron source will be
university and industrial laboratories in the U.S. and abroad which are already
using positron beams. The availability of the proposed source will facilitate
the more widespread use of positron-based diagnostic techniques for
semiconductors and metals. If these techniques come into routine use, the
customer base for a diagnostic instrument based on this source may include the
majority of semiconductor manufacturing facilities.