* 9561023
* SBIR PHASE I: A Blackboard-Based Collaboration Environment  for Human Problem Solving
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Daniel Corkill, Blackboard Technology Group
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,422.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project addresses weaknesses in
currently available groupware, conferencing, and workflow software. These
software systems are changing the way organizations function in the l990s, by
providing environments for conveniently entering and retrieving information,
communicating it among users, and, in the case of workflow software, tracking
its flow through business processes. Lacking in these software systems are
integral mechanisms for dynamically controlling the collaborative processes they
support and for informing users of where and when their contributions are
needed. Instead, such control must be collectively supplied by the individual
users or be pre-specified in workflow procedures. There is a need for `high-end`
collaboration software tools which will have capabilities that are very distinct
from today's `mass-market` tools. These high-end tools will provide technologies
for handling more complex information exchanges, more opportunistic interactions
among participants, and more intelligent control and monitoring of collaborative
activities. To address the limitations of current collaboration software
systems, It is proposed to apply to human collaboration, the problem-solving
approach that was developed to support opportunistic collaboration among
software modules. The approach provides a robust core technology for
collaboration software -- one that explicitly deals with control separate from
the individual problem-solving contributors. This project will demonstrate the
effectiveness of applying such an approach for integrating software `experts` in
an environment for computer-assisted human collaboration. Controlling the
collaboration process will become an increasing burden on users as the use of
collaboration tools becomes pervasive. The proposed research addresses this
problem head on, by investigating the use of a core technology with explicit
control capabilities. As a result, collaboration will become more effective (due
to opportunistic control) and less burdensome (due to the reduced control
required from individual participants). Given the cross-industry use of
collaboration tools, the results of this project have wide commercial
applicability.