* 9561560
* SBIR PHASE I:  Genetic Engineering of Regulated Seedlessness in Seed Propagated Crops
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Neal Gutterson, DNA Plant Technologies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 71,913.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is directed toward the
development of a method for producing seedless fruit from a hybrid variety while
retaining seeded fruit production from the parental inbreds. The strategy is to
allow fertilization but to block seed development soon thereafter through the
seed coat-specific expression of a cell lethal function, the ribonuclease
barnase. Barnase expression has been shown to block cell growth and development
in specific plant tissues. A normally monomeric enzyme, barnase will be
synthesized as two partial peptides encoded by separate synthetic genes, each of
which will be present in one parental inbred. In this way, the commercial fruit
product is seedless, yet commercial seed production of a seed-propagated crop
would not be impaired. For the purpose of the initial test, tomato plants will
be transformed separately with each chimeric gene, using different selectable
markers for each gene. To determine whether cell viability is disrupted when the
two chimeric genes are expressed together, one chimeric gene will be introduced
through biollistics into leaf tissue already transformed with the other chimeric
gene. Later, a pair of lines, each expressing one partial barnase gene will be
crossed to each other to confirm that no progeny are obtained in which both
genes are expressed, based on resistance to the linked markers. The overall
project goal is to apply this method to watermelon to create diploid hybrid
varieties producing seedless fruits. To ensure that this can be achieved, the
ability to transform watermelon, based on published methods, will be evaluated
during Phase I research. The use of fertile but seedless diploids should reduce
costs of production since triploid seedless watermelon production requires that
a portion of yield be sacrificed to a pollen source due to the pollen-deficiency
of triploid varieties. In addition, the time and cost to develop new seedless
watermelon varieties would be reduced by eliminating the need to produce a
tetraploid parent. Finally, this method for creating seedless varieties will
have value in other seed-propagated crops, such as cherry and papaya, and it may
be extended to vegetatively-propagated crops such as grape.