* 9561330
* SBIR PHASE I:  Development of a Frazil Ice Meter
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Casey Moore, WESTERN ENVIRONMENTAL TECHNOLOGY LABORATORIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,922.00

9561330 Moore This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to
develop a differential absorption meter optimized for frazil ice detection.
Small crystals known as frazil ice form when heat is removed from a turbulent
water body that is at, or below the freezing point. This process proves a major
factor in ice formation of northern lakes and exposed polar oceanic bodies, and
plays an important role in numerous physical and biological processes. In
addition frazil ice formation can severely impact various cold-climate
industrial water use processes. Yet the mechanism, it's prevalence, and the
associated dynamics remain poorly understood, largely for lack of effective
instrumentation. Researchers recently successfully tested a measurement
technique in which the differential absorption of water and ice were determined
to yield ice crystal concentration. This technique shows great promise in
becoming an accepted method if an instrument can be developed to effectively
exploit it. Phase I effort will focus upon the development and testing of a
proof of principal prototype. Commercial uses of the meter range from research
applications to environmental and process monitoring. Potential customers
include scientists, government agencies, hydroelectric power authorities,
municipal water authorities, shipping companies and other industrial concerns.