* 9561205
* SBIR PHASE I:  Monolothic Capillary Optics for Protein      Crystallography with Laboratory X-Ray Sources
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Johannes Ullrich, X-Ray Optical Systems
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,596.00

9561205 Ullrich This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
demonstrate the feasibility of developing significantly improved laboratory-
based protein crystallography instrumentation by incorporating multichannel
capillary x-ray optics. Crystallography is an important tool in molecular
biology for determining the structure of proteins. Currently available systems
require large and relatively perfect crystals. The collection of high resolution
data sometimes necessitates the use of synchrotron sources. Monolithic
multichannel capillary x-ray optics can efficiently collect a large solid angle
from a laboratory x-ray source and focus the x-rays into a suitable, intense,
well collimated x-ray beam for use in protein crystallography. The Phase I
project will include design, manufacture and characterization of a prototype
capillary x-ray optic; evaluation of suitable x-ray sources; and modeling of the
benefits to protein crystallography. Phase II will involve incorporation of an
optimized optic into a prototype protein crystallography system and comparison
of protein measurements with measurements from current state-of-the-art systems.
If successful, the system will have an improvement of more than an order of
magnitude in collimated x-ray beam intensity. This will make possible in the
laboratory many protein crystallography measurements previously only possible at
synchrotrons, or previously possible using laboratory sources by sacrificing
resolution and requiring very resource intensive sample preparation. The new
capability will greatly expand the use of protein crystallography, accelerate
research, and reduce the cost of these measurements. The researchers involved
are the world experts in developing and commercializing multichannel capillary
x-ray optics and experts in protein crystallography. Crystallography has proven
to be a reliable tool for investigating the three dimensional structure of
important large biological molecules. Even with the limitation s inherent in the
current systems due to limited x-ray beam intensity, protein crystallography
systems are in wide use. All pharmaceutical companies have crystallographers
working on problems aimed at structure based design of drugs. The x-ray optics
resulting from a successful project would be able to be retrofitted into
existing systems, and designed into optimized systems. Once demonstrated, the
capability to form intense, small-diameter, collimated x-ray beams from
laboratory x-ray sources would have applications in a wide variety of systems.