* 9561134
* SBIR PHASE I:  Application of Advanced Molybdate Conversion Coatings to Aluminum Alloys and Anodized Aluminum
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* King-Tsai Jeng, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate the
feasibility of using a new approach to apply molybdate (hexavalent molybdenum)
conversion coatings to aluminum alloys and anodized aluminum for aircraft
applications. Chemical conversion coatings, particularly chromate conversion
coatings, have found widespread commercial and military applications. Of
particular interest is the use of chemical conversion coatings on aircraft
aluminum alloys, because of their excellent corrosion resistance and their
ability to serve as an effective base for paint. Conventional baths used to
develop this coating contain chromates (hexavalent chromium), and it is the
residual chromates in the coating that are largely responsible for the high
degree of corrosion inhibition observed. However, chromates are highly toxic and
their presence in wastewater effluents is severely restricted. Thus, it is
highly desirable to develop a coating for aluminum alloys and anodized aluminum
utilizing non-toxic chemicals that could serve as an alternative to the
conventional chromate coating process. The key to the proposed project is the
use of `Advanced Oxidation Processes (AOPs)` to promote the oxidation of low
valence molybdenum to hexavalent molybdenum in a post-treatment stage and,
hence, enhance the formation of protective oxide films on aluminum alloys. The
proposed procedure is simple, environmentally benign, and can be applied by
brushing or spraying. This project should produce a viable alternative to the
polluting conventional chromate conversion process used for a multitude of
commercial and military end items. The molybdate (hexavalent molybdenum) process
could eventually replace conventional chromate conversion coatings for
commercial applications. Developed technology will also be beneficial with
respect to the environment and human health.