* 9561284
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Solid Super Acids
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,04/30/1997
* Roy Periana, Catalytica Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 04/30/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I Project is focused on the
development of economically and environmentally advantageous solid acid
catalysts for the gasoline alkylation process; a process whereby alkylate is
generated by the reaction of butenes with isobutane to generate a highly
branched C8 hydrocarbon. Alkylate, comprises over 12% of the gasoline pool and
is one of best components of gasoline having high octane, low volatility, and
clean burning characteristics. Consequently, demand is growing for this
material. The strategy of this research will be to synthesize novel, non-
volatile, easily separable solid acids with superacidic properties, characterize
the materials and test then for alkylation acidity. Currently, alkylate is
generated in acid catalyzed processes utilizing liquid sulfuric or liquid
hydrofluoric acids. At any time, a typical plant sulfuric acid plant utilizes
2.5 million pounds of sulfuric acid while a hydrofluoric acid plant utilizes
200,000 pounds of this material. Particularly in the case of the volatile,
highly toxic, hydrofluoric acid, these large quantities of toxic acids pose
significant health and environmental issue. Additionally, these acids require
frequent regeneration. In the case of sulfuric acid, a typical plant will
generate 100 tons/day of spent acid that requires regeneration. The replacement
of these liquid acids with non-volatile, easily separated solid acid catalysts
would provide refiners with a more economic option for producing high octane
reformulated gasoline reduce the environmental problems associated with current
processes. It is anticipated that the development of effective solid acid
catalysts would have broad implication for the process industry as many
industrial processes utilize acid catalysts.