* 9561066
* SBIR Phase I: Economic and Solvent-Free Separation/         Purification of Fullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Chenyu Pan, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-61066 Pan This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will
demonstrate the economic separation/purification of fullerenes (C60, C70)
without the use of solvents. Fullerenes, the third form of carbon after graphite
and diamond, have ushered in a completely new field of carbon with potential
applications in diverse fields such as electronics, medicine, materials, and
chemistry. The continued research as well as the pace of large-scale application
development are hampered, however, by the high cost (several times the cost of
gold) and limited supply of pure and solvent-free fullerenes which are currently
separated by liquid chromatography. Residue solvents in the fullerenes are
impurities that often significantly interfere with applications of interest. A
major contributor to the high cost is the separation/purification cost primarily
arising from the difficulty in completely removing the residue solvent. This
program will demonstrate a continuous, energy integrated separation method that
utilizes the difference in the volatility of C60 and C7O and incorporates a
fluidized bed technique into the separation. The results of this program will
immediately bolster fullerene research and advance the efforts to develop a
commercial manufacturing process for low-cost, pure, and solvent-free
fullerenes. Such a commercial process will lead to large scale applications of
fullerenes in optics, high temperature superconductivity, catalyst, polymers,
medicine, diamond synthesis, and a host of other diverse applications.