* 9561809
* SBIR PHASE I:  Powder Lubricated Bearing Development for    Flywheels
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Hooshang Heshmat, MOHAWK INNOVATIVE TECHNOLOGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Kesh S. Narayanan
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,022.00

9561809 Heshmat This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
provide the necessary foundation for the design, manufacture and integration of
a truly unique self-contained powder-lubricated quasi-hydrodynamic (PLQH) backup
bearing into flywheel energy storage (FES) systems that use magnetic bearings.
Advances in lightweight high strength composites, high speed brushless motors,
magnetic bearings and solid state electronics, coupled with improvements in the
achievable energy density, output power levels, rapid energy withdrawal and
recovery, and cost have made compact/efficient FES systems for vehicular
applications feasible. While the major components that make the FES concept
feasible are now in place, there exists a critical need for a reliable and
durable backup to the magnetic bearings. This backup bearing must be capable of
repeated and intermittent operation in the vacuum environment, even in the
presence of repetitive high speed transient impacts. Finally, the backup bearing
subsystem must itself be lightweight, compact, simple (i.e., no external
lubrication system) and low in cost. This project for a self-contained PLQH
bearing will attempt to meet these needs. Over the past eight years, under the
sustained sponsorship of DOD, NASA and DOE, the fundamental aspects of this
powder lubrication technology have been brought from its embryonic state to
fruition in a practical machinery application. In this project MiTi will attempt
to transition this technology to a product that will support the development of
durable FES systems for vehicular applications. Toward that end, this Phase I
program will update an existing two dimensional powder lubrication design
analysis to include axial flows and pressure distributions and will validate the
design analysis through component testing. In a self-contained bearing, where
the available lubricant is limited, optimizing the bearing geometry so as to
avoid extreme starvation is crucial to successful operation. The outc ome of
this Phase I effort will therefore be the guidance and tool needed to optimize
the self-contained PLQH bearing geometry. FES systems, if successfully developed
for commercial vehicular applications, would initially represent approximately
100,000 to 200,000 units per year. Additionally, Army hybrid electric heavy
combat vehicles which would require between 3 to 7 FES modules would represent
up to an additional 100,000 units. Aircraft gas turbine engines also using
magnetic bearings and requiring backup bearings represent an additional market.
Developing this key fundamental element, may also impact other fields where
precise control of the wear process is used in machining operations (e.g.,
finishing operations for ceramic balls).