* 9561712
* SBIR PHASE I:  Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition         Processing of Lanthanum Phosphate and Beta-Alumina Fiber    Coatings for Mullite Matrix Composites
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Andrew Hunt, NGIMAT CO.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9561712 Hunt This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
demonstrate the ability of Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD) to
inexpensively deposit high quality lanthanum phosphate and beta-aluminate thin
films for use in composite applications. A series of run studies will be
performed to optimize the process and demonstrate reproducibility. In this
project, thin films of lanthanum phosphate and beta-alumina will be grown onto
flat substrates and fibers using CCVD. The composition, morphology,
microstructure, and mechanical properties of the films will be determined as a
function of deposition conditions. Combustion Chemical Vapor Deposition (CCVD~M)
is the only open atmosphere CVD technique for ceramics. The CCVD method has been
shown to inexpensively and quickly apply dense, adherent, epitaxial thin films
in a continuous manner. This technology can be used for the production of
lanthanum phosphate and beta-aluminate coated thermostructural composite fibers
for stability and toughened behavior in mullite matrix composites. The CCVD
method is low cost, high quality and versatile. It does not require a reaction
chamber or furnace, yet the thin films produced are comparable in quality to CVD
films, and allows fibers to be easily passed through a deposition zone for
multi-layered, production line coatings. This firm has produced CVD quality
films of numerous materials using CCVD in the open atmosphere. This allows for
easy handling of fiber tows which is a major problem for other existing coating
techniques. Traditional CVD coating of ceramic fibers is slow, difficult and
expensive, and requires a specially designed furnace. In contrast, the CCVD
technology offers the ability to coat multiple fibers without specialized
equipment or environments. A large corporation has expressed interest in this
technique for the production of low cost, high quality lanthanum phosphate and
beta-aluminate films on fibers for high temperature protective and structural
composites in mullite matrix composites. For these reasons, the CCVD technology
is well-positioned to be used in the development of composites for fan blades,
cylinder inserts, brake rotors and related applications. ***