* 9561625
* SBIR Phase I:  Interferometric Laser Technique for Sizing   and Velocimetry of Irregular and/or Inhomogeneous Particles
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Amir Naqwi, TSI INCORPORATED
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 72,081.00

9561625 Naqwi The purpose of this Small Businness Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to examine the feasibility of extending the interferometric
phase Doppler technique to irregular particles. Phase shift signals generated by
the irregular particles will be interpreted as the outcome of a stochastic
process, i.e. a given particle (depending upon its orientation in the
measurement volume) is expected to generate a particular phase shift with a
certain probability. This project aims at experimentally examining the nature of
the phase shift probability functions, associated with different kind of
irregular and inhomogeneous particles (preliminary measurements indicate that
these functions may be fairly simple in form). For this purpose, irregular
particles will be qualified using alternative techniques that measure particle
volume, cross-sectional area or aerodynamic diameter. The theory of geometrical
scattering by statistically random particles will also be developed to predict
the above probability functions. Finally, numerical inversion schemes will be
developed to deduce velocity-resolved particle size distributions from the
measured phase shift distributions. The successful completion of Phase II, if
approved, will lead to a very desirable technique for non-intrusive and
spatially-resolved measurement of irregular particles in multiphase flows.
Measurements would be conducted through a single optical window and would be
independent of laser intensity. Currently, there is no equivalent commercial or
non-commercial instrument available.