* 9561203
* SBIR Phase I: Illustrated, Interactive, American Sign       Language/Science Videodisk Dictionary
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Laurel McLagan, Technology International Incorporated of Virginia
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561203 McLagan Children with hearing disabilities are often unable to express
themselves or to communicate specific concepts in brief words using text or sign
language, especially scientific and mathematical concepts, due to limitations in
technical English vocabulary or unfamiliarity with the appropriate sign. This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project focuses on developing and
demonstrating the feasibility of providing an illustrated, interactive American
Sign Language (ASL)/Science dictionary for children with hearing disabilities
using interactive videodisk (IVD) technology. The dictionary will use text,
graphics, video, animation, and ASL signs to define new words for elementary
school level. The child can call words via keyboard, touch screen, IVD controls,
or other input devices and display the word definition in both English and ASL
or can input a definition via selection of ASL signs or English words to
identify representative words. The first phase of the research entails producing
a prototype of a first dictionary (about 1,500 words) appropriate for middle
school on a microprocessor, using an authoring workstation. Each frame will
display a word, a video of the ASL representation of the word and definition of
the word, and a graphical illustration of what the word represents (this
illustration can be still graphics, video image, or animated graphics or
cartoons). The prototype dictionary will be alpha tested, and evaluated by
subject-matter-experts prior to introduction to other student's display media,
and by users. Means to reduce the cost for use in schools and at home will be
sought for eventual implementation on an IVD system. This project will create a
dictionary that can be directly used by children with hearing disabilities. The
tools developed offer an unlimited opportunity to present persons with hearing
impairments with almost all voice and text material available to the majority of
our nation's population. The technique involved in its creat ion can be applied
to a vast array of educational materials serving a broad range of demographic
groups. These applications include illustrated dictionaries for adults, games,
entertainment and training products.