* 9561298
* SBIR Phase I:  Innovative Methods for Training to Improve   Young Driver Risk Perception
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Beth Rabinovich, COMSIS Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 11/30/1996
* USD 74,901.00

9561298 Rabinovich The ultimate product of this Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project is a module for training adolescent drivers appropriate
skills of risk perception and evaluation incorporating the features that have
been lacking in failed past attempts; namely, (a) direct relationship to current
research and theory on adolescent cognition and risk behavior; (b) adoption of
successful strategies from other domains of youthful risk behavior (e.g., drugs,
violence, sexual behavior); and (c) flexibility to adapt to the current driver
education system which is now diverse, often informal, and conducted within non-
educational as well as various educational settings. The aim of this Phase I
effort is to provide basic information about how youth evaluate risks in
different traffic situations in the laboratory and on the road; identify
strategies utilized in successful prevention/intervention programs for risky
behavior (e.g., driving, substance use, etc.); and develop guidelines for a
modular risk decision component of driver training. The modular unit will
contain transportable low-tech training that can be used in a variety of
settings (e.g., school, home, commercial driver training establishments,
community sites, and testing sites). This information will be utilized to
achieve the major goal of the next phase of the project which will produce a
training module for young novice drivers. The proposed product has commercial
application for training young novice drivers to perceive risky traffic
situations. It would have applicability to a variety of settings including high
school health classes, commercial driver training, and community settings.