* 9561108
* SBIR PHASE I:  Novel High Sensitivity Gas Sensors for       Chemical Characterization:  Intracavity Laser Spectroscopy
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Esmail Mehdizadeh, Innovative Lasers Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,693.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will research and
develop advanced in situ, gas sensors that are simultaneously extremely
sensitive (parts-per-billion-volume (ppbv) or lower concentrations), and low in
cost. These laser-based sensors are designed to meet the increasing demands for
improved chemical characterization and monitoring instrumentation of gaseous
species (molecules/ atoms/radicals/ions) in chemical and environmental science
applications. The unique properties of semiconductor diode lasers coupled with
the high detection sensitivity and operational versatility of a new
spectroscopic technique, intracavity laser spectroscopy (ILS), provide the
technology innovation required to successfully address these applications. In
comparison to currently available ILS gas sensors based on crystal lasers, the
new generation of semiconductor diode laser/ILS sensors will have (i)
substantially lower costs, (ii) simplified operational parameters, and (iii)
expanded applicability while maintaining high detection sensitivity relative to
any currently available gas sensors. During Phase I, this firm will utilize its
established expertise in ILS technology to determine the specifications required
for semiconductor diode laser/lLS gas sensors which are optimized for
characterization of chemically and environmentally important gaseous species
under realistic processing conditions. New opportunities to design extremely
sensitive, low-cost gas sensors that are operationally simple have applications
in the chemical and environmental sciences. Commercial markets for sensors
include the semiconductor industry (e.g., microcontamination monitoring, real
time in situ detection of gaseous species, controlling the reactivity in
chemical processing), monitoring combustion and plasma reactions used in the
preparation of high quality deposited materials (e.g., flat panel display
fabrication), the ultra-high purity gas supply industry, and the fields
associated with environmental monitoring and certification of 1egal compliance.