* 9561143
* SBIR PHASE I:  Position Sensing to Improve the Interface forAdvice Giving Wearable Computers Used as Cognitive          Prosthetics
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Mark Friedman, AugmenTech Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561143 Friedman This Small Business Innovations Research Phase I project
focuses on research to develop a new and more powerful user interface for advice
giving and is built on 10 years experience designing and testing the use of
custom wearable talking computers for assisting people with cognitive
impairments. Based on an existing wearable computer, a position sensing system
will be developed that can be cost effectively installed in schools and
potential job sites. The research is to actively sense user location and gross
motor activity to give goal oriented advice based on task and user activity
models. Use of these models should enable giving advice verbally either after a
user request or when there is sensed user difficulty. In our domain of gross
motion, we will be able to determine whether or not computer originated advice
is heeded. By actively sensing task progress, we will be able to offer
encouragement when advice is heeded and provide more detailed guidance when
initial cues are insufficient. Finally, we will be able to automatically radio
for human supervision if we sense dangerous activities or an inability to follow
computer generated guidance. This interface avoids the natural language
understanding problems inherent in other active advice giving systems that
engage in dialog with their users. It will explore the domain of understanding
user needs from task related gross motor activities. The application to enable
cognitively impaired users to independently hold jobs rather than remain in
custodial care is important to society. If affordable wearable computer
technology and minor modifications to a worksite can enable a person to change
from being a dissatisfied net consumer of public funding in custodial care to a
more satisfied wage earner in competitive employment, it is obviously a win-win-
win situation. Society wins by decreasing net care costs to cognitively impaired
citizens, the citizens are more satisfied with their lives, and our company has
a new, pro prietary product.