* 9561477
* SBIR PHASE I:  Large Area Fiber Optic Tapers for X-Ray      Detectors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Richard Jeskey, Incom Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This small business Innovation Research Phase I project is to identify and
develop the materials required to make Large Area Fiber Optic Tapers for
detectors needed to do macromolecular x-ray crystallography using rotating anode
sources. Large area CCD based fiber optic taper detectors for x-ray
crystallography have been successfully fabricated and tested using a synchrotron
x-ray source. However, when using a rotating anode x-ray source, which is not as
intense or as collimated as a synchrotron, the resulting images are not of the
quality desired for optimum results. The problems encountered with these
detectors are excessive background noise and low spatial resolution. Initial
research into the problems indicate that materials presently used for Large Area
Fiber Optic Tapers are not ideally suited for solving these problems. The
objective of the research is to identify and develop the materials required to
improve the performance of these detectors. If CCD based Large Area Detectors
can be successfully developed for use with rotating anode x-ray sources a
significant step can be made in the field of x-ray crystallography. The speed of
acquiring x-ray diffraction images with a CCD based detector can be up to 10
times faster with better resolution and data quality than is presently available
with Image Plate detectors. This project will have a significant impact on the
development of a new generation of x-ray crystallography detectors to meet the
ever increasing demands for analyzing complex crystal structure.