* 9561822
* SBIR PHASE I:  Experimental Validation of Admittance        Modeling
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Donald Leo, CSA Engineering Inc
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561822 Leo This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
experimentally validate a technique for dynamic analysis of structures with very
high modal density acted on by uncertain loads. The primary tools for dynamic
analysis are finite element modeling, modal analysis, and statistical energy
analysis. These methods are powerful tools but have limitations when applied to
extremely complex structural systems. A technique known as admittance modeling
has the potential to overcome these limitations, but has not been thoroughly
tested on practical problems. The goal of this effort is to develop this
promising theory into a practical tool for the analysis of very complex
structural systems. Two experiments will be performed during Phase I. The first
involves the control of a truss structure with an attached tuned-mass damper.
The second experiment is a vibroacoustic system consisting of a "black box"
attached to a stiffened panel that is excited by multiple acoustic sources. For
both experiments, dynamic response will be predicted using experimental
measurements and the admittance modeling technique. The accuracy of the
admittance technique will be tested by comparing the predicted responses with
the measured data of the actual system. A preliminary software package will also
be developed to analyze the experimental data and provide a basis for the full-
scale development in Phase II. A fully developed admittance modeling package
would fill an important gap in the toolbox of structural dynamicists. A
commercially available package would be of interest in the aircraft and
automotive industries because of the inherent complexity of their structural
vibration problems.