* 9561266
* SBIR Phase I:  Screening Users of Virtual Reality Systems   for After-effects Such as Motion Sickness and Balance       Problems
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Robert Kennedy, Essex Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,794.00

9561266 Kennedy This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
concerned with developing a set of test procedures to evaluate aftereffects in
connection with exposure of humans to virtual reality systems. Virtual reality
(VR) technology is currently being designed for broad availability in many
segments of society. There can be a downside to the compellingly realistic
presence and self-motion afforded from VR systems. Aftereffects resembling
symptoms of motion sickness can occur, some of which indicate disorientation and
unsteadiness. Users of virtual reality systems are at risk of illness and injury
both during exposure to virtual environments, and afterwards due to the
occasional presence of long-term effects such as flashbacks, oculomotor
disturbances, drowsiness and disturbed motor control. An R&D program is proposed
to develop a battery of methods, tests, and procedures in order to identify: (a)
VR systems expected to cause sickness in users, (b) specific equipment and usage
characteristics that may be improved or modified, and (c) users who may be at
particular risk of injury and/or sustained illness following exposure to a
virtual environment. The proposed battery is intended for use primarily as a
dependent variable, that is, to register the effects of exposure to simulated
environments. Three tasks will be carried out in Phase I. The first effort will
be to determine which tests should be included in the battery and how the
various configurations can accommodate the individual tasks. The second task
will be to determine the sensitivity and psychometric characteristics of the
tests in the battery in order to obtain insights into difficulties to be
encountered and overcome. The third will be to repeatedly administer a
representative set of tests to individuals to determine the stability of the
tests. This work will provide the foundation for the next phase of the research
which will entail further validation of these tests and development of the
algorithms whic h will make them saleable to VR system developers. A need exists
for a methodological battery of tests which can be used by manufacturers of
virtual environment systems to ensure that minimal risk is associated with use
of virtual reality systems. The availability of such a battery of tests which
could be employed to certify that particular virtual environment systems produce
no ill effects to humans would be extremely valuable to manufacturers and users
of such equipment either for research or commercial usage.