* 9561049
* SBIR Phase I: Photoresist Polymer Masks Formed From an      Aqueous Phase by Polymerization in a Two Dimensional        Surfactant Template
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Bruce Roberts, Surfactant Associates Inc
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-61049 Roberts Recent needs and developments in information technology have
spurred efforts to fabricate ever smaller features on silicon wafers. To do
this, many lithographic techniques are being explored for their ability to
provide high resolution photoresist masks capable of producing such submicron
features. Needs for chip features down to 0.18 microns are predicted by the year
2002, with need for smaller 0.125 micron features soon after. Over the last
decade, Langmuir-Blogett (LB) films, a surfactant based process, has been
recognized as a viable candidate masking technique. The LB process has
demonstrated ultrathin, pin-hole free masks down to resolutions of 0.010 microns
(i.e. 10 nm); however, the LB process is limited to using only those few surface
active monomers capable of both substrate adsorption and polymerization. In
contrast, an alternative surfactant based process, developed in Surfactant
Associates' laboratory, allows ultrathin film formation by practically any
organic monomer capable of serving as a photoresist polymer. The process relies
on electrostatically adsorbed bilayer surfactant aggregates (admicelles) in an
aqueous environment into which a resist monomer is solubilized and polymerized
to form polymerized thin films physically adsorbed to the metal oxide surface.
The thin film mask is removed from the surface by changing the net surface
charge by a pH change or imposing an electrical potential on the surface. Thin
films formed by using admicelles have already found industrial use for modifying
surfaces ranging from metal oxides used in thermoset polymer composites to drug
delivery systems. It is proposed that this technique offers a variety of choices
in fabricating ultrathin masks. Such masks offer a range of etching sensitivity
for the lithographer while at the same time eliminating the need for volatile
organic solvents used in standard lithographic processes. This process is
aqueous based, environmentally acceptable, offers versatility, and resolution s
equal to--if not greater--than LB films. The development of the ultrathin masks
proposed here may allow integrated circuit fabricators to manufacture integrated
circuits with much finer detail than is possible by the industry today--thus
allowing the United States semiconductor industry to maintain its world wide
technological lead. The dominance of the United States in semiconductor
technology and the military and economic implications of that status are
significant not only because of employment aspects but also national security
concerns.