* 9561471
* SBIR PHASE I:  New Sensors for Chemical Characterization of Combustion and Process Gas Streams
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Pei-Lin Chen, T/J Technologies, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 01/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will develop new sensor materials for chemical
characterization of mutlicomponent gas streams. There is a growing need for
chemical sensors for the continuous, on line monitoring of gaseous process and
emission streams. Micron sized devices that are sensitive, operate under the
adverse conditions frequently required for many energy related applications, and
can discriminate species in multicomponent mixtures are currently unavailable.
The objective of the proposed work is to develop robust chemical sensing devices
which will quantify the gas composition based on changes in the electrical
conductivity of the transducer produced by adsorption of the target gas(es) and
identify the species based on the temperature at which they desorb from the
transducer surface as the transducer is heated linearly. This firm has
identified conductive ceramics which hold great promise for use as sensor
materials because they are refractory, possess high electrical conductivities,
reversibly adsorb/desorb a number of gases of interest and can be produced in
the form of high surface area films. This firm will show that sensor transducers
based on these materials will be amenable to miniaturization, highly selective,
operable at extreme temperatures and inexpensive. The Phase I research will
demonstrate the feasibility of these materials by fabricating high surface area
transducer films and evaluating their ability to detect and discriminate H2 and
NO, common process gases. Changes in the electrical conductivity on adsorption
of H2 and NO will be evaluated using the four point probe method and the ability
to discriminate these gases will be determined using temperature programmed
desorption techniques. The thermal and chemical stabilities will be evaluated in
H2 and NO at temperatures up to 1000 ÝC. This project will lead to a new class
of materials for on line sensing of gaseous streams. These sensors will be based
on materials which are ideal for operation in high temperature and corrosive
environments. Process control and continuous emissions monitoring represent two
broad areas of potential commercial application. Combustion based processes
would benefit in both respects. For example, emissions feedback to engine
control computers can both improve energy efficiency and reduce emissions.