* 9561354
* SBIR Phase I:  Spectral Imaging Micro-Mirror Array for      Oceanographic Remote Sensing
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Gajendra Savant, Physical Optics Corporation (Corporate Headquarters)
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 10/31/1996
* USD 72,495.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate that a
spectral imaging device with high spatial, spectral, and temporal resolution can
be created by combining a charge-coupled device (CCD) array with an integrated
array of volume holographic micro-mirrors. In POC's Spectral Imaging Micro-
Mirror Array Sensor (SIMMAS) device, the micro-mirror array will filter the
scene imaged onto the detector array, allowing the spectral characteristics of
the scene to be determined after simple numerical post processing. Since the
filter array is passive, the speed of the system will be limited only by the
detector and post processing system, which will operate at video frame rates.
The band-rejection nature of the device will result in high signal throughput,
yielding a large signal-to-noise ratio and allowing its use low light levels.
The specific innovations in the project are the creation of an integrated
holographic micro-mirror array and the application of this array to spectral
imaging. The SIMMAS device can be broadly applied to those commercial scenarios
where compact and low-cost spectral imaging is advantageous. such as hand-held
field inspection systems, robust industrial inspection systems. plasma engine
diagnostic systems (for NASA applications), medical biosensors. and remote
sensing (satellite) systems.