* 9561833
* SBIR PHASE I:  Novel Electron Correlation Methods:          Multiconfigurational Density Functional Theory
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/1996,11/30/1996
* Murco Ringnalda, SCHRODINGER, INC
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 11/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This SBIR Phase I project will result in a multiconfigurational density
functional approach to electronic structure problems that combines ab initio
generalized valence bond (GVB) or restricted configuration interaction (RCI)
techniques with density functional theory (DFT) methods. The GVB DFT and GVB RCI
DFT software will use the pseudospectral techniques of this firm's PS GVB
software to allow rapid calculations without loss of accuracy. In Phase I, this
firm will write the software necessary to implement the proposed GVB DFT and GVB
RCI DFT methods in PS GVB's pseudospectral framework, examine results from
various functionals and hybrid parameters, and use the methods to perform some
preliminary calculations of molecular properties to illustrate its feasibility,
speed, and accuracy. Extensions of Becke's half half and three parameter methods
that employ densities from GVB and GVB RCI wave functions in the density
functional evaluation of the correlation energy will be examined, and various
parameters for the three parameter methods will be tested. Calculations of
various properties of large molecules will be performed using medium and large
basis sets, including optimized molecular structures, bond dissociation
energies, ionization potentials, proton affinities, solvation energies,
multipole moments, polarizabilities, and hyperpolarizabilities. These results
will be compared to experiment or to timing and accuracy obtained using less
rapid or less accurate ab initio and DFT methods. An extensive market already
exists for electronic structure codes, with researchers performing ab initio and
DFT studies for chemical, biological, pharmaceutical, and materials
applications. The extension of PS GVB's correlation methods to GVB DFT, GVB RCI
DFT, and GVB RCI MP2 DFT techniques with the same efficient scaling already
present for other pseudospectral methods would permit rapid calculation of
chemically accurate dissociation energies, reaction barriers, conformational
energy differences, force fields, and multiple other molecular properties.
Consequently, this work will enhance the market for PS GVB significantly.