* 9561842
* SBIR PHASE I:  Stable Dehydrogenases:  Reagents for Organic Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,01/31/1997
* Larry Allen, ThermoGen Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Hennessey
* 01/31/1997
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will identify new
enzymes from thermophilic organisms suitable as stable off the shelf reagents
for selectively and mildly installing chiral centers from corresponding carbonyl
groups. There is great need in the chemical industry to develop catalytic
methods capable of efficiently converting molecules to products without
generating excessive waste streams or emissions. Molecular conservation methods
based on biocatalyst reagents, such as dehydrogenase enzymes, offer
opportunities to solve the challenges associated in industrial scale synthesis.
Current dehydrogenase based technology is limited by the few available enzymes
that have narrow substrate specificities, stabilities or yield a single type of
stereocenter for application on large scale. New dehydrogenase enzymes need to
be developed in order to increase the chemo- and stereoselectivity of different
substrates from that which is currently available. Preliminary results indicate
that dehydrogenases may be present in a number of extreme thermophiles that will
be further investigated. Dehydrogenases have been identified as useful
biocatalysts for chemical synthesis applications, particularly in the reduction
of carbonyl groups to alcohols. They allow simplification of reactions that are
difficult by traditional synthetic methodology. The highly stable biocatalysts
that the firm proposes to develop will add a variety of new dehydrogenase
specificities to the synthetic chemist's toolbox.