* 9561365
* SBIR PHASE I:  The Mathematical Theory and Implementation ofh-p Adaptive Meshless Analysis for Interdisciplinary        Applications and High-Performance Computing
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Tadeusz Liszka, Computational Mechanics Company, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

*** 9561365 Liszka This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop, formalize, and extend the mathematical theory and computational
algorithms for the h-p adaptive meshless analysis method. The feasibility of the
method for removing all need for a computational mesh to solve discrete forms of
mathematical models of interdisciplinary physical systems will be determined.
Asymptotically correct error estimation techniques and combined refinement and
higher-order adaptivity will be developed. The combination of error estimation
and adaptivity within the context of a meshless environment will eliminate the
need for the analyst (scientist/engineer) to determine numerical accuracy of
computational simulations. The method's mathematical properties include full
polynomial reproducibility, local interpolation, high-order (spectral) accuracy,
and C-infinity basis functions; moreover, the spatial (and potentially temporal)
discretization is represented by a simple open covering of the physical domain,
and thus can be full automated. Completion of this research effort will result
in a major advance in the area of computational simulation, with the potential
for replacing existing software using finite element and finite difference
techniques. Solution of difficult problems involving moving/deforming domains
will be enabled by the new technology due to its meshless properties. Commercial
benefit to the US economy is enormous due to the removal of the manpower-
intensive mesh generation process, and the ability to quantify and minimize the
error in computational simulations. Emerging concepts such as Virtual Testing
and Virtual Prototyping will be enabled by the proposed research. The proposed
research and development effort will result in new mathematical theory,
computational algorithms, and prototype implementations of an object-oriented
problem-solving environment implementing the method for emerging high-
performance computer architectures. Commercial applicatio ns of the technology
will include a suite of object-oriented, interdisciplinary, scientific and
engineering analysis software systems for structural analysis, computational
fluid dynamics, computational electromagnetics, multi-disciplinary optimization,
environmental sciences, climate modeling, and semi-conductor simulation. All
computational simulation being performed using traditional techniques can
potentially benefit from the proposed research. ***