* 9561725
* SBIR PHASE I:  Kidcode:  Software for Young Children's      Exploration of Symbolic Representation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Michelle Baker, Intellinet Inc  New York
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/1996
* USD 74,958.00

9561725 Baker This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will
conduct a formative evaluation to design and implement prototype software that
allows children in the age range 5-7 years to explore symbolic representations
in a variety of domains by developing codes and coded representations of text,
pictures, and animations. The software, Kidcode, is intended to supplement the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM) curriculum standards by
focusing on mathematical representation as an act of communication. Whereas the
NCTM approach takes concrete experience with real objects as its starting point
and gradually develops cognitive links to abstract representations, the software
proposed here would encourage children to manipulate and explore symbolic
representations for the purposes of communication. The pedagogical objective of
the proposed software is to help young children develop an understanding of
symbolic representation in many of its manifestations through experiences
creating codes and decoding the communications of their peers. Educators often
recommend that phonetics be taught alongside invented spelling and other whole
language techniques for reading. Similarly, fostering exploration of symbolic
representations as part of a mathematics curriculum based on the NCTM standards
is likely to lead to a deeper understanding of the linkages between concrete
activities and the symbolic representations used in NCTM style exercises. Such
an understanding will allow children to more readily develop the capacity for
using mathematical languages to model the real world. Moreover, because symbolic
representations are the foundation for language development in all of its forms,
the educational software to be develop will offer opportunities for children to
practice reading and writing skills and so see mathematics as a descriptive
language in analogy to spoken or written English. The Kidcode software has the
potential to become an important additional resource avail able to support the
mathematics curriculum in elementary and preschools. Moreover, because use of
symbolic representations cuts across the language arts and mathematics
curricula, it could become an essential element in the software libraries of
these schools. In addition, the objective of the project is to design software
that is intrinsically interesting to children so that they choose to use it on
their own. If successful, Intellinet, Inc. will develop the software for the
rapidly growing market for educational software for the home, thus playing an
important broad role in the support of mathematical learning of young children.