* 9561796
* SBIR PHASE I:  In-Situ Cleanup of Petroleum Contaminated    Soil and Groundwater Using Alcohol Flooding
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Patrick Lucia, GeoSyntec Consultants
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,811.00

951796 Lucia This Small Business innovative Research Phase I project evaluates
the potential application of alcohol flooding for remediation of soil and ground
water contaminated by lighter-than-water non-aqueous phase liquids (LNAPLs).
Alcohol flooding is an innovative technique that offers the potential for
enhanced levels of cleanup at a lower cost than possible with currently
available technologies. Alcohols possess a great ability to solubilize petroleum
hydrocarbons. Being more viscous than many petroleum-derived LNAPLs such as
gasoline and aviation fuels, alcohols can mobilize LNAPLs as a pure phase by
increasing viscous forces, even if the LNAPLs are not fully solubilized into the
aqueous phase. Because alcohols are fully soluble with both water and LNAPLs,
they partition into each phase, thereby altering the bulk liquid properties and
reducing interfacial tension (IFT). As a result, viscous forces are increased
and IFT is decreased, enabling enhanced LNAPL recovery to occur under
realistically attainable flow velocities and gradients. Intimate contact between
the alcohols and LNAPLs is essentially guaranteed under all flow conditions
because both compounds are more buoyant than water and therefore accumulate in
and around the water table surface. Therefore, loss of plume control will not
result in the migration of contaminants out of the treatment zone. In fact, this
phenomenon can work to the advantage of enhanced recovery of floating LNAPL
product by injecting alcohol onto and below the water table and recovering it
using a dual injection/extraction pumping scheme. Furthermore, LNAPL entrapped
by capillary forces below the water table can be recovered by controlled
lowering of the water table which has high concentrations of alcohol. Any
residual alcohol left in the ground after the remediation effort will enhance
the biodegradation of any residual LNAPL since alcohols are excellent primary
substrate for in-situ biodegradation. Phase I research will confirm the
feasibili ty of alcohol flooding for remediation of LNAPLs in unconfined aquifer
media. A series of 10 laboratory tests in a 1 m by 1 m by 2.5 cm tank filled
with fine sand will be performed to demonstrate the enhanced recovery of
floating LNAPL and LNAPL emplaced below the water table using alcohols. Fluids
recovered during alcohol floods will be analyzed by gas chromatography to
evaluate the efficiency of the process. Remediation of LNAPL-impacted soil and
ground water is an important problem at oil refineries, aviation terminals,
military installations, tank farms, and other locations where hydrocarbon fuels
are stored or dispensed. As alcohol is an octane enhancer, the alcohol-LNAPL
mixture recovered from the subsurface has commercial value as a feedstock for
refineries, thereby offsetting the cost of remediation. Therefore, this
application of alcohol flooding has a significant cost savings advantage over
other available technologies for LNAPL cleanup at potentially greater LNAPL
recovery efficiencies.