* 9561603
* SBIR Phase I: An Automated Note-Taking and Multi-Media      Lecture Delivery System
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Jagmohan Gadhok, Digital Scanning Systems Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561603 Gadhok Throughout the United States, teachers and students with
disabilities encounter difficulties which undermine teacher-student
communication and preclude optimal learning. This Small Business Innovation
Research Phase I project will generate the technical data for the development of
an automated note-taking and multimedia lecture delivery system based on a
patented electro-optical sensing and scanning technology. The system will enable
mobility-impaired teachers to overcome many of the instructional problems
imposed by physical limitations and will enhance and facilitate the learning
experience for students with physical and learning disabilities. The basic goals
of the Phase I project are to produce a prototype automated note-taking system
and to establish the parameters for the multimedia lecture delivery system,
which will be fully developed in the next phase of the research. The research
and development effort in Phase I will focus on the evaluation of the
technologies required to adapt the digitization technology established by
Digital Scanning Systems, Inc. for the development of an automated note-taking
and multimedia lecture delivery system so that it will be of particular benefit
to the disabled community both within and outside of the education environment.
The automated note-taking and multimedia lecture delivery system will be
marketed for use by the disabled community in education, as well as for use in
business and other noneducational environments. There are numerous other
applications for the technology which can be utilized by individuals who are not
disabled as well as those who are. These applications include the following:
Producing hardcopy (printouts) from whiteboards; automated note-taking in
business and other conference rooms; teleconferencing; and the digitization of
large-area design boards.