* 9561257
* SBIR Phase I:  Development of a Low Cost Production Process for Low Carbon Content, Submicron Scale High Temperature    Superconductors (HTSC) Powders
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Lawrence Bool, Physical Sciences Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,999.00

This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will develop a low cost
process for producing low carbon content, submicron scale HTSC powders. The work
is based on proposed modifications to a patented PSIT process for producing
nanophase ceramic powders, a process which allows chemical flexibility, chemical
purity, and high yield. In Phase I, efforts will be exerted to the production of
bismuth-based BiSrCaCuO family of superconductors (BSCCO). The discovery of high
temperature superconductors (HTSC) produced from mixed metal oxides has opened
new possibilities for improving the efficiency of power generation and
transmission and developing energy-efficient transportation devices as well as
sensitive and accurate instrumentation. Extensive commercial application of HTSC
components, however, depends on maintaining acceptable production costs along
with the appropriate physical properties. In the proposed Phase I effort, a
mixture of appropriate HTSC precursor inorganic compounds with organic carrier
liquid will be sprayed into a combustion system that includes a gas flame and an
externally heated furnace. Oxidation of the organic carrier liquid in the
mixture droplets will allow the decomposition of the chemical precursors,
followed by vaporization and/or diffusion into the gas phase. Subsequent
condensation of submicron particulate will lead to the formation of HTSC
powders. Because of the expected submicron size of the HTSC powder, fabrication
into thin HTSC wire using the powder in tube technique is expected to be
straightforward. The development of a low cost process for the production of low
carbon content, submicron high temperature superconducting powders has
potentially broad applications: superconducting wires for power transmission,
motors, generators, magnets for commercial and industrial use such as medical
diagnostic and radiofrequency devices. Other applications include high speed
magnetic levitation trains and advanced ship drive systems, infrared sensors,
etc.