* 9561577
* SBIR PHASE I:  Automatic Spoken Language Assessment by      Telephone
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Jared Bernstein, Entropic Research Laboratory Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 07/31/1996
* USD 72,544.00

9561577 Bernstein The assessment of spoken language proficiency is essential for
prospective professions (such as nurses or flight attendants) if they are not
native speakers of English but need to work in situations where rapid, accurate
communication is a vital concern. Assessment of spoken language proficiency can
also figure in the qualification for many other professions, for example for
teachers. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
investigate the use of speech recognition in language testing. The guiding
objective is to demonstrate techniques that suggest that a feasible system for
Automatic Spoken Language Assessment by Telephone (ASLAT) can produce
proficiency scores that are reliable and valid with reference to good current
tests. Phase I research will implement a telephone-based system for pilot
testing various interactions with populations of native and non-native speakers.
The immediate objective is to identify several interactive tasks that exercise a
range of receptive and productive language skills which reliably predict a test-
taker's level of functional oral proficiency in English. These automated
interactions should, first of all, be quite simple for native speakers of North
American English. That is, regardless of dialect or other demographic
characteristics of a native speaker, an ASLAT system should return a high score.
At the same time, the ASLAT should distribute non-native test-takers over a wide
range of scores that reflect the range of their functional command of spoken
English. There is good reason to believe that advanced speech recognition
systems adapted for language assessment and operating over the telephone will
enable the achievement of the project goal of offering valid and reliable spoken
language assessments at low cost the user. Current tests of spoken language
proficiency are usually administered, scored, and reported by human operators.
The labor cost to administer a typical test ranges from $10 to $60. Computer-b
ased tests of oral proficiency can probably be administered, scored, and
reported for between $1 and $2 per test, leaving another $3 or $4 per test in
margin when tests are offered at $5 per test in large volumes.