* 9561042
* SBIR Phase I: Light Element X-Ray Flourescence Using        Capillary X-Ray Optics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Qi-Fan Xiao, X-RAY OPTICAL SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1996
* USD 72,356.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
the use of polycapillary optics for the determination of low atomic number (Z)
elements (Z<14) on silicon (Si) semiconductor substrates using X-ray
fluorescence (XRF). Light element contamination is a significant problem in
semiconductor production resulting in reduced device yields, increased
production costs, and impaired industrial competitiveness. No satisfactory
analytical technique is available that is both nondestructive and has the
necessary detection limits as set by the Semiconductor Industry Association
(SIA) National Technology Road Map for Semiconductors (NTRMS). It is predicted
that the technology of polycapillary X-ray optics can effectively collect a
large solid angle of X-rays and preferentially transmit photons below the Si
absorption edge. The transmitted beam can be focused upon the targeted area of a
Si semiconductor with high intensity. The performance characteristics of several
polycapillary fibers will be studied for transmission of low energy X-rays in
different geometric configurations. These results will be used to design a novel
polycapillary optical system for low energy XRF and improve the signal-to-noise
ratio for light element analysis. Applications of the research are expected to
extend the capability of the XRF technique to a greater range of light elements
and will be particularly useful in the semiconductor industry. These
applications will include materials synthesis and processing, electronic and
photonic device fabrication, and microfabrication. Improved semiconductor device
yields and more competitive analytical instrumentation are expected.