* 9561368
* SBIR Phase I:  Effectiveness of Peptidyl Membrane           Interactive Molecules (Peptidyl MIMs) in Preventing Disease Caused by Perkinsus Marinus in Crassostrea Virginica
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,12/31/1996
* Beverly Anne Weeks-Perkins, Demeter BioTechnologies Ltd
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 12/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561368 Weeks-Perkins This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is
designed to determine if a specific Demeter Peptidyl MIM can be used to control
Perkinsus marinus in Eastern Oysters, crassostrea virginica. This pathogen is
the primary cause of oyster mortalities along the mid-Atlantic coast of the
United States. From Massachusetts to Florida the average harvest is about 10% of
what it was prior to the 1960's. As a result the Gulf of Mexico has become the
main source for oysters in the Eastern United States. However, in those waters
there has been an ongoing problem with the bacterium Vibrio fulnificus, which is
carried by oysters. Immunocompromised consumers have become ill from eating raw
oysters and each year there are some deaths. For this reason many oyster
processors in the mid-Atlantic region now refuse to buy from the Gulf and are
forced to buy Pacific oysters (C. gigas) from the West Coast for the "raw bar"
trade. It has been demonstrated that certain proprietary compounds and
technologies are effective in vitro against an array of procaryotic and
eucaryotic microbial pathogens at levels which are non-toxic to healthy cells.
The Principal Investigator has demonstrated this effectiveness against Perkinsus
marinus in vitro without killing C. virginica hemocytes. The objective of Phase
I is to establish which Demeter Peptidyl MIMs (Membrane Interactive Molecules)
are most effective against Perkinsus marinus in live oysters. In an oyster
culture facility specifically set up for this purpose, oysters will be exposed
both to the pathogens and three prescreened Peptidyl MlMs at different intervals
and doses to find out how effective is the killing of the pathogen, how long the
organism remains unaffected by the pathogen when exposed to the Peptidyl MIMs ,
and how toxic the Peptidyl MIMs are to the oysters. When P. marinus can be
controlled, locally grown Eastern oysters may again dominate this multi-million
dollar market. A joint venture with other organiz ations will be attempted for
commercialization purposes. Income will be in the form of profit sharing.
Further, any topical anti-protozoal technologies developed as a result of this
project may be spun off for other aquacultural applications internationally.