* 9561605
* SBIR PHASE I:  Fatigue Performance and Failure Modelling    for High Speed Composite Flywheels
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1996
* James Hanks, SATCON TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,616.00

9561605 Gorman This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
conduct fundamental research into the failure mechanics and fatigue performance
of composite materials applied to the high stress rotating environment of energy
storage flywheels. Implicit in the work is the premise that manufacturing and/or
service induced defects in composite fly wheels are inevitable, and that
commercial success requires a comprehensive understanding of the type and extent
of defects which may be safely accommodated. A combined program of operational
and micromechanical analysis and testing iswill be carried out, leading to both
manufacturing quality acceptance standards and methodologies for predicting
composite flywheel service life. Unique features of this work are the
incorporation of inhomogeneous composite material models into the evaluation of
flow criticality and growth, as well as explicit consideration of local loading
increments due to flaw growth. Phase I will encompass initial conceptualization
of the analysis plus coupon testing. Phase II will continue analytical
development including spin test to destruction of several composite flywheels.
Phase III will apply the developed methodology to a particular UPS composite
flywheel product. The end result of this project will be a database of nominal
and intentionally flawed coupon strength and rotor spin tests as well as a
computer-based composite flywheel reliability design tool. These data and
analyses will be formulated so as to assist designers in choosing among the
diverse composite flywheel architectures showing commercial promise. The design
tool will also guide choices as to design safety factors, estimated service
lives, and operational diagnostic and servicing procedures. This research will
redress current deficiencies in the understanding of composite flywheel
reliability and service life, which demand either very large design safety
factors or exceedingly restrictive standards of fabrication and inspectio n. The
results are expensive in either case, diminishing delivered performalce on the
one hand, and dramatically increasing scrap rates (and costs) on the other. The
development of rational defect acceptance standards and service life predictions
will remove one of the most significant barriers to composite flywheel energy
storage applications currently pending in the automotive and fixed-base UPS
markets.