* 9561500
* SBIR PHASE I:  A Neuro-Dynamic Programming Approach to      Stochastic Control
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Yuchun Lee, Unica Technologies, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,872.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) project develops techniques for
solving complex stochastic control problems using neuro-dynamic programming
(NDP). Although stochastic control problems are critical in many applications,
satisfactory solutions have not been found because of their great complexity.
However, recent advances in NDP may enable solutions to stochastic control
problems that were once dismissed as intractable. Phase I will develop a
methodological framework for the application of NDP and apply the technology to
a complex real-world stochastic control problem of commercial interest, namely,
supply chain management. This approach exploits all information that is critical
for optimal control and is expected to lead to a realistic modeling of a generic
supply-chain. It is expected to surpass existing strategies for stochastic
control, and a rigorous comparison will be made to establish NDP as an important
and practical technology. After Phase I a user-friendly commercial software
product can be developed to enable the widespread application of neuro-dynamic
programming. Furthermore, strategies developed from the case study in supply-
chain management would be integrated into existing commercial supply-chain
management software and marketed to manufacturing companies.