* 9561236
* SBIR Phase I:  Proton-Conducting Zeolite Membranes for      Low-Temperature Fuel Cells
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Krishna Choudhary, Polywood, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

The operating temperature range of low-temperature proton-exchange membrane
(PEM) fuel cells can be increased by using proton-conducting inorganic membranes
instead of polymeric PEM electrolytes. This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project will develop proton-conducting, membrane-like zeolites
for use in low-temperature fuel cells. Prototype fuel cells will also be
developed and tested. Low-temperature ionic conductivity in zeolites will be
induced by incorporating proton-conducting hydrous salt ions as cations in the
zeolite lattice. The cations in zeolites, along with protons, reside in the
microscopic channels, cages, and cavities of the zeolite framework. The
structure and chemistry of cations in proton-conducting zeolites will be
investigated by spectroscopic techniques: extended X-ray-absorption fine
structure (EXAFS), X-ray-absorption near edge structure (XANES), X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy. Ionic conductivity will be determined by AC impedance and DC
conductivity measurements. The structural and chemical information, to be
obtained by spectroscopic studies, will be used to optimize the chemical
composition and crystal structure of proton-conducting zeolites. In Phase I,
proton-conducting mordenite and ZSM-5 zeolite thin films on conductive porous
substrates will be synthesized. The zeolite films will be prepared by
hydrothermal crystallization from aluminosilicate gels followed by ion-exchange
treatments and heat-treatments for drying and calcination. These low-temperature
fuel cells with proton-conducting zeolite electrolytes are expected to work in a
temperature range of about 90-125o Centigrade. With inorganic electrolytes they
will generate power using methanol or hydrogen fuel and serve potentially as the
power supply for the electric-car Next Generation Vehicle (NGV). In addition to
zero-emission automotive applications, they may have commercial application in
submarines and other watercraft.