* 9561788
* SBIR PHASE I:  Enhanced Subsurface Injection of Chlorinated Solvent Degrading Microorganisms
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Mary DeFlaun, Envirogen, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will explore ways to
treat chlorinated solvent contamination in subsurface environments such as
aquifers. Chlorinated solvents, like trichloroethylene (TCE), are particularly
prevalent aquifer contaminants. Depending on the degree of contamination, their
physical properties may cause them to occur as DNAPLs and sorb to aquifer
sediments, which make them difficult to remediate by pump-and-treat methods. For
these cometabolic contaminants, biodegradation by indigenous bacterial
populations may be limited by the lack of a suitable indigenous population or
inducing cosubstrates for degradative activity. For many sites, especially
aquifer contamination, remediation will require bioaugmentation or the
introduction of degradative bacteria into the subsurface. ENVIROGEN has
developed bacteria specifically for the in situ remediation of chlorinated
solvents. These strains are adhesion-deficient for enhanced transport; they
express TCE-degrading enzymes constitutively, eliminating the need for inducing
cosubstrates; and they can be grown with large amounts of energy storage
polymers for prolonged degradation. The application of these strains, however,
may be limited at sites that have extensive DNAPL contamination. Free product
chlorinated solvents are toxic to these bacteria. To broaden the applications
for these highly specialized organisms, we propose to combine these organisms
with a foam technology which will act to disperse the microorganisms as well as
the DNAPLs, thereby reducing their toxicity. This foam technology may also
provide a mechanism for providing nutrients and oxygen to extend the degradative
activity of the introduced strains. The successful demonstration of the proposed
work will result in an in situ bioaugmentation technology for treating even the
most highly contaminated aquifers. This technology is broadly applicable;
chlorinated solvents are common groundwater contaminants at both government and
private sites.