* 9561829
* SBIR PHASE I:  Cloning and Automated Screening of Genes     Encoding Cold-Adapted Lipases From Bacteria Inhabiting      Lipid-Rich Whale Skeletons
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Jeffrey Stein, Diversa Corporation
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561829 Stein This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
determine the feasibility of using a novel cloning and automated screening
approach to assemble a library of genes encoding cold-adapted lipase. The
approach is based on the construction of "environmental libraries" which
represent the collective genomes of naturally occurring prokaryotes archived in
cloning vectors that can be propagated in E. coli or other suitable host.
Because the cloned DNA is initially extracted directly from environmental
samples, the libraries are not limited to the small fraction of prokaryotes that
can be grown in pure culture nor are they biased towards a few rapidly growing
species. These libraries are then screened using fluor-linked substrates and
high throughput robotics to identify clones expressing the activity of interest.
In addition, specialized cloning vectors will be employed that allow the rapid
identification of cloned DNA fragments containing signal sequences which target
the gene product for export. Such signals frequently precede genes encoding
hydrolytic enzymes such as lipases. These approaches will be used to screen
environmental libraries constructed from DNA extracted from a unique
environment: the bacterial mats encrusting lipid-rich whale skeletons in deep
sea basins. Preliminary work suggests that these sites harbor a diverse
bacterial community that subsist on the copious amounts of complex lipids that
exude from the whale bones over a period of many years. By coupling the
environmental library approach to high throughput automated screening, hundreds
of thousands of recombinant clones from the whale bone bacteria will be screened
for lipase activity. Candidate genes encoding lipases that display high activity
at low temperatures yet remain stable at moderate temperatures will be
overexpressed for evaluation as detergent additives. In addition, other unique
lipases found will be evaluated for use in other industrial processes which
include thos e in food and beverage, pharmaceutical, waste systems, chemical and
medical industries.