* 9561597
* SBIR PHASE I:  Multilayer Electrochromic Films for Enhanced Optical Modulation
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Stuart Cogan, EIC Laboratories Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 08/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will prepare bilayers
and trilayers of thin film electrochromic metal oxides and analyze their
spectroelectrochemical properties. In particular, the feasibility of achieving a
flat gray scale electrochromic modulation and a three color electrochromic
element will be explored. These materials will be incorporated into
electrochromic window and display configurations currently under development.
Successful completion will lead to at least two novel electrochromic products:
1) a high readability information display with two or more color capability, and
2) a neutral gray scale light transmission modulation coating for windows and
other glass products. Electrochromic materials change their optical spectrum
reversibly when electrochemically cycled between oxidized and reduced forms. We
propose here a new concept in electrochromic material design in which the
selection of light attenuation wavelength range is much broader than is
presently possible. The innovation is based on using bilayer and multilayer
contiguous thin films of electrochromic inorganic oxides. It is anticipated that
the multilayers will be in thermodynamic equilibrium, so that the total spectrum
will be determined by the electrochemical potential of the assembly and the
thicknesses of the contiguous layers. These considerations result in the
possibility for design of electrochromic color and achievement of several colors
depending on the applied potential. The major commercial applications of
electrochromic technology include: information displays; filters for optics,
photography and electronic imaging; military low observable applications;
ophthalmic eyewear and sunglasses; automobile mirrors, sunroofs, and glass;
atria glass; and architectural glass for all kinds of buildings from passive
solar dwellings to large office complexes.