* 9561347
* SBIR PHASE I:  Thinking Like a Mediator: Precedent-Based    Software for Resolving Disputes
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Gary Klein, KLEIN ASSOCIATES INC
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,915.00

9561347 Klein There is substantial public and private interest in encouraging
mediated settlements and a growing infrastructure to support mediation as a
means of conflict resolution. While successful mediators may often "think like
lawyers," they have different goals and employ different methods and reasoning
processes. Despite the centrality of the use of precedents in the United States
legal system, there is no body of precedents from which to work in mediated
settlements. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project proposes to
analyze the cognitive aspects of the expertise of mediation professionals who
are called upon to resolve tough and high-profile disputes in order to design
support tools to assist experts and novices in "thinking like mediators." In-
depth interviews with expert mediators will center on expert-novice differences
and mediators' use of analogical reasoning from prior cases. The firm, Klein
Associates Inc., will develop a prototype to test the feasibility of supporting
mediation through the use of case-based reasoning. The prototype will include a
small case base of conflict resolution precedents which a mediator can retrieve
and use. The next phase of the research will focus on more in-depth research
into mediation expertise and further development of the prototype's ability to
retrieve similar cases and to present retrieved cases so as to support their
application to a mediation problem. Alternative Dispute Resolution (ADR) is an
important area in the legal practice community. Currently there is tremendous
pressure on attorneys to learn it and use it to avoid costly trials as evidenced
by the proliferation of ADR courses offered by state bar associations.. This
timely project aims to make available a computer assisted support tool to serve
mediators within specific organizations and one providing a broader range of
knowledge and precedents to be made widely available to any paying subscriber.