* 9561117
* SBIR Phase I: Gridless Density Functional Calculations
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Benny Johnson, Q-Chem, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

95-61117 Johnson This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
focus on the development of analytic techniques for the integration of density
functionals. In recent years, Density Functional Theory (DFT) has emerged as an
accurate alternative first-principles approach to quantum mechanical molecular
investigations, which is cost-effective compared with conventional correlated
methods. Unfortunately, the approximate density functionals used in practice are
quite complicated and numerical quadrature must be used for their integration.
There are difficulties inherent to such grid-based methods which do not arise in
methods where all the requisite integrals are evaluated analytically, for
example, as in Hartree-Fock theory. Unless great care is taken in the handling
of the molecular grid, undesirable effects manifest themselves in the
calculation. These various difficulties can be rigorously handled, but their
improper treatment is a source of problems in most implementations. The goal of
the Phase I feasibility study is to develop an analytically integrable density
functional which yields a theoretical model chemistry similar to that of the
Dirac functional. We will implement the resulting functional within the firm s
quantum chemistry computer program. A practical analytic method would eliminate
the spurious effects described above and at the same time would be quite likely
to improve the computation time for small and medium-sized systems. The
commercial benefits are apparent by measuring the substantial increase in both
the quality of the results and the efficiency of the system resulting in
increased research productivity and cost effectiveness.