* 9561291
* SBIR Phase I:  The Development of a Solar Energy Thermal    Process for Producing Fullerenes
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Xikun Wang, Materials and Electrochemical Research Corporation (MER)
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561291 Wang This Small Business Innovative Research Phase I project will
investigate the technical feasibility of using concentrated solar energy to
continuously evaporate waste forms of carbon and establish the economic
feasibility of producing fullerenes using the proposed solar-thermal process.
Concentrated solar energy is an environmentally benign and novel method for
achieving ultra-high heat fluxes. The proposed solar-thermal process would
provide a pollution-free supply of energy for synthesis processes that require
focused intense heat. The production of fullerenes (buckyballs) requires very
high temperatures to vaporize carbon and condense C60, C70, and other complex
carbon molecules. Fullerenes are currently produced using an electric arc
between expensive graphite rods. This process is quite energy intensive and the
electrical generation, graphite rod production and organic solvent extraction of
the fullerenes associated with this process contribute to the production of
waste. Concentrated solar energy is ideal for vaporizing a variety of forms of
carbon_which is some cases is a waste product_for the synthesis of fullerenes.
The feasibility of this process has been demonstrated on a batch basis and has
the potential of being significantly more economical than the existing electric
arc process. The primary benefit of this Phase I project will be to establish an
environmentally benign process of utilizing waste carbon and solar energy to
economically produce fullerenes to meet the projected demand of fullerenes dor
electrodes in hydride batteries, fuel cells, gas storage of hydrogen, oxygen and
hydrocarbons and as precursors to deposit diamond. The grantee is the largest
producer of fullerenes and plans to scale production to one ton/day in 1998 for
an established application of fullerenes.