* 9561346
* SBIR PHASE I:  A Detailed Model of Turbulent Mixing and     Reaction for Non-Premixed Reacting Flow Computations
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Marc Cremer, REACTION ENGINEERING INTERNATIONAL
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,997.00

*** 9561346 Cremer This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
investigates the implementation of a detailed model of turbulent mixing and
reaction into a comprehensive reacting flow code. The overall objective involves
demonstration of the feasibility of coupling the Linear Eddy Model (LEM) of
scalar transport in turbulent flows with a model for momentum transport based on
the Reynolds averaged Navier Stokes equations. The LEM has been shown to provide
a physically realistic representation of turbulent mixing in a number of
geometries involving reactive and nonreactive flows. Finite-rate kinetics will
be implemented using an approach based on the intrinsic low-dimensional manifold
method or a reduced mechanism. Feasibility of the overall methodology will be
based on a comparison of model predictions of species concentrations,
temperature distribution, and effects of changes in mixing parameters to
existing experimental data for a jet diffusion flame. Reaction Engineering
International (REI) currently markets three software products for the computer
simulation of turbulent reacting flows. REI continuously develops and applies
these tools to aid in the design and manufacture of advanced combustion systems.
Incorporating a turbulent mixing model into the firm's reacting flow codes will
provide more accurate predictions of trace pollutant species generated in a
combustion process. This improved capability will increase the applicability of
these tools and the potential to attract outside investment to further develop
our modelling tools. The improved tools will be accessible to industry via
product sales and consulting services provided by REI. These tools will be
particularly useful in the development of new low emission burner systems for
process heaters used in the chemical process industry. ***