* 9561647
* SBIR Phase I: Computer Simulation of Science and Technical  Laboratory Exercises for Physically-Disabled Students
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Walter Woltosz, Simulations Plus, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 51,477.00

9561647 Woltosz This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project to be
conducted at Words+, Inc. focuses on enabling physically-disadvantaged students
to conduct laboratory experiments in the physical sciences. It is designed to
test the feasibility of developing efficient computer simulations of laboratory
experiments based on first principle mathematical models that can be run by
disabled students on personal computers with an absolute minimum of motor input.
It combines: (1) state-of-the-art personal computer technology; (2) existing
knowledge about dynamic simulations of a variety of mechanical, chemical,
electrical, magnetic, and optical processes; and (3) existing technologies
developed by Words+, Inc., that enable persons with severe disabilities to
operate sophisticated computer software with very little motion--as little as
the blink of an eye. The ability to experience firsthand the results of
simulated experiments and to control the setup and operation of those
experiments will change the perspective of the physically-disabled person in the
laboratory from that of a spectator to an active participant. This new
capability can serve to motivate more disabled students to seek careers in the
sciences or careers requiring scientific background, thus empowering those whose
brains function well but whose bodies prevent them from working in more physical
forms of employment in their efforts to realize their potential. The famous
theoretical astrophysicist Professor Stephen Hawking of the University of
Cambridge in England (a Words+ user) is a clear example of a severely
physically-disabled person who is making major contributions to science.
Software that can be run by the physically-disabled can also be run by the able-
bodied, so the results of this project have the potential to lead to software
with strong commercial potential. The final commercial products from this effort
will be CD-ROM's or other similar media with softwape simulations covering a
wide range of scienc e and technical disciplines and distributed through mass
market channels to high school and university students around the world.
Accurate, first principle simulation is currently used in some industries. Its
use in education is both inevitable and can be expected to evolve continuously
for the foreseeable future as the knowledge base on which mathematical models
are derived improves and as affordable computer resources continue to increase