* 9561095
* SBIR PHASE I:  Wavelength-Multiplexed, Quantum Cascade Laser Spectrometer
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Kurt Linden, Spire Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,916.00

9561095 Linden This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project
develops a new, wavelength-multiplexed, monolithic semiconductor laser array for
use in a spectrometer capable of simultaneous detection of a variety of gases in
absolute trace concentrations. Simultaneous, multitrace gas detection is
presently possible only with complex and very expensive multilaser systems or
with FTIR instruments which do not have trace gas sensitivities approaching
those demonstrated by tunable diode laser spectrometers. The recent (1994)
discovery and demonstration of the quantum cascade laser (an unipolar, mid-IR,
semiconductor laser) enables a completely new manufacturable, junction-free
semiconductor laser source, which can be multiplexed over a large number of
preselected wavelength regions in the mid-IR. Such a tunable, multiwavelength
laser source can simultaneously sense traces of a large variety of gases in the
atmosphere. This research will design, develop, and demonstrate a monolithic,
addressable, multiwavelength tunable, quantum cascade laser array for gas and
trace gas detection. Phase II would look at epitaxial growth of complex quantum
well laser structures, laser array fabrication, evaluation, spectrometer system
design, and prototype evaluation. It is anticipated that this research will
produce a portable, ultra-high sensitivity, multigas, mid-IR spectrometer.
Potential commercial applications include simultaneous trace gas detection of a
wide variety of atmospheric pollutants, hazardous gaseous species, explosive
decomposition products, and biological agents. Such an instrument can also be
used for chemical process monitoring, studies of complex chemical kinetics,
medical diagnostics, and environmental surveillance.