* 9561561
* SBIR PHASE I:  An Integrated Environment for Parallel       Program Development
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Lata Kale, Concurrent Solutions, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,982.00

9561561 Kale This Small Business Innovations Research Phase I project proposes
to develop a sophisticated environment, based on computer assisted software
engineering (CASE) techniques, for development of parallel programs. Although
parallel programming is substantially difficult than sequential programming, the
tools available for developing parallel programs are typically even more
primitive than those for sequential programming. This is partly due to the fact
that the information available at the compile time to the system is inadequate
to provide any substantial support during development. Parallel object oriented
languages provide a potential solution to this problem. The specificity provided
by objects is enhanced by other primitives in the system. The compile time
system may be able to support development of programs more effectively. This
project conducts research to determine the feasibility of such a parallel
programming system, and to develop techniques that are necessary to building it.
In addition to the novel exploitation of language-specificity, the research will
also involve case techniques, and support for multi-lingual programs, and
software reuse. The research will lead to a cohesive and integrated environment
for supporting all phases in the software life-cycle of multi-lingual programs.
The software market for high performance parallel machines is starting to
expand. It is expected that parallel machines will be used in a more broad based
set of application beyond the current scientific computation niche that they
occupy. Software development environments will fill an important need in this
area, which remains unfulfilled as yet.