* 9561563
* SBIR PHASE I:  Integrated Optics Based on a High-Speed      Liquid Crystal/Polymer Technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Lawrence Domash, Foster-Miller Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,881.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will investigate
a new material and fabrication approach for the low cost and rapid production of
both passive and active integrated optic components. The technology is based on
a highly efficient holographic photopolymer material, DMP-128, from Polaroid
Corporation. Arbitrary patterns can be directly written in the photopolymer
using argon laser and a specially developed high speed laser writer. Because of
the large index changes possible in a DMP photopolymer, excellent waveguides,
couplers, splitters, filters, and other passive components can be fabricated
with little difficulty by direct writing individual or integrated components
directly in the DMP substrate. In addition, it is also possible to create high
speed liquid crystal based active switch and modulators using the same DMP
system. Since the index changes in DMP are due to porosity variations, the
material can be infused with liquid crystal (LC) creating large index changes in
response to an applied voltage. Due to the unique nanometer pore configuration
of the DMP, nematic liquid crystals switch with microsecond speeds, three orders
of magnitude faster than in conventional LC cells Fiber optic telecommunications
would benefit from integrated optical matrix switches with microsecond speed. A
nationwide fiber optic network will require massive numbers of inexpensive
passive coupling and splitting devices. New datacom networks are now being
planned that require wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) and tunable filters.
These and other near-future commercial and government related applications are
expected to open to this new technoloqy.