* 9561773
* SBIR PHASE I:  Nonlinear Modeling and Control of            Terfenol-D Actuators
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* David Dozer, SATCON TECHNOLOGY CORPORATION
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,733.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project concerns nonlinear
modeling and control of Terfenol-D based actuators. Nonlinear models will be
developed which will allow the design of control systems that extend the linear
operating region of these materials. Although Terfenol-D is noted for large
force and power densities, high stiffness, and the largest peak strain of all
piezoelastic materials, the application of this material is limited by its
inherent. nonlinear behavior. The nonlinearities result in higher harmonics when
dynamic inputs are applied. These harmonics increase unwanted vibration and
tracking error. Models will be derived using nonlinear magnetoelastic equations
and lumped parameter modeling methods for magnetic, electrical, and mechanical
subsystems. Hysteresis and saturation will be included in the nonlinear
magnetoelastic equations. The resulting non linear dynamic model will be
validated experimentally through open and closed loop control experiments. By
extending the linear operating region, it is expected that harmonic content, and
hence vibration and tracking error, will be reduced. Also a substantially higher
force density will be achieved. This will result in the ability to design
smaller, lighter, less expensive actuators for use in applications which demand
precise positioning and/or extremely high force to weight ratios; such as,
vibration and noise cancellation, high pressure pumps, and micropositioners.
Development of the nonlinear controllers will allow up to a 50% increase in
performance for dynamic applications, thus reducing size, mass and cost. As
evidenced by the growing piezoelastic material market, commercial applications
are increasing for these types of actuators. With twice the peak strain and an
energy density of up to 15 times that of lead zirconate titanate (PZT),
nonlinear control will allow these features to be used in a variety of dynamic
applications. It is expected that Terfenol-D will replace other piezoelectric
materials in rapid micropositioning, of large objects and vibration isolation.