* 9561591
* SBIR Phase I:  Environmentally Safe Organic Corrosion       Inhibitor from Natural Products
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/1996,10/31/1996
* Milan Bartos, Lynntech, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 10/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561591 Bartos Corrosion inhibitors are widely used for the protection of metal
surfaces against corrosion. In some cases, their use is the only possible way to
protect metals from an aggressive environment. Corrosion inhibitors cover a wide
spectrum of chemical substances including both inorganic and organic compounds.
In many cases, however, the highly efficient inhibitors are very toxic and,
therefore, are a high risk to health and to the environment. There is a great
need for new, low cost, environmentally safe, high performance corrosion
inhibitors to replace the existing no-longer satisfactory substances such as
chromates. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will examine
a new class of naturally based corrosion inhibitors. These materials have the
potential to meet the need for a completely non-toxic, environmentally safe
corrosion inhibitor. In Phase I, research will be carried out to investigate
critical issues related to the preparation and performance of the new inhibitor.
The proposed new corrosion inhibitor should be highly efficient, non-toxic,
biodegradable and is prepared almost entirely from renewable natural resources.
Furthermore, the proposed technology is simple and the raw materials are low-
cost. These key features are of great commercial potential for all applications
where metallic surfaces have to be protected against corrosion.