* 9561467
* SBIR PHASE I:  Removal of Pollutants from Diesel Exhaust    Gases
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Suk-Bae Cha, CHA Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561467 Cha This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
investigate the technical and economic feasibility of a novel approach for
dramatically reducing the costs of removing various pollutants from the exhaust
of stationary diesel engines. The proposed process specifically addresses those
engines that drive electrical generators producing electrical power of 50 kW or
more. Targeted pollutants include nitric oxides (NOx), hydrocarbons (HCs),
carbon monoxide (CO), and soot (also known as dry particulate material, or DPM).
The proposed approach entails injecting a very small amount of hexane into the
diesel exhaust at the exit of the engine manifold. The altered mixture of gases
then passes through a triple-layered, catalyst-impregnated filter that is
subjected to low-level microwave energy. The first layer of the filter captures
the DPM which oxidizes rapidly in the presence of microwave energy. The second
layer_impregnated with copper (Cu) and gadolinium (Gd) catalysts_promotes the
reduction of NOx in the presence of hexane and other hydrocarbons in an oxygen-
rich atmosphere. The third layer utilizes an oxidizing catalyst to promote the
complete conversion of CO and HCs, including any surviving hexane, to CO2. In
addition to driving the oxidation of captured DPM in the first layer of the
filter, subjecting the filter to low-level microwave energy enhances the
catalytic reactions in the second and third layers of the filter to achieve very
high conversions of NOx, HCs, and CO. Successful completion of Phase I could
potentially yield a process that would cost effectively remove ninety percent
(90%) of the NOx and all of the DPM, CO, and HC found in the exhaust of 50+ kW
diesel engines used in stationary power applications.