* 9561734
* SBIR PHASE I:  Model-Based Control for Microelectronics     Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Abbas Emami-Naeini, Integrated Systems Inc
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,995.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will extend the
control of microelectronics manufacturing equipment systems down to room
temperature. As a state-of-the-art method for performing several important steps
in semiconductor fabrication, Rapid Thermal Processing (RTP) is the motivating
application. At high temperatures (above 500oC), sensors (pyrometers) are
available for temperature measurement, and good process models exist, so that
feedback control can be used. At low temperatures (below 500oC) neither sensors
nor models are available, so that feedback control is not possible. Phase I will
develop a physically-based nonlinear model of the process, valid at both low and
high temperatures, and an innovative non-contact temperature sensor will be
modeled. These models will be combined, a baseline temperature controller will
be synthesized, and a closed-loop system will be simulated to demonstrate
control at low temperatures. In Phase II a prototype sensor would be built and
tested in a commercial RTP chamber under closed-loop control. This approach
promises to make significant improvements in throughput by allowing precise
control over a broad range of temperatures. The new sensor and controller will
be installed on an advanced commercial RTP chamber. Potential commercial
applications are expected for a real-time sensor and controller product with
accompanying embedded software.