* 9561157
* SBIR Phase I: Multimedia for Learning Structural            Biochemistry
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Donald Mackay, ScienceMedia Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sara B. Nerlove
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561157 Mackay Highly technical scientific topics can be effectively learned
through a multimedia experience. This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I
project focuses on developing an interactive multimedia product that will make
more accessible the subtle relationship between structure and function in
macromolecular biochemical systems. The integration of voice, video, animation
and simulation into a virtual reality proposed will enable students to interact
with sophisticated computer models of molecules and interrogate their molecular
properties in a state-of-the-art multimedia format running on standard personal
computers. ScienceMedia will collaborate with professors and students from the
University of California at San Diego in the development of process. The
material to be prepared includes biochemical background on proteins, nucleic
acids, carbohydrates and lipids for the novice. More importantly, the project
will assemble and adapt detailed examples illustrating the relationship between
molecular and chemical structure and a molecule's biological function. Among
these examples are biological motion, information storage, nerve impulse
propagation, enzymatic catalysis, and nutrient transport. The student will
interact with the molecular systems, probing their structures, discovering first
hand what physical and chemical forces give rise to their biological properties.
This project aims to produce a multimedia product integrating high end 3D
molecular models, hypertext cross referencing, and biochemical knowledge base to
be marketed to high school and college students, thus enabling them to better
appreciate the chemical processes responsible for life. The tools and
technologies developed along the way will provide the foundation for making
additional contributions to education in other areas of molecular biology and
chemistry and to instruction and training in the burgeoning biotechnology
industry.