* 9561345
* SBIR PHASE I:  Metal Cluster and Combined Flourescent/Gold  Labels for Peptide Synthesis
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,08/31/1996
* Richard Powell, Nanoprobes Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 08/31/1996
* USD 74,995.00

9561345 Powell In this Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project,
Undecagold, 1.4 nm "Nanogold" cluster complexes, combined fluorescent and gold
cluster labels, and platinum cluster complexes 1.8 to 3.6 nm in diameter will be
covalently conjugated to protected amino acids suitable for supported peptide
synthesis. Analogs of L-cysteine, L-lysine and glycine will be prepared, in
addition to labeling reagents functionalized to append the cluster labels to the
N-terminal and C-terminal, and will be used to insert the labels at programmed
positions in synthetic peptides during automated peptide synthesis. Chirality of
the natural amino acids will be preserved to retain maximum peptide bioactivity.
The labels will be synthetically modified for maximum solubility and stability
towards synthesis and deprotection conditions by systematic variations of their
coordinated ligands. Labeled peptide analogs of the C-terminal region of histone
H1 protein, HMG-D and HMG-Z proteins will be prepared and microinjected into
living cells. Their distribution, function and macromolecular localization
within the cell nucleus will be studied by fluorescence confocal and electron
microscopy. Labels will also be incorporated into synthetic analogs of the
hormone peptide leuteinizing hormone releasing hormone (LHRH), then their
sensitivity and specificity as immunoassay probes will be studied in membrane
blot and microtiter plate tests. The reagents will be widely used by electron
microscopists, cell and molecular biologists to prepare probes with the highest
possible resolution, retention of bioactivity and sensitivity. The strategy for
preparing labeled and unlabeled peptides simultaneously will reduce probe
preparation time and cost. Rapidly growing applications exist in the selective
labeling of combinatorial peptides. These reagents may also be used to prepare
novel hybrid materials in which the unique electronic and catalytic properties
of metal nanoparticles are programmed site-specif ically into new biomaterials
to yield new macromolecular devices.