* 9561810
* SBIR PHASE I:  Simultaneous Mercury, SO2, and NOx Control   in Coal Combustion
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Marek Wojtowicz, Advanced Fuel Research, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,960.00

9561810 Wojtowicz This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
addresses the problem of removal and recovery of mercury from
combustion/incineration flue gas with concurrent control of SO2 and NOX. Coal
combustion and incineration of municipal and hazardous wastes result in air
pollution due to emissions of trace amounts of heavy metals. Because of high
toxicity of these species, their emissions are or will be regulated. High
volatility of mercury makes control of this metal particularly difficult. The
project approach is based on regenerative adsorption on novel sorbents. A
proprietary adsorption/stripping/regeneration scheme is used, with mercury
recovery downstream of the regenerator. The preferred location for the
adsorption unit is directly before the stack, which makes retrofitting an easier
task, and also makes it possible to carry out adsorption at relatively low
temperatures (70 to 200 degrees C). The success of the project hinges upon the
proof of sorbent performance, which is the objective of the Phase I research. To
date, no technology is available for mercury removal from
combustion/incineration gases. The objective of the Phase I project is to
demonstrate (1) high mercury removal efficiencies; and (2) the technical and
economic feasibility of the proposed process. The project will be carried out in
three tasks: (1) selection and preparation of sorbents; (2) assembling and
testing the experimental set-up; and (3) sorption/regeneration experiments. The
main result of this research will be a novel technology for the removal of
mercury from combustion flue gas, with simultaneous reduction in SO2 and NOX
levels. Future extension of this process to other pollutants (e.g., other
volatile air toxics, N2O, etc.) is also possible. Applications for the process
include: coal fired power plants as well as municipal, medical, and hazardous
waste incinerators.