* 9561260
* SBIR Phase I:  Photochemical Process for Transformation of  Ozone-Depleting Substances Into Environmentally Benign and  Commercially Valuable Products
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Moshe Lavid, M.L. Energia, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/1996
* USD 75,000.00

9561260 Lavid This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will
develop an innovative photochemical process capable of transforming existing
stockpiles of ozone-depleting substances into environmentally benign and
commercially valuable products. Existing stockpiles of chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs) pose a serious threat to the depletion of the stratospheric ozone layer.
Their replacement with alternative materials will cause a significant disposal
challenge. Currently, there is no economically practical and Environmentally
acceptable technology. This project offers a unique solution designated, Photo-
HydroDechlorination (PHD). It is based on a synergistic effect of W initiation
combined with a reducing atmosphere of hydrogen, promoting chain-propagation
reactions and leading to high selectivity of desired products. The primary
objective of project is to experimentally demonstrate feasibility by efficiently
transforming representative CFCs into desirable hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs) and/or
monomers. To accomplish this objective, a four-task research plan is used. It
includes: (1) design and construction of a special photochemical flow reactor,
(2) experimental demonstration, (3) kinetic modeling, and (4) cost estimates.
This project will lead to a "green" technology for environmentally safe
transformation of ozone-depleting substances into commercially valuable
products. The current stockpile of an estimated 4.5 billion pounds of CFCs,
which poses a serious disposal problem, will become a vital feedstock to produce
high value products. Based on preliminary cost estimates, the existing
stockpile, which represents a huge environmental liability, can be turned into
about $4 billion of saleable products.