* 9561825
* SBIR PHASE I:  New Architectures and Applications of        Multiwavelength Optical Networks Using Waveguide            Grating Router
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Feiling Jia, Optivision Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Michael F. Crowley
* 07/31/1996
* USD 75,000.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will investigate the
system architectures that can efficiently utilize the unique multi-fiber
multiwavelength routing capability of Waveguide Grating Router (WGR) in a
variety of application environments. Wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) has
been demonstrated as a feasible technology to more fully utilize the vast
optical bandwidth in the point-to-point communications. The extension of WDM
technology into a switched networking environment based on wavelength routing
concept reveals a new set of challenging issues. In addition to device
technology and algorithms on network topology, a critical issue here is the
development of efficient and cost-effective systems or subsystems that use
wavelength routing for performance enhancement. Combining wavelength
multiplexers/demultiplexers with optical switches provides maximum flexibility,
but the number of switch crosspoints generally increases linearly with the
number of wavelengths used. The high cost, fabrication complexity, and large
insertion loss make acoustooptic tunable filters unattractive for commercial
application in the foreseeable future. An innovative approach is required which
combines Waveguide Grating Router (WGR) with simple active devices. The Phase I
effort of this SBIR will design a system architecture that can exploit the
unique wavelength routing capability of WGR device in a wide range of
application environments. Results of our initial investigation are also
presented. Wavelength routing has enormous potential applications in high-speed
computer networking or telecommunication infrastructure. By utilizing the unique
feature of WGR devices, results from this research effort should greatly benefit
the nation in the cost-effective realization of wavelength routing for
performance enhancement in a variety of applications.