* 9561581
* SBIR PHASE I:  The Development of a 600 MHz Wide Bore (89mm) High Resolution NMR Magnet with Internal Tin Wires
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Jay Wu, Cryomagnetics Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* G. Patrick Johnson
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,500.00

*** 9561581 Wu This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project is to
study the feasibility of the development of a 600MHz wide bore (89mm) high
resolution NMR magnet with internal tin superconducting wires. Replacing bronze-
processed wire by internal tin wire, high field NMR system cost will be reduced
significantly. The Phase I research objective is to solve engineering problems
related to construction of high field NMR magnets with internal tin wire. To
achieve the objectives, Cryomagnetics, Inc. will develop model coils to
experimentally determine the internal tin wire stability in persistent mode
operation. Phase I research will include fabrication of NbTi and Nb3Sn joints,
analysis of stress distribution in the coils, optimization of the annealing
process, design of quench protection circuits and evaluation of internal tin
coil stability in persistent mode. At the end of Phase I, an engineering design
of a full scale 600 MHz wide bore NMR magnet will be completed, and this design
will be the starting point for Phase II research which will be directed toward
development of a full scale NMR magnet with internal tin wire. The anticipated
results from Phase I are to demonstrate the stability of internal tin wire in
persistent mode operation and apply internal tin wire to high field NMR magnets.
The new technologies developed in Phase I will generate great commercial
opportunities by reducing NMR system costs. The proposed wide bore NMR magnet
systems will be ideal for micro imaging and in vivo spectroscopy as well as
biological solid state NMR spectroscopy. The successful completion of Phase I
&amp; II of this project will make low price, wide bore, high field NMR magnets
available in the market. ***