* 9561156
* SBIR Phase I: Computer Aided Prototyping (CAP)
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Thomas Miller, Proto One
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 09/30/1996
* USD 70,565.00

This small Business Innovative Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses a
rapid prototyping procedure for new products which incorporate microprocessor
technology. Today, development of each new microprocessor controlled product
involves custom design of both hardware and software, in many cases duplicating
functionality previously implemented in earlier products. This process of re-
inventing much that has already been done often requires an extended R&D cycle
and unnecessarily large costs. An alternative to this approach to prototyping is
designated Computer Alded Prototyping (CAP). Phase I research will configure a
new product prototype with proven hardware and proven software using a personal
computer click-and-drag scheme as the configuration tool. Unique hardware
design, unique software design, and unique merging concepts will be studied. The
result will be a practical CAP concept. The CAP concept is expected to make a
drastic reduction in the cost and time required to prototype a new product. No
longer would it be necessary for teams of engineers and programmers to spend
months or years designing, coding, compiling, and debugging prototypes.
Technicians trained in the CAP Procedure will be able to use a PC to build a
working prototype in a matter of days or weeks. CAP would find wide commercial
use in the electronics industry in that virtually every such product contains a
microprocessor chip. Other potential arenas of application include, but are not
limited to, medical devices, office equipment, and manufacturing processes and
control.