* 9561462
* SBIR Phase I:  Anti-Reflective Coatings (ARCs) for 193nm    Lithography
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/1996,07/31/1996
* Jim Meador, Brewer Science, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Ritchie B. Coryell
* 07/31/1996
* USD 74,998.00

This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop
thermosetting anti-reflective coatings (ARCs) that are optimum for 193 nm
optical lithography applications. This is the most likely exposure wavelength
for the generation of equipment that follows deep-UV (248 nm). Since
reflectivity coefficients at this shorter wavelength are similar or (in some
instances) higher than those at 248 nm, a need for an ARC undeneath the 193 nm
resist can be expected. The research objective of is to provide at least one
outstanding or optimum 193-nm ARC for manufacturers to use during resist
development and for the production of semiconductor devices. Light absorbing
chromaphore (193 nm) will be chemically-attached to three different polymer
hosts. The host polymers have been selected for high aliphatic content and the
expectation that they will exhibit improved oxygen-plasma etch rates. To assure
insolubility in photoresist solvents, the dye-attached polymers will be
formulated into thermosetting systems (ARCs). The profile of 193 nm resist
poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) at optimum exposure and dose will be used to
optimize ARC chemistry. Plasma etch rates of the cured 193 nm ARCs will be
compared to ARC CD11. ARC stability and manufacturability will be determined.
ARCs developed in Phase I would be further improved in Phase II and
characterized with an amplified resist. A successful product will be useful to
integrated circuit makers, offering promise for increased packing density on
semiconductor substrates.