* 9561101
* SBIR PHASE I:  Controlled Release Polymers for Continuous   Monitoring of Chlorinated Hydrocarbons
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/1996,09/30/1996
* Mary Beth Tabacco, Ariano Technologies Inc
* Standard Grant
* Darryl G. Gorman
* 09/30/1996
* USD 74,750.00

This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project will demonstrate an
innovative approach to detection of chlorinated hydrocarbons for continuous, in
situ monitoring. Current methods of chemical analysis require that samples of
contaminated soil or groundwater be collected and transported to a centralized
laboratory for analysis. In the Phase I effort new solid phase pyridine
derivatives will be developed which can be incorporated into controlled-release
polymers for reagent delivery. The chemical basis for this approach is an
outgrowth of the work of Fujiwara who first demonstrated that basic pyridine,
when exposed to certain chlorinated hydrocarbons, developed an intense red
color. Problems encountered with this assay include volatility of the pyridine
reagent an the difficulty of containing it, consumption of the reagents during
the reaction with the analyte, and poor long term stability. The proposed effort
will eliminate many of these problems by developing solid phase reagent systems
that have excellent long term stability when combined with new controlled-
release reagent delivery systems, and incorporated into an optical fiber probe.
Reagent response to TCE and chloroform will be measured spectroscopically and
verified when incorporated into a controlled-release polymer. There is a
significant market opportunity for accurate and reliable field deployable
analytical instrumentation for in situ, continuous monitoring of chlorinated
hydrocarbons. The instrumentation developed will have immediate commercial
application for the measurement of groundwater contaminants, monitoring the
efficacy of environmental bioremediation efforts, unattended monitoring of stack
discharges, and assuring workplace air quality.