* 1800120
* Interfacial Water at Electrically Polarized Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Dusan Bratko, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 450,000.00

Alenka Luzar of Virginia Commonwealth University is supported by the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
study the properties of aqueous (water) interfaces at the nanoscale. The work
focuses on interfaces when electric fields are present. Aqueous interfaces
pervaded by electric fields are ubiquitous in nature, for example in human
cells. They are also important in many engineering applications. Modulation of
static and dynamic properties of such interfaces underlies the function of
biological membranes, heterogeneous catalysis, and development of lab-on-a chip
technologies. Luzar and co-workers address some of the fundamental aspects of
these phenomena. The molecular picture this research provides enables the design
of new electromechanical devices of nano- or microscale dimensions. New
methodologies are being developed to enable more realistic predictions of
materials' properties, for example the propensity of metals to bind polar
molecules, including biological ones. The research is very inter-disciplinary
and very fundamental. It is highly appropriate for training and motivating
students, including undergraduates, to become scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Luzar and her co-workers develop and apply novel
computational approaches to elucidate water responses to heterogeneous
environments, both in and out of equilibrium. Three separate, but interconnected
areas are being investigated: (1) Characterization of high frequency
polarization response of interfacial water, its relation to hydrogen bond
dynamics, and the interplay of confinement and external field effects on
molecular reorientation; (2) Timely problem of mechanical to electric energy
conversion based on the reversal of electroactuation, where an immense
improvement upon transition to nano- or mesoscale is envisaged. New
nonequilibrium molecular dynamics methodology to capture heat exchange
associated with friction and ohmic dissipation under electromechanical
perturbation are being introduced within the framework of constant voltage
Molecular Dynamics. New algorithms for surface tension, line tension and
friction impeding liquid spreading under applied field are being developed; (3)
Hydration of, and solvation forces between nanoscale solutes with multi-body
interactions associated with materials conductivity, beyond the polarization of
individual moieties. A computational approach to large-scale polarization
effects characterizing conducting particles subject to the fixed potential
requirement is being developed for systems comprising metallic or semiconducting
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.