* 1800406
* Research Initiation Award: Studying the Dynamics of Network Systems by Using Ordinary Differential Equations and Boolean Frameworks
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Yunjiao Wang, Texas Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 310,724.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to Texas Southern University has potential broader impacts in a number of
areas. The goal of the project is to better understand the relationships between
the structures of network systems and their dynamics. Undergraduate students
will gain research experiences and the research will be integrated in a number
of undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this
proposed study is to decipher the relationships between the architecture of
network systems and their dynamics in the context of biological network systems,
gene regulatory networks and neuronal networks in particular. Based on two
popular modeling frameworks, Boolean networks and coupled ordinary differential
equations (ODEs), this proposed study will use both numerical and analytical
methods to address the following questions: What are the necessary conditions on
the principle parameters in an ODE system so that a network will achieve certain
target dynamics? In the context of gene regulatory networks, what are the
general bifurcations with a given network architecture? What are the possible
effects of missing interactions on the dynamics of networks? The potential
results will facilitate the modeling and analysis of mathematical models in
biology. The study will also address a problem rising from the binocular rivalry
phenomenon: Can mechanisms accounting for the dynamics of bistable perceptual
rivalry be extended to multi-stable perceptual rivalry? Potential results will
add to knowledge on the functions of our brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.