* 1800431
* Fluctuation-Based Electronic Structure Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2021
* Filipp Furche, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2021
* USD 489,999.00

Filipp Furche of the University of California, Irvine is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop, implement, test, and apply novel computational
chemistry methods. The Condensed Matter and Materials Theory program in the
Division of Materials Research also contributes to this award. The new methods
enable simulations of molecules and condensed matter systems that are very
difficult to treat with conventional approaches, for example rare-earth
compounds or transition metal compounds used in catalysis. Such systems are
critically importance for science and emerging technologies. A fundamentally
different approach to electronic structure theory based on quantum fluctuations,
proposed by Furche promises to overcome many of these limitations. The methods
developed in this project are made available to the public through the Turbomole
quantum chemistry software. The project enhances undergraduate education and
workforce readiness through a new concentration in Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry at UCI and a high school outreach program aimed at students from
disadvantaged backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furche and his group are
developing new methodology to enable predictive simulations of molecules and
condensed matter systems such as small-bandgap or correlated materials and
clusters, noncovalently bound nanostructures, or optical properties of
transition-metal and rare earth compounds. Despite their critical importance for
science and emerging technologies, these systems remain nearly intractable with
conventional electronic structure methods, due to insufficient accuracy,
computational efficiency, or both. Random phase approximation (RPA) methods
developed during previous funding periods are the prototype fluctuation-based
electronic structure theory. Guided by the successes and failures of RPA, Furche
and his group are laying the groundwork for a systematically improvable
hierarchy of electronic structure methods based on fluctuations. As opposed to
the conventional approach to electron correlation in chemistry, which is based
on interacting electron pairs, triples, etc., the methods proposed here describe
correlation in many-electron systems by vacuum fluctuations generated by virtual
pairs of electrons and holes traveling forward and backward in time (and
multiples thereof). Furche and his group also explore a Brueckner functional
framework as alternative to Kohn-Sham reference states, and aim to extend the
scope of RPA methods to ionization, time-dependent properties, and excited
states. Applications include low-valent rare-earth and actinide compounds, and
halogen-pi interaction mediated drug design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.