* 1800457
* Weakly Differentiable Mappings and Functions: Analysis, Geometry, and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Piotr Hajlasz, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 240,000.00

In 1900, David Hilbert presented a famous list of 23 open questions that had
fundamental influence in the mathematics of the 20th century. Hilbert's 20th
problem was about existence of generalized solutions of partial differential
equations and variational problems. This was a crucial question since the theory
was at a dead end: the classical notion of a differentiable function was not
sufficient for further development. This led to one of the greatest discoveries
of mathematics of 20th century: the theory of Sobolev spaces. Without Sobolev
spaces, further development (both theoretical and practical) of nonlinear
partial differential equations would not be possible. Recent decades showed
however, that the scope of applications of Sobolev spaces goes far beyond the
theory of partial differential equations; the theory applies to differential
geometry, geometric group theory, algebraic topology, sub-Riemannian geometry,
and analysis on metric spaces, just to name a few. This is a very active area of
contemporary mathematics with many unsolved problems and new emerging areas of
research. This research project concerns analytic, geometric, and topological
properties of Sobolev functions and mappings as well as other related classes of
mappings that have low differentiability regularity. The focus of the principal
investigator is on finding new bridges between seemingly unrelated aspects of
the fields of analysis, geometry, and topology. Graduate students and young
researchers will be trained through research involvement in the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the principal investigator plans
to explore the following topics. (1) Approximation of convex functions (which
have second order distributional derivatives being Radon measures and thus low
regularity from the differentiable viewpoint). (2) General theory of Sobolev
extension domains. (3) Existence of translation-invariant operators (a question
that does not deal with weakly differentiable functions). (4) Continuity of
Orlicz-Sobolev mappings of finite distortion. (5) Regularity of Sobolev
isometric immersions. (6) Sign of the Jacobian of a Sobolev homeomorphism. (7)
Topologically nontrivial Kaufman-type counterexamples to the Sard theorem (while
the Sard theorem deals with sufficiently smooth mappings, the principal
investigator will investigate the case of mappings with low regularity). (8)
Sobolev spaces on metric spaces. (9) Implicit function theorem for Lipschitz
mappings into metric spaces. (10) Lipschitz homotopy groups of the Heisenberg
groups. (11) Whitney extension theorem for contact mappings into the Heisenberg
group. (12) Calculus of differential forms and Hölder continuous mappings with
applications to the Heisenberg groups. (13) Preparation of a monograph about the
Heisenberg groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.