* 1800621
* I-Corps: Millimeter-wave communications for real-time sensing, identification, and localization
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Emmanouil Tentzeris, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Kamei
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project are twofold.
This technology is characterized by its connection to flexible and hybrid
electronics (FHE) technologies and the Internet of Things (IoT), and by its
remarkably large potential application space. As an approach that was
specifically designed with FHE technologies in mind, this invention has the
potential to radically transform the IoT landscape. Indeed, such a combination
of capabilities in a thin-film printed form factor could give birth to a new
class of ubiquitous IoT devices. The social, economic, and environmental
benefits of such devices becoming mainstream and low cost could be significant.
This would enable the collection of tracking and sensing data across a large
variety of application areas, such as reducing the losses of perishables during
transportation of agricultural products, permitting the monitoring of
temperature-sensitive health products, and minimizing the risks related to
pipeline leaks and aging infrastructure.

This I-Corps project builds on technology that was developed asa low cost
Internet of Things (IoT) solution for the ubiquitous and rapid detection of
hazardous chemical agents in large industrial and public environments. It was
demonstrated for the real-time indoor-light-powered and battery-less detection
of ammonia by a low-cost inkjet-printed wireless tag. It consists in the
combination of novel communications approaches and radio-frequency hardware
which can enable low cost, printed and flexible "Smart-Skin" devices which can
communicate and be localized at a maximum range in excess of 1000 yards, while
only requiring an operating power on the order of that of a wrist watch. The
approach lies at the interface of various current areas of technological
progress, such as 5G and IoT networks, flexible and hybrid printed electronics,
automotive radars, and nanomaterials-based sensing.