* 1800147
* Synthesis via Decarboxylative Activation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jon Tunge, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Tunge. Professor Tunge is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry at The University of Kansas. He is developing new classes of reactions
that are less harmful to the environment than current state-of-the-art
technologies. To do this, Professor Tunge and his group harness the chemical
potential inherent in carboxylic acids. These groups are very common and can be
found in a wide variety of readily available, renewable materials. By developing
methods that take advantage of carboxylic acids, the Tunge group is able to
convert these readily available materials into more valuable chemicals. This is
accomplished by the novel combination of two types of chemical reagents that in
turn lowers the energy barrier to reactions that were previously unavailable.
This leads to new types of chemical reactivity. In the specific project being
pursued the carboxylic acid is stripped out of the molecule to form a highly
reactive intermediate that can then be used to generate new chemical bonds. In
addition to its scientific value, this combination of environmentally friendly
reagents to achieve synthetic goals provides an excellent vehicle for training
students to make chemicals and materials in a wide variety of industries.
Professor Tunge's group is also engaged in scientific outreach in catalysis
education and is developing new avenues for recruitment of underrepresented
groups into the chemistry profession. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carboxylic acids are
a ubiquitous, often renewable source of organic reactants. Past chemistries have
allowed the Tunge group to transform carboxylic acids into a variety of
chemicals using decarboxylation to form reactive nucleophiles (pKa 10-32). In
this project, carboxylic acids are being combined with transition metal
catalysts in combination with photoredox catalysts to form reactive nucleophiles
of high basicity (pKa 32-48), thus obviating the need for stoichiometric
organometallic reagents. In addition to using carboxylic acids as carbanion
equivalents, new strategies are being developed that allow decarboxylation to be
used to generate radical and carbocation intermediates. Ultimately, these
studies are being employed to determine optimal conditions for generating
specific reactive intermediates and then exploiting those intermediates through
C-C bond forming, elimination, and nucleophilic trapping reactions. This
chemistry integrates the themes of catalysis with green chemistry and synthesis.
These themes are further emphasized in educational materials related to
catalysis that are broadly disseminated online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.