* 1800645
* Qualitative Properties of Solutions to Nonlinear Elliptic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Ovidiu Savin, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 251,680.00

This project focuses on central problems in classical fields of analysis such as
the calculus of variations and free boundary problems. The problems under
investigation share some common features and have roots in different areas like
material sciences, fluid mechanics, geometry, cost optimization etc. They are
relevant to both pure and applied mathematics. The proposed problems require
progress on the known methods and techniques and addressing them would be
beneficial for mathematicians and possibly for the larger scientific community
as well. The outcome will be disseminated to the interested audience to
invigorate the advancement of the theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central part
of the project deals with the stability of singular minimizing maps of smooth,
convex energies that appear in nonlinear elasticity. The PI will investigate the
singularity formation in the associated parabolic flow and the regularity of
solutions to a class of elliptic systems with special structure. Another part of
the project is concerned with problems in nonlinear elliptic equations. The PI
shall study the boundary behavior of some degenerate Monge-Ampere equations and
optimal transportation problems, and to develop Pogorelov type estimates for
some interesting model equation. In free boundaries, the PI will study the two-
phase free boundary problem for different operators together with various
obstacle-type problems, and will also analyze the rigidity of boundary layer
phase transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.