* 1800400
* Interrelated Photo and Electrocatalytic Processes for the Reduction of CO2: Controlling Multiproton/Multielectron Events
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Andrew Bocarsly, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 484,355.00

One important approach to remove undesirable CO2 in the atmosphere is to convert
it to useful chemicals. This chemistry can be carried out in an electrochemical
cell, but there are also recent advances showing that it is possible to do CO2
conversion with light. Thus, one goal is to react CO2 and water with sunlight to
generate chemicals that are important both as fuels and as raw materials.
Whether this chemistry is carried out electrochemically or photochemically, the
reactions require energy. Practical CO2 conversion processes require that the
energy input be as small as possible. To that end, catalysts are needed that
minimize this energy input while also providing desirable reaction products.
Presently, there is only limited understanding of the chemistry needed to build
both electrocatalysts and photocatalysts that achieve such efficiency. The
Bocarsly research group is advancing the understanding of the fundamental
underlying chemistry necessary to develop practical CO2 catalysts. They are
using this knowledge to construct new catalysts with improved chemical activity,
product selectivity, and energy consumption. This knowledge-based advancement in
catalyst design is critical to produce new routes to CO2 utilization that are
environmentally responsible and socially beneficial. Dr. Bocarsly is actively
engaging in outreach activities related to his research efforts including the
education of next generation chemical researchers and K-12 outreach activities
carried out under Princeton's Summer Laboratory Learning Program. His activities
include a special program to encourage undergraduates in underrepresented groups
to consider graduate education in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding from the National Science
Foundation makes possible Dr. Bocarsly's studies at Princeton University on
catalysts for electrochemical and photochemical CO2 utilization.
Electrocatalytic studies focus on the use of metal alloy systems to address both
materials science (i.e. electrode composition) and mechanistic question
necessary to understand the reduction of aqueous CO2 to organic oxygenates.
Presently, an understanding of the detailed mechanisms that allow the coupling
of electron and proton transfer in the reduction of CO2 is being sought. Of
particular interest is the reduction of CO2 to form carbon-carbon bonds. Three
types of studies are underway: 1) The role of meta-stable surface oxides in the
reduction of CO2; 2) The photochemical and electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to
CO using manganese carbonyl complexes as homogeneous catalysts; 3) Mixed metal
electrodes as PCET catalysts for the formation of multiple carbon products.
Understanding unifying chemical themes that underlie all these systems is
transformative in terms of fundamental chemistry and the capability it brings in
the areas of new fuel resources and environmental protection. Dr. Bocarsly is
heavily involved in the education of next generation electrochemical
researchers, who are key to an environmentally sensitive alternate energy
future. In addition, Dr. Bocarsly carries out activities in the areas of
community outreach and K-12 education through Princeton's Materials Program and
Princeton's Summer Laboratory Learning Program. Bocarsly's research program also
partners with Princeton's Department of Chemistry Outreach to Underrepresented
Minors Program, to bring a diverse selection of the national undergraduate
population into Princeton research labs for a 10-week summer research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.