* 1800280
* Nickel-Catalyzed Three-Component Cross-Coupling with Unactivated Alkenes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Keary Engle, The Scripps Research Institute
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

The efficient conversion of renewable chemical feedstocks into valuable
products, such as medicines, agricultural chemicals, and other materials, is a
central challenge in modern synthetic chemistry research. Alkenes (molecules
that contain a carbon-carbon double bond (C=C) bond) are one class of feedstocks
that are ubiquitous, inexpensive, and available on large scale. While alkenes
have been long appreciated as important starting materials for the synthesis of
valuable substances, at present it remains difficult for chemists to convert
alkenes into many types of desirable products. In this project, Dr. Keary M.
Engle is developing new reactions to fill this gap. Specifically, by using small
quantities of an inexpensive, non-toxic, and earth-abundant nickel catalyst, Dr.
Engle's reactions are allowing alkenes to be used as lynchpins to connect to two
additional reactants, allowing for the formation of otherwise difficult to form
carbon-carbon single bonds bonds between the reactants and the alkenes. Dr.
Engle and his research team are highly engaged in outreach activities that are
synergistic with his research in order to promote engagement with science,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines among diverse populations.
Specifically, these efforts include internships for high school and
undergraduate students, open-access sharing of research-relevant information for
scientists and for the general public, and implementation of active-learning
strategies for classroom teaching. This research project helps to improve the
sustainability and innovation of the chemical industry while increasing the
technical workforce of the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Keary M. Engle of
The Scripps Research Institute is developing a toolkit of nickel-catalyzed,
three-component, cross-coupling reactions to convert alkenes into structurally
complex products that have potential utility in academia and industry. In
particular, the Engle lab is developing transformations that strategically
employ proximal chelating functional groups to control the key elementary steps
and enhance selectivity for a desired 1,2-difunctionalization of alkenes.
Detailed mechanistic studies combining reaction kinetics, organometallic
synthesis, and density functional theory (DFT) are being carried out to
elucidate the reactivity of key organonickel intermediates involved in these
catalytic processes. By drawing on these mechanistic insights, Dr. Engle is
translating existing auxiliary-based approaches to new strategies that take
advantage of native functional groups for directivity, in order to improve the
efficiency, utility, and atom-economy of such reactions. A diverse collection of
reaction partners are being examined, including those capable of forming
challenging C(sp3)-C(sp3) and C(sp3)-heteroatom linkages. Dr. Engle and his
research group are actively engaged in STEM outreach programs, including high
school and undergraduate internship programs, as well as disseminating
scientific knowledge to diverse audiences through various media platforms and
through innovative classroom teaching initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.