* 1800332
* RUI: Highly Luminescent Multinuclear Coinage Metal Arrays with a Twist: A New Approach to Design Light-Emitting Molecular Wires and Coils
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Michael Stollenz, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,407.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Michael Stollenz, a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Kennesaw State University. The Stollenz Group is exploring novel
molecules that contain specific arrangements of individual metal atoms. The
molecules are highly luminescent, and they have the potential to serve as
molecular wires. Molecular wires have fascinated scientists for decades because
they are an essential component of building miniaturized electron devices on the
submicroscopic scale. Luminescent, multinuclear complexes of copper, silver, and
gold are of particular interest in this regard, since they can also be applied
in molecular/organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). To build molecular wires of
this nature, synthetic methodologies are needed that can produce new molecules
that contain specific arrangements of the individual metal atoms. With this in
mind, Professor Stollenz and his group are working to develop new methodology
for producing not only strictly linear arrays of copper, silver, and gold ions,
but also arrangements that are substantially bent for use in conducting
molecular coils. A long-term prospect for such molecular coils, embedded in
electronic circuits, is to utilize them as tiny electromagnets that can be
integrated in nanomachines and other nanoscaled electronic devices. Such devices
can in turn be applied in nanorobots that deliver drugs inside a human body. If
these devices are luminescent, their path can be followed by fluorescence
imaging. The Broader Impacts of the work also includes the mentoring and
training of undergraduate and master students from the significant population of
underrepresented groups at Kennesaw State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program focuses on the development and implementation of new strategies
to multinuclear coinage metal arrays that both serve as potentially conducting
molecular coils and as molecular/organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). The
underlying synthetic methods give a fundamental approach to control aggregation
of linear cluster assemblies and provide a deep insight into the coordination
chemistry of multinuclear complex arrays in general. Specifically, a library of
new bis(amidine) ligands that are capable of accommodating at least four copper
or silver centers, arranged in a linear fashion, is being created. The
incorporation of Cu(I) ions in the arrays is accomplished by employing a clean
organometallic Cu(I) source, mesitylcopper. The resulting linear cluster
assemblies can either be homoleptic complexes or complexes that retain the
mesityl groups. Bis(amidine) ligands with additional terminal N-donor groups are
selectively protected by AuCl complex fragments. These heretofore unknown
digold-metalloligands are utilized as building blocks for new linear or bundled
homonuclear gold or heterobimetallic gold/copper cluster assemblies as promising
luminescent materials. Finally, new bis(amidinato)lithium complexes are
synthesized and their behavior in solution is investigated. Furthermore, this
program provides an in-depth training and mentoring of undergraduate and
graduate students in synthesis, characterization techniques (crystallography and
spectroscopy), oral presentation skills, scientific writing, laboratory safety,
and data management. These measures prepare students to achieve their ambitious
career goals in science or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.