* 1800926
* STEM Core in Central Maryland for Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jeffrey Feuer, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,505.00

Community college students, especially those from underrepresented groups, face
many barriers in their efforts to earn degrees in STEM fields. To reduce these
barriers, institutions can implement creative innovations, moving away from
isolated programs and toward cooperative action involving employers, high
schools, non-profits, and others in the regional community. This project will
implement such a strategy that was developed by Growth Sector, a non-profit
devoted to opening STEM careers to students from low-income backgrounds and from
groups that are currently underrepresented in STEM fields. Growth Sector's STEM
Core curriculum includes accelerated mathematics and immediate immersion in
technical subjects for first-year students. Student Support Specialists provide
comprehensive assistance to enhance student achievement. During the summer after
their STEM Core Year, students are placed into paid internships with
organizations planning to hire employees who have the skills the students are
developing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Community College of Baltimore County and
Anne Arundel Community College will adapt and implement the STEM Core Year for
cybersecurity students at both campuses. Both institutions will provide
wraparound support through Student Support Specialists. In addition, the Fort
Meade Alliance, a consortium of 200 members (including companies and
individuals), will support the summer internships for cybersecurity students who
successfully complete the STEM Core Year of course work. Both institutions have
significant populations of underrepresented students in STEM and recruitment
efforts will aim to bring these populations into the cybersecurity programs.
Fourteen community colleges in California have achieved promising results after
adopting Growth Sector's STEM Core Year model. For example, a majority of STEM
Core students who began in algebra, had completed calculus by the end of one
academic year. This project will provide additional insight into the possibility
that the STEM Core model may be a transferable approach for increasing student
success and diversity in the skilled technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.