* 1800596
* Probing support-solvent-solute interactions in heterogeneous catalysts by surface-sensitive magnetic resonance tools
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Susannah Scott, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 01/31/2023
* USD 752,313.00

The manufacturing of chemicals from renewable biomass is an important, long term
alternative to petroleum. Co-production of higher-value chemicals can also help
to make these processes more economical. However, biomass has a high oxygen
content. To make useful chemicals, this oxygen must first be removed.
Dehydration is one important route to reducing oxygen content. With this funding
from the NSF Division of Chemistry, Drs. Han and Scott of the University of
California Santa Barbara are investigating these dehydration reactions. The role
of solvents and catalysts are being studied to aid in the design of more
effective catalysts for these reactions. At the same time, powerful new
measurement methods for probing the fundamental chemistry are being developed.
The graduate students on the project are acquiring advanced research skills, and
learning to integrate their findings with collaborators. They are also gaining
international and industrial perspectives of their research. The PIs and their
students are mentoring younger, at-risk students, who are also experiencing
first-hand experimental problem-solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficient
conversion of biomass-derived polyols to value-added renewable chemicals by
dehydration is an important challenge for heterogeneous catalysis. Conducting
such reactions selectively in semi-aqueous solvent systems, under mild reaction
conditions, requires the development of highly active, hydrothermally stable
catalysts. Their activity can be enhanced by tuning the solvent composition and
the catalyst support to promote the partitioning of dissolved reactant molecules
to the catalytically active solid, and adsorbed product molecules back into
solution. This project elucidates and quantifies the interdependent solid-
solvent-solute interactions that control activity and selectivity in catalytic
dehydration reactions. In the presence of solid catalysts for acid-catalyzed
alcohol dehydration reactions, the dynamics of adsorbed reactants and products,
the surface-coupled solvent dynamics, and the partitioning of (co-)solutes to
the surface relative to bulk, are being characterized with molecular precision.
The measurements are made possible by state-of-the-art, surface-sensitive
magnetic resonance tools, including solid-state magic-angle spinning (MAS)
dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) NMR to characterize catalyst supports and
active sites with dramatically enhanced sensitivity, and Overhauser DNP to
measure the surface diffusivity of solvent molecules which is correlated with
the solvation barrier to adsorption. The key questions being addressed are: (1)
How can catalytic activity and selectivity in polyol dehydration be controlled,
by varying the solvation barrier for solute adsorption to the catalyst surface?
(2) How can the solvation barrier for solute approach be modulated, by tuning
the hydrophobicity of the catalyst surface and the composition of the solvent
mixture? The study generates a basis for new structure-property-function
relationships in liquid-phase heterogeneous catalysis, exploring their validity
in an important family of reactions for the upgrading of biomass-derived
polyols, and advancing the development of surface-sensitive magnetic resonance-
based tools to characterize heterogeneous catalysts. The graduate students
involved with the project are learning advanced research techniques, and
learning to integrate their findings with collaborators. They are also gaining
international and industrial perspectives of their research. The PIs and their
students are mentoring younger, at-risk students, who themselves are
experiencing first-hand experimental problem-solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.