* 1800511
* Strategic Approaches to Cycloheptanoid Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Brian Stoltz, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 01/31/2022
* USD 473,200.00

Organic synthetic chemistry is driven by the ongoing need to find efficient ways
to construct carbon-based molecules from readily available starting materials.
With this award, Professor Brian Stoltz at Caltech is synthesizing two complex
naturally occurring molecules using novel approaches that have not been
previously utilized for this purpose. These classes of molecules can be of
benefit to society, particularly as medicinal agents in the treatment of
debilitating and life-threatening diseases such as cancer. The research team is
also studying new methods for making other important carbon-based molecules.
Professor Stoltz strongly supports a variety of outreach programs with the
intent of teaching and inspiring future scientists. With this award he is
offering summer undergraduate research positions in his laboratory for
exceptional students and providing science demonstrations at local elementary
schools. Outreach programs such as these encourage participation from groups
that are otherwise underrepresented in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Stoltz is exploring various strategies
for the syntheses of two structurally intriguing natural products, namely
scabrolide A and curcusone C. The total syntheses of these targets have not yet
been reported. Although distinct, these compounds have several common structural
features that relate the project at an intellectual level. Most notably, both
targets contain a carbon-based polycyclic framework possessing either a
peripherally-fused or centrally-fused cycloheptane ring, respectively. The
[5,6,7]-tricyclic framework of scabrolide A is being constructed via a ring-
closing metathesis (RCM) and transannular Diels-Alder strategy, whereas the
[5,7,6] core of curcusone C is being synthesized by means of a cross-
electrophile coupling and Michael-type annulation. Professor Stoltz and his
students are currently engaged in various outreach activities in order to
encourage talented young scientists to explore similar
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.