* 1800580
* Holey Graphene-Supported Single Metal Atoms as Highly Efficient Electrocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Xiangfeng Duan, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

Electricity can provide the needed energy for chemical reactions such as the
splitting of water into hydrogen and oxygen. Electrocatalysts are materials that
are often needed for efficient and cost-effective electricity-driven, chemical
reactions. Single atom catalysts (SACs) are composed of single, isolated metal
atoms held on solid base (support). Supported electrocatalysts have potentially
high reaction speeds, and tunable behavior, high durability, and recyclability.
However, SACs are usually produced using high temperature processes that lead to
complex and difficult to characterize structures. In this project, Dr. Xiangfeng
Duan and his team at University of California, Los Angeles are developing a
general approach for the preparation of single metal atoms supported on graphine
with well-defined and systematically-tunable structures. The team uses advanced
X-ray analyses and electron microscopy imaging approaches to unambiguously
identify the arrangement of the single metal atoms, and matches the structures
with reactivities to determine the best catalysts. The goal of this research is
to define design criteria for the next generation of highly efficient
electrocatalysts that could be used in mobile electronics, transportation, and
renewable energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SACs can combine the merits of both
homogeneous catalysts (e.g., highly uniform active sites, tunable coordination
environment and maximized atom utilization efficiency) and traditional
heterogeneous catalysts (e.g., high durability, easy separation from the
product, excellent recyclability, and easy integration with electrodes for
electrocatalysis). In this project, Dr. Xiangfeng Duan is developing a general
approach to prepare a series of single metal atoms embedded in two-dimensional
graphene lattices with well-defined atomistic structure and systematically
tunable metal centers (e.g., Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Ru, Pd, Pt), then evaluating their
catalytic properties towards various electrochemical processes. The team uses
extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) and X-ray absorption near-edge
structure (XANES) analyses as well as high resolution transmission electron
microscopy imaging approaches to unambiguously identify the local coordination
configuration of the single metal atoms. These are further correlated with
electrocatalytic activities through both experimental and theoretical studies to
establish the structure-property relationship. The general synthesis of a series
of single metal sites supported by highly crystalline graphene can allow
unambiguous structural identification and systematic catalytic investigations
(both experimentally and theoretically). The goal is to establish structure-
property correlation and thus define the critical steps toward the rational
design of SACs with tailored activity, selectivity and
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.