* 1800012
* Development of Catalytic Enantioselective Intermolecular Diene Hydrofunctionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Steven Malcolmson, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 420,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Steven Malcolmson. Professor Malcolmson is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry at Duke University. The development of new chemical
reactions is critical to continued progress within a number of vital
technologies, including materials, agriculture, and pharmaceuticals. The needs
for the development of synthetic methods include the use of cheap and abundant
starting materials while generating minimal chemical waste. One reaction of
interest, called a catalytic hydrofunctionalization, adds new abilities to
change to readily available molecules. Hydrofunctionalization reactions are
currently limited in terms of the types of molecules that can be used and the
speed and selectivity of the overall process. To address these limitations, the
Malcolmson laboratory is developing a number of new hydrofunctionalization
reactions that form carbon-carbon and carbon-nitrogen bonds. The reactions take
advantage of commercially available reagents and easily accessed starting
materials, and they incorporate all of the atoms from all reagents into the
products (atom economy) while using minimal solvent. As such, the reactions
generate very little chemical waste. The products generated from the reactions
are valuable in that they can serve as synthetic building blocks for use in the
fine chemical, agrochemistry, and medicinal chemistry industries. In addition to
this work, Dr. Malcolmson and his team are developing a series of short online
videos to educate the public and undergraduate and graduate students about how
the development of catalytic reactions has shaped the modern world through
industrial applications. This effort increases public scientific literacy and
fosters an interest in science among precollege and college students while also
broadening graduate education, thereby helping to train the next generation of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Synthesis
Program of the Chemistry Division, the Malcolmson laboratory at Duke University
is developing a number of catalytic site- and enantioselective hydroamination
and hydroalkylation reactions of acyclic 1,3-dienes, including challenging
internal dienes. Palladium-based catalysts with chiral chelating P,N-ligands
allow for efficient and enantioselective reactions of cheap, abundant, and
commercially available amines and beta-dicarbonyl pronucleophiles at room
temperature within short reaction times. Hydrofunctionalization of dienes offers
an expedient and 100% atom economical way to construct compounds with allylic
stereogenic centers, valuable building blocks for assembling fine chemicals,
agrochemicals, and pharmaceuticals. The high-value products garnered under this
project are not easily prepared through competing technologies such as allylic
substitution. The methods development outlined in this application along with
the accompanying mechanistic investigations may begin to address long-standing
challenges in enantioselective hydrofunctionalization technologies and lay the
groundwork for related future studies. The educational outreach focuses on
increasing public understanding and appreciation for catalysis via production
and distribution of a collection of short videos, relating how synthetic
catalytic chemistry has shaped the modern world. These videos are available on
YouTube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.