* 1800316
* Photoionization and Photoelectron Spectroscopy of Transient Organometallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Dong-Sheng Yang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Saturated hydrocarbons or alkanes constitute the most abundant feedstock for
organic chemicals. Controlling which bonds in hydrocarbons react with other
molecules (also known as "selective activation and functionalization") remains
one of the grand challenges in the chemical sciences. In this project funded by
the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Dong-Sheng Yang of the University of Kentucky
contributes to this task by examining the way metal atoms interact with the
hydrocarbon compounds and detecting reactive chemical species in these reactions
using laboratory-made instruments and sophisticated laser spectroscopic
techniques. Professor Yang-s research shows how the hydrocarbons are activated
by metals and converted into other chemicals. This work improves the fundamental
understanding about how metal catalysts increase the rate of a chemical reaction
and reduce the energy required for hydrocarbon conversion. The project provides
technically challenging training for a diverse group of students at all levels
and prepares them for careers in industry, academia, or the public
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects focuses on spectroscopic
characterization of transient organometallic complexes formed in metal-mediated
alkane activation reactions. Emphasis is placed on the C-H and C-C bond
activation of small alkanes and the remote functionalization of alkyl nitriles,
amines, and alcohols by lanthanide metals. Expected results are the accurate
ionization energies, metal-ligand and ligand-based vibrational frequencies,
electronic states, spin-orbit splitting, and molecular structures of the short-
lived species. The plan is to examine the electron configuration effects of the
lanthanide elements and the reactivity-structural relationships of the linear,
branched, and cyclic alkanes and functionalized alkane derivatives. Experimental
methods include laser-assisted molecular beam reactions; time-of-flight mass
spectrometry; mass-analyzed threshold ionization, zero electron kinetic energy,
and infrared-ultraviolet photoionization spectroscopy; and slow electron
velocity-map imaging. The experimental measurements are supplemented with
quantum chemical calculations. The students engaged in this project are being
trained not only in the aforementioned experimental techniques, but also quantum
chemistry calculations, namely density functional theory, as well as other
advanced tools through collaboration with other experts (e.g., Prof. Michael
Schmidt, Iowa State).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.