* 1800683
* Research Initiation Award: Mechanisms of Interaction of Glyco-gag with Restriction Factors
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Takayuki Nitta, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2023
* USD 299,961.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Savannah
State University will provide significant broader impacts by providing hands-on
research training and career development opportunities to underrepresented
minority (URM) students through strong mentor-mentee interactions, by advancing
research capability of the biology department, and by adding new topics and
activities in several classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a consequence of the
continuous arms race between hosts and viruses, both hosts and viruses show
signatures of adoption in their genome. While hosts have developed restriction
factors that limit viral replication in the infected cells, some viruses have
acquired their own unique accessory proteins that could counteract the host
restriction factors. Recent reports have demonstrated that one accessory protein
in a mouse gammaretrovirus can facilitate its replication by counteracting two
host restriction factors through unknown mechanisms, and it will be a powerful
tool to clarify novel mechanisms in host-viral interactions. The long-term goal
of this project is to clarify the detailed mechanisms of host-virus
interactions, and determine how viral accessory proteins regulate viral
replication at cellular and organismal levels. The proposal aims to identify and
characterize new viral proteins that can counteract host factors, clarify how
the retroviral proteins interact with the host factors, and describe host-virus
co-evolution through computational analysis. The expected outcomes will advance
knowledge on fundamental aspects of innate-immunity and host-virus co-evolution,
and thus will substantially enhance understanding and advance fundamental
knowledge in genetics, virology and cell biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.