* 1800070
* Cooperative dynamics in ligand binding reactions at the solution/solid interface
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kerry Hipps, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2023
* USD 609,077.00

Many large molecules have several chemically reactive sites. Oftentimes these
sites behave independently, with the chemical reactions occurring at one site
having no effect on the others. This is not always the case, however. In some
instances, the binding at one site can change the chemical reactivity of
another. Cooperation between reactive sites plays an important role in problems
ranging from biology to molecular electronics. However, investigating
cooperativity is challenging, since many experimental methods have trouble
distinguishing the reactive sites. With support from the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry and the Chemical, Structure, Dynamics and
Mechanisms A programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professors Ursula Mazur,
Bhaskar Chilukuri, and K. W. Hipps at Washington State University are exploring
cooperative effects in the binding of small molecules on nearby sites in large
chemical complexes using a high resolution imaging method. The discoveries could
aid in the design of new materials, as well as have broad implications for
advancing technologies related to sensing, catalysis, and optoelectronics. The
project's findings are incorporated into undergraduate courses at Washington
State University, providing modern research examples to highlight concepts in
chemistry, materials science, and engineering. The research labs involved in the
project also provide training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students, including a number of female and minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with their students, Professors Mazur,
Chilukuri, and Hipps are synthesizing large, electron-rich molecules that
consist of multiple fused porphyrin rings, and then depositing them on
conducting substrates such as Au, graphite, and MoS2. The team then exposes the
porphyrin multimers to small molecules (e.g. O2, CO, and NO) that react with the
metal centers. By imaging the products with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM),
they can directly observe of cooperative binding. Experimental observations are
compared with molecular dynamics and density functional theory calculations to
determine if communication occurs through the metal support or the
intramolecular pi structure, as well as the extent to which intermolecular
coupling occurs. Professors Mazur, Chilukuri, and Hipps are involved in
undergraduate education and mentoring students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.