* 1800795
* Research Initiation Award: Mechanisms of CO2 Adsorption in Amine-immobilized Porous Materials
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Daniel Autrey, Fayetteville State University
* Standard Grant
* Joyce Belcher
* 08/31/2024
* USD 296,179.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at their home institution, and
to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Fayetteville State University (FSU), will conduct
research aimed at addressing one of the most pressing environmental concerns of
our age: the escalating level of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2), which is a
major greenhouse gas largely correlated to the combustion of fossil fuels. For
the foreseeable future, it seems that the ever-growing energy demand will most
likely necessitate more consumption of these indispensable sources of energy.
Therefore, it is strategically important to develop technologies for Carbon
Capture, Usage and Storage (CCUS). Currently, aqueous amine solution is the most
advanced technology for carbon capture. However, the use of aqueous amine
solution suffers from several significant drawbacks, including apparatus
corrosion and high regeneration cost. These disadvantages can be alleviated if
we graft amine into porous solid matrix instead of mixing with water. This
project aims at developing novel amine-grafted porous organic polymers for
efficient carbon capture. We expect two major benefits for our designed
materials: one is noncorrosive. Amines are grafted inside the porous solid
matrix without direct contact the apparatus. The other is energy efficient.
Water has one of the highest heat capacities. It costs a lot more energy to heat
aqueous solution than porous solid in a temperature swing process. The
successful implementation of this proposed research will enhance our
international competitiveness in carbon capture
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific challenges for amine-grafted
porous materials to become an economically viable technology for carbon capture
are their CO2 loading, recyclability, and manufacturing costs. The better
understanding of adsorption-desorption mechanisms of CO2 in amine-grafted porous
materials is one of the key factors which will help us design and synthesize
such materials to reach maximum CO2 loading with optimized energy efficiency. We
propose several strategies to build porous polymeric platforms to study the
structure-property correlations between amines and CO2 molecules. First, we
build anchors in the porous platforms, then we use these anchors to attach
amines of different lengths. The number of amines that could be incorporated is
largely dependent upon the number of installed anchors; therefore, high
concentration and even distribution of anchors inside the porous platforms
ensure the maximum amine loading afterwards. The proposed research will advance
our understanding of the CO2 adsorption-desorption mechanisms in amine-grafted
porous materials at the molecular level. The knowledge generated will guide the
development of such materials of high CO2 loading with optimized energy
efficiency. The proposed research will also allow the PI to work with two to
three undergraduate researchers each year over a three-year course. All of them
will obtain extensive training in experimental design and implementation, data
collection and analysis, results presentation and publication, etc. Such
experiences will boost their competency and prepare them for graduate schools or
professional workforces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.