* 1800592
* D3SC: Machine Learned Free Energies of Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Charles Musgrave, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 517,497.00

Charles Musgrave of the University of Colorado Boulder and collaborator Aaron
Holder are supported by the Division of Chemistry, and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems, to develop and apply
machine learning approaches for the discovery of new materials. While the
periodic table provides a many possible combinations of elements from which to
form materials, only a fraction of these compounds will be stable or have
desirable properties for particular applications. Furthermore, of the large
number of possible compounds, only about one thousand have known properties at
elevated temperatures. For the past fifty years, computational chemists have
used equations of quantum mechanics to discover new materials. However,
screening large numbers of candidate materials for a specific technological
application remains too computationally demanding to be practical. Recently,
statistical learning approaches have been developed which can extract systematic
information from large quantities of data to train highly reliable "artificial
intelligence" models for predicting properties of a new system. In this project,
Professors Musgrave and Holder are using machine learning approaches applied to
predict the stabilities, structures, and chemical reactivity of materials. The
predicted properties can then be used to identify candidate materials for
catalyzing technologically-important reactions, such as splitting water into
oxygen and hydrogen, converting carbon dioxide into useful products, or the
'green' synthesis of ammonia from nitrogen and water. The models are available
on public repositories as machine learning computer codes, and through publicly-
accessible databases. The project is training high school, undergraduate and
graduate students in the development and application of state-of-the-art machine
learning methods for chemistry and chemical engineering applications. The
researchers participation in the Broadening Opportunity through the Leadership
and Diversity (BOLD) Center at University of Colorado. The incorporation of new
concepts in machine learning and chemistry are integrated into courses and
through the departmental LearnChemE YouTube platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines expertise in electronic structure, thermodynamics,
computational science, and machine learning to study one of the most fundamental
properties of molecules--the Gibbs free energy, G(T). The data-driven approach
takes advantage of results showing that the vibrational entropy and Helmholtz
free energy computed in the constant-volume quasiharmonic approximation -
quantities that critically contribute to G(T) but are computationally
challenging to calculate quantum-mechanically - have systematic temperature
dependence and can be accurately and efficiently predicted using machine
learning, coupled with knowledge of the chemical composition of the material.
The researchers are extending this observation to apply machine learning methods
to model G(T) directly, using experimental data for several hundred molecules
for training and descriptor extraction. The resulting descriptors are being used
to predict thermochemical data for ~20,000 unique compositions tabulated in the
Inorganic Crystal Structure Database, and in turn, to compute temperature-
dependent convex hull phase diagrams and solid-state reaction equilibria. The
models and G(T) data are available on large databases. The new methodology is
enabling the discovery of general trends and new chemical knowledge of the
effects of temperature and composition on reactivity, synthesizability,
stability and metastability. In addition to providing deep insights into the
thermochemistry of molecules and reactions, this research is enabling the
identification of anomalies that may indicate systems where emerging properties
are altering the behavior of the molecule. For example, where temperature-
dependent emergent or quantum phenomena create unique materials properties.
Despite the technological and economic importance of advanced materials in a
broad range of technologies, much is still unknown about the detailed behavior
that give rise to their stability and reactivity. Potential applications of the
new techniques and thermochemical databases produced include thermochemical
water splitting using redox materials, ammonia synthesis by chemical looping,
oxidation chemistries, carbothermal reduction of oxides, and reduction of
molecules by molecular hydrogen or other reductants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.