* 1800291
* Chemical and Structural Consequences of High Oxygen Coverages and Subsurface Oxygen in Catalytically Active Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Daniel Killelea, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 09/30/2022
* USD 469,571.00

Catalysis is essential to technological advances, especially in the chemical
industry. Partial oxidation of organic chemicals on metal surfaces (catalysts)
is an extensively used catalytic reaction. However, the atomic-level details of
these seemingly straightforward oxidation reactions have remained elusive. Many
aspects of the metal surface factor in to its reactivity. Among them, the
arrangements of metal atoms, and the abundance of various oxygen-containing
species, play key roles. In this project, Dr. Dan Killelea of Loyola University
Chicago (LUC) and his research group are studying how the surface structures and
reactivity of these metal catalysts change under reaction conditions.
Significantly, this project also examines subsurface oxygen, which are oxygen
atoms dissolved into the near-surface layers of the solid catalysts. Although
subsurface oxygen atoms may not be reactants themselves, they may affect the
reactivity and properties of the surface in important ways. While surface
chemistry research is central to this proposal, this project broadens
participation in science outreach efforts to the Chicago Public Schools (CPS).
One goal of this project is to support students of under-represented
socioeconomic status to develop their interest in scientific careers. Through
this project, LUC students engage CPS students in several contexts: the high
school lab, tours of LUC facilities, and a Summer Internship Program. Additional
engagement and outreach efforts include hosting CPS student meetings with
admissions counselors from local universities, and trips to Argonne National
Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Dan Killelea of Loyola University Chicago
is advancing the understanding of the behavior of subsurface oxygen in metals by
investigating its formation, and physical and chemical effects in three
catalytic metals: rhodium, palladium, and platinum. In each, subsurface oxygen
is thought to contribute to the selectivity of catalytic processes, but the
origins of their activity remain unclear. The reactivity of the metals with
various oxygen abundances is measured and the formation of subsurface oxygen is
quantified with a combination of surface science techniques. The changes in the
surface structures of the oxidized metals are directly observed using Scanning
Tunneling Microscopy (STM). In addition to the STM images, density functional
theory (DFT) is used to identify stable structures of surface and subsurface
oxygen atoms on these metals and their effects. The data obtained with STM is
complemented with other surface science measurements. In concert, these provide
a detailed picture of the ensemble-averaged physical and chemical properties of
metal surfaces with subsurface oxygen. The results of this project advance
surface catalysis by providing much needed fundamental information about
subsurface oxygen and reveal the importance of it in industrially relevant
heterogeneously catalyzed reactions. Additionally, support from the NSF
strengthens active collaborations with researchers in The Netherlands, Tulsa,
and Chicago, as well as outreach efforts to local Chicago Public High
Schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.