* 1800492
* Model Theory: Connecting Algebraic, Analytic, and Diophantine Geometry Through Definability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Thomas Scanlon, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2023
* USD 220,000.00

Important mathematical structures can often be understood from very different
perspectives, either by analyzing them with algebraic or analytic formulas or by
regarding them geometrically. This dual algebraic/geometric view is applied in
many branches of mathematics, especially for the study of algebraic equations
involving numbers (under the name of Diophantine geometry), the study of
solutions to polynomial equations (under the name of algebraic geometry), or the
study of the possible algebraic relations among solutions to systems of
differential or difference equations (under the names of differential algebraic
geometry or difference algebraic geometry, respectively), among others. In
practice, some of the questions considered in these areas suffer from extreme
complexity inherited from their connection to number theory or to even more
complicated domains. Work in mathematical logic has elucidated the boundary
between those complicated theories and those admitting a tame, geometric theory.
This research project aims to extend the class of theories for which a tame
geometry can be established and to use these results from mathematical logic to
answer questions from the target domains. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project studies the connections between geometries of various kinds, including
algebraic, differential, Diophantine, and analytic geometries, through the
model-theoretic lens of definability in suitable theories. Mathematical theories
as diverse as those of partial differential equations, difference equations,
perfectoid spaces, formal geometry, algebraic dynamics, and homogenous dynamics
will be studied. Technically, methods including geometric stability theory as
applied to differentially closed fields, o-minimality, and quantifier
elimination for valued differential fields and analytic difference rings will be
applied for the purpose of answering questions internal to model theory (such as
proving or refuting the trichotomy principle for regular types in differentially
closed fields with several commuting derivations) and for applications to
problems in functional transcendence, dynamics, and Diophantine geometry. It is
anticipated that the work will have applications to the structure of algebraic
differential equations, the arithmetic of dynamical systems, and mathematical
physics, as well as in other areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.