* 1800738
* Graph Limits and Measurable Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Gabor Lippner, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 149,988.00

Understanding the structure and properties of large real-life networks has
become one of the most important scientific challenges of our time. Large
networks are ubiquitous in both the natural and social sciences and we have
access to more-and-more data about them. However, most existing methods for
analyzing this data are too slow for even moderately large networks. Hence the
need to devise, new, robust tools for network analysis. One way of building new
tools is to advance our understanding of the underlying structure of large
networks. This approach has led to tremendous success in the case of networks
with relatively many connections (so called dense networks). However, most real-
word networks do not fall into this category (they are so-called sparse), and
our understanding of their structural properties remain rather limited. The goal
of this project is to advance the understanding of large sparse networks through
the study of similarities between networks, and via the use of continuous models
- so called graph limits - to approximate large networks. This approach has
proved extremely successful in the case of dense networks. Progress in the
sparse case has been slow mainly because the "right" notion of similarity seems
elusive, and a host of different concepts have emerged over time whose
relationship to each other remains unclear. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project
will focus on the graph limits, networks defined on probability measure spaces,
so-called graphings. It will investigate classical graph theoretic notions on
such objects. The few known results indicate that graphings frequently exhibit
surprising differences compared to classical graphs. Yet, one can often find
natural assumptions under which classical results extend to the measurable
context without any change. The central motivating question of the project is
the approximability of graphings by finite graphs. To this end, various
combinatorial and algebraic properties of graphings will be explored in detail
to allow comparison to finite graphs. The combinatorial aspects include
understanding how standard theorems in graph theory about the existence of
matchings, vertex- and edge-colorings generalize to graphings. Algebraic aspects
include the study of spectral properties of graphings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.