* 1800779
* GIS Technology:  Mapping, Data Management, and Work-Based Learning Across Industry Sectors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Debra Stakes, Cuesta College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 224,904.00

Geographic Information System (GIS) skills are needed for jobs in many fields.
GIS combines cartography, spatial analysis, and data management to support
research and inform decision-making. Computer programmers or database
administrators need GIS expertise to maintain or program databases containing
geographic information. Mapping technicians apply GIS concepts when creating
maps and charts. GIS is also used in city planning, developing marketing
strategies, addressing public health concerns, and conducting geographic
research. The use of GIS in many fields opens new employment options for
students. Despite these employment needs, only four GIS certificates were
awarded in the South-Central Coast Region of California between 2012-2015, all
by a single community college that is 200 miles from San Luis Obispo, where
Cuesta College is located. Since adequate GIS training is not currently
available in the region served by Cuesta College, this project aims to meet the
high-demand workforce needs across multiple industry sectors for Geographic
Information System (GIS) Technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
establishes a GIS Analyst certificate at Cuesta College, a Hispanic-Serving
Institution. Activities include outreach, and project-based and work-based
learning designed to motivate more students to enroll in specialized GIS
courses. This increased enrollment is expected to increase the number of
students, particularly Hispanic students, who earn a GIS Analyst certificate.
The certificate will be part of the Earth and Ocean Science program but may
appeal to students who seek to add GIS skills to other degrees, such as
engineering or computer information systems. Through seminars related to use of
GIS in these and other fields, the project aims to engage faculty from different
fields in the GIS project. The GIS Analyst certificate is also expected to
appeal to workers who need to learn GIS skills to advance in their careers or to
become competitive for a new job. The GIS Analyst certificate requires the
addition of three new courses, which will be based on models developed by the
GeoTech Center with funding from the National Science Foundation. Regional
employers will contribute to the development of the curriculum and provide work
experiences for students. Students enrolled in GIS courses will have the
opportunity to attend the Environmental Systems Research Institute Users
Conference, earn industry-recognized credentials, and display their projects at
a local GIS event. By June 2021, the project aims to enroll forty students in
GIS courses and projects that ten or more students will earn the GIS Analyst
certificate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.