* 1800180
* Geometric Properties of Fractals That Arise in Various Dynamical Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Sergiy Merenkov, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

The main goal of this project is to study various forms of symmetry. People have
been fascinated with the symmetry phenomenon since ancient times and the
examples can easily be found in visual arts, in particular architecture, poetry
and music. Typically, the symmetry in these examples is either mirror, i.e., the
objects are doubled across a flat surface, or translational when a pattern is
repeated in space or time intervals of the same size. Nature is also abundant
with symmetries. The most widely recognized examples are lightning, fern, and
cauliflower or broccoli. The symmetry here is of a different type, namely it is
self-similarity, and objects that possess such symmetries are called fractals.
Fractals are roughly the same on different scales, i.e., parts of a fractal look
like smaller copies of the whole fractal. This project studies geometric spaces
that possess the above symmetries and generalizations of such symmetries, e.g.,
quasi-self-similarities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project
investigates dynamical properties and curvature distribution of fractal spaces
that support dynamical systems. Here dynamics typically refers to the iteration
of a map or a system of maps on a given fractal. More precisely, the PI plans to
classify fractal spaces from various families according to their quasisymmetry
groups, quasiregular dynamics that they support, or the asymptotics of the
curvature distribution function of the packings associated to such fractals. The
project concerns mainly fractals that are the Julia sets of postcritically
finite rational maps or residual sets of various self-similar constructions,
such as Apollonian gaskets. The methods to be employed come from dynamics of
groups and rational maps, and from complex analysis as well as its more recent
counterparts. For example, recent developments have shown that many fractal
spaces can be effectively studied using combinatorial tools and techniques of
analysis on metric spaces. Moreover, geometry of dynamical fractals influences
certain analytic properties of packings associated to such fractals. E.g., the
asymptotics of the curvature distribution function of various dynamical packings
is related to the fractal dimension of the corresponding residual sets. It is
the hope of the PI that the project would add new methods and ideas that, in
particular, would shed more light onto the relationship of these fields, namely
geometry, dynamics, and curvature distribution of associated packings. Complex
analysis has often provided tools and methods for solving problems that come
from natural sciences, engineering, and other fields of mathematics. Recent
examples related to physics include the investigation of the conformal
invariance of continuum limits of two-dimensional lattice models in statistical
physics and applications to quantum gravity. The PI expects that his
investigations would reveal additional geometric and other properties of
fractals that arise, in particular, in natural
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.