* 1800321
* RUI:  Nonuniformly Hyperbolic Dynamical Systems out of Equilibrium
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mark Demers, Fairfield University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2022
* USD 245,423.00

This award funds research dedicated to the study of chaotic dynamical systems
out of equilibrium. Much research in dynamical systems focuses on closed systems
in which the dynamics are self-contained. In many modeling situations, however,
such a global view is not possible and it becomes necessary to study local
systems that are influenced by other unknown systems, possibly on different
scales. These considerations motivate many of the systems to be studied during
the course of this award: systems in which mass or energy may enter or exit
through deterministic or random mechanisms, and large-scale systems of smaller
interacting components that exchange mass or energy. Such systems have been used
in theoretical physics and chemical engineering to model atom traps, explore
mechanisms for heat conduction in solids and investigate metastability in
molecular processes. Rigorous mathematical results obtained during the course of
this award will aid in the interpretation of these studies as well as suggest
new directions of inquiry. This award also supports the involvement of
undergraduates in mathematics research. Using the highly visual nature and
physical motivation of the problems outlined above, the PI will recruit
undergraduate students to work on these topics during each summer funded by the
award. Special emphasis will be given to recruiting students from
underrepresented groups in research mathematics. Students will disseminate
results of their research via poster sessions, conference presentations and
publications in peer-reviewed journals. By stimulating interest in research
careers in mathematics and creating a peer community supportive of that
interest, the award will contribute to the important goal of integrating
research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by the problems outlined
above, this award is organized around three specific projects: The first project
investigates the statistical properties of both classical and non-equilibrium
particle systems with collision interactions, an important class of models from
statistical mechanics; the second concerns open systems, which relate on the one
hand to models of physical systems in which mass or energy is allowed to escape,
and on the other to the study of metastable states; the third project concerns
the behavior of extended dynamical systems comprised of a finite or infinite
number of smaller components linked together, with orbits or energy allowed to
pass between them. Important examples include the aperiodic Lorentz gas and
mechanical models of heat conduction. Using his recent work concerning spectral
decompositions of transfer operators for dispersing particle systems, the PI
will investigate equilibrium and non-equilibrium models from statistical
mechanics and provide rigorous analysis of physically important quantities such
as entropy production. In addition, the PI will adapt and develop techniques
using projective cones due to Birkhoff as well as the construction of Markov
extensions (a generalization of Markov partitions) to the study of such systems.
None of these techniques require Markovian assumptions on the dynamics, making
them widely applicable to a wide variety of nonuniformly hyperbolic and
physically important systems. The application of these tools to central models
from equilibrium and non-equilibrium statistical mechanics will represent
significant advances in the study of such systems. Efforts to understand these
tools in one context, strengthens them and aids in their application to other
areas of mathematics. Their intellectual interest is enhanced by the application
of these ideas to resolve problems posed and approached formally in the physics
literature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.