* 1800347
* Salish Kootenai College SEA-PHAGES
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Mary Larson, Salish Kootenai College
* Standard Grant
* Jody Chase
* 01/31/2023
* USD 297,675.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the STEM curricular offerings at these
institutions expands the opportunities of their students to pursue challenging,
rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for research studies in areas that
may be culturally significant, and encourages a community and generational
appreciation for science and mathematics education. This project aligns directly
with that goal, and moreover will increase the body of knowledge on the genomics
of bacteriophages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of Salish Kootenai College's
Science Education Alliance-Phage Hunters Advancing Genomics and Evolutionary
Science in Tribal Colleges and Universities (SEA-PHAGES in TCUs) Project are to
provide exciting professional development opportunities for STEM faculty, expand
research-based learning opportunities for STEM students, and build institutional
research capacity through participation in the SEA-PHAGES curriculum offered in
partnership with the Howard Hughes Medical Institute (HHMI). Faculty and
students will isolate, identify, sequence and analyze newly discovered
mycobacteriophages gathered from the local environment as part of a long-term,
nationwide study. Faculty at SKC will learn novel laboratory procedures,
participate in national training workshops, and enhance their research skills
and knowledge. Students enrolled in the dual-credit STEM Academy will study
genomics and bioinformatics, gain valuable hands-on laboratory experience, and
participate in cutting edge research. Knowledge and skills gathered through this
project will provide a strong foundation for future teaching and research in
genomics, biotechnology and bioinformatics at Salish Kootenai
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.