* 1800955
* Guitar, Robotics, and Rocketry Projects to Enhance Advanced Technological Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Calhoun Calhoun, Santa Fe College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2023
* USD 467,713.00

Increasing the workforce in STEM fields is important for the nation's global
competitiveness. Industries in the rural communities served by Santa Fe College
in Florida have increasing demand for highly-skilled and effective technicians.
To address this need, Santa Fe College will develop educational resources to
promote participation in STEM disciplines and awareness of career possibilities
in STEM by providing unique experiences for students. The project will design a
single multidisciplinary course to engage students in the scientific methods
used for research and analysis. Three different versions of the course will be
developed to include a hands-on project focused on either guitar building,
rocketry, or robotics. The math, technology, and science skills will be woven
throughout these student projects. The courses will be offered to students at
three rural educational centers. These students include those who are
transitioning from secondary to postsecondary education and first-time college
students. Many students in these populations are unfamiliar with STEM technician
jobs. The project aims to enhance student abilities and promote interest in
career opportunities that will help strengthen the nation's STEM technician
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project will be to: 1)
create and implement a project-based Research and Analysis course with three
experiential learning project options: guitar building, robotics, and rocketry;
2) provide faculty professional development to ensure consistent implementation
of the pedagogy at three rural educational centers; 3) engage a minimum of three
local businesses in development and implementation of career exploration
presentations and/or videos; and 4) evaluate the change in STEM career attitudes
and intentions of program participants through a pre- and post-test research
study. Curriculum development will use evidence-based pedagogical practices
designed to mitigate stereotype threat and enhance self-efficacy. Building on
the work of others, this project will adapt, integrate, and enhance relevant
curriculum and resources from other ATE projects, to meet the needs of Santa Fe
College's students and community. Because of the rural nature of the
participating educational centers, students will include a higher than average
percentage of low socioeconomic status students and first-time college students.
The project aims to emphasize collaboration with industry partners to better
meet employer needs for STEM technicians, and to connect students with industry
so they obtain firsthand knowledge of requirements for developing a successful
career. The change in STEM attitudes and interest in STEM careers will be
measured using a validated pre-post analysis. The results of this project will
be disseminated through project presentations and publications, and shared on
the ATE Central website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.