* 1800885
* Skilled Technical Education &amp; Experiential Learning
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Chakea Robinson-Shaw, Albany Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 219,204.00

In January 2014, Georgia's governor announced the High Demand Career Initiative,
which convened discussions between the private sector, Georgia's postsecondary
stakeholders, and Georgia's Department of Economic Development to explore
Georgia's future job needs. From these discussions across the state, a renewed
appreciation emerged of the critical need for a well-trained and educated
workforce for industry growth and expansion. Because Albany Technical College
(ATC) is one of the institutions responsible for educating Georgia's workforce,
it is obligated to help plan and deliver educational programs that meet industry
needs. This project will support changes to increase the effectiveness of the
ATC Civil, Electrical and Computer, and Electromechanical Engineering Technology
programs in educating highly skilled technical workers for
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the growing demand for
skilled technicians and a diversified labor force. As a Predominately Black
Institution, ATC has the potential to increase the participation of individuals
from a group that has been underrepresented in many technical workforce areas.
Working with industry partners, ATC aims to educate students who can meet the
demands of these partners for highly skilled employees. Industry will assist
faculty in placing students in internships and in evaluating student projects.
Project-Based Learning and paid internships will be integrated into three
engineering technology programs: 1) Civil Engineering Technology; 2) Electrical
and Computer Technology (Telecommunications); and 3) Electromechanical
Engineering Technology. The internships will enable students to apply classroom
knowledge to the hands-on experiences. In addition, students will work on real-
world projects early in their program of study. This strategy is expected to
foster a climate in which they can see and achieve the "end goal." The project
will address the following goals: (1) Increase enrollment, retention, and
placement rates for Civil, Telecommunications, and Electromechanical Engineering
Technology programs and (2) Strengthen existing partnerships with local
employers. The project will also be disseminated to the secondary school
program, "Move On When Ready," and the ATC Engineering Prep Academy. Students in
these programs will be supported to complete high school, continue their post-
secondary education, and interact with local employers who will be looking to
fill high demand technician positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.