* 1800923
* Modification of lithospheric structure via subduction, terrane accretion, and rifting: A case study beneath Connecticut
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2018,11/30/2023
* Maureen Long, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 11/30/2023
* USD 385,235.00

The bedrock geology of the eastern United States is extraordinary in its
complexity. This complexity reflects a range of plate tectonic processes that
have affected eastern North America over geologic time. These processes include
the formation and breakup of supercontinents, the accretion of new landmasses
onto the continental edge, and widespread volcanic activity due to subduction
and continental rifting. The state of Connecticut, though relatively compact in
area, represents a prime opportunity to study this range of fundamental Earth
processes. This is because Connecticut's geology reflects several phases of
mountain building and terrane accretion during the formation of the Appalachian
Mountains and the Pangea supercontinent, as well as the later breakup of Pangea
and the formation of the Atlantic Ocean basin. This project will use data from
an array of 15 seismic stations deployed across northern Connecticut to study
the deep structure of the crust and mantle beneath the state, using recordings
of seismic waves from distant earthquakes. The team will use images of this deep
structure to answer fundamental questions about how supercontinents are formed
and break up, as well as how plate tectonic processes such as subduction,
rifting, and terrane accretion affect the evolution of the crust and upper
mantle. The project includes a component of outreach to high school science
teachers, enabling teachers to spend one week in the field collecting data and
learning about Connecticut geology, as well as developing a classroom exercise
that uses seismic data from the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will analyze data from the Seismic Experiment for Imaging Structure beneath
Connecticut (SEISConn), a deployment of 15 broadband seismometers in a dense
linear array across northern Connecticut. The array occupies a region of the
Appalachian Orogen that encompasses a striking variety of accreted terrane
structures, as well as the Hartford Basin, a Mesozoic rift structure resulting
from the breakup of Pangea. They will apply a suite of imaging techniques to
SEISConn data, focusing on the imaging of discontinuity structure, seismic
velocity structure, and seismic anisotropy within the crust and lithospheric
mantle. The project is motivated by three major science questions: 1) How did
episodes of subduction and terrane accretion during Appalachian oogenesis affect
crustal and mantle lithospheric structure, and how does present-day deep
structure correspond to surface geology? 2) How was the structure of the crust
and mantle lithosphere affected by (failed) rifting during the Mesozoic, and how
does the structure beneath the Hartford Rift Basin compare to structure across
the (ultimately successful) rifted margin of eastern North America? 3) How was
the crust and mantle deformed during subduction, terrane accretion, and rifting?
This project will apply a range of analysis techniques to SEISConn data,
including P-to-S and S-to-P receiver function analysis, ambient noise
tomography, wavefield migration imaging, and shear wave splitting. The final
phase of the project will involve the testing of specific hypotheses about past
tectonic processes that were formulated based on geologic observations. This
project will support the continuation of the successful Field Experiences for
Science Teachers (FEST) program at Yale, which provides one week of field
seismology experience to Connecticut-based high school science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.