* 1800499
* Organoboronates as Lewis Acidic Nucleophiles in Enantioselective Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Jeremy May, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 420,000.00

With funding from the Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor
Jeremy May of the University of Houston is designing and synthesizing catalysts,
especially carbon-based catalysts (i.e., "organocatalysts"), that increase the
efficiency of carbon-carbon bonds forming reactions with the necessary control
of three-dimentional structure. This research is transformative in that the use
of such organocatalysts avoids many problems associated with metal-containing
catalysts, including toxicity and the expense of precious metals. In addition,
this research is providing fundamental insights into the mechanisms of
organocatalyzed reactions. Some of these reactions are biologically relevant.
Dr. May's new reactions replicate and improve upon natural products that have
antibacterial, anticancer, neurological, or immune system-stimulating activity.
In addition, the Professor May is partnering with KIPP Sharpstown Junior High to
introduce students to experimental chemistry and other physical sciences. The
May lab works with disadvantaged and at-risk students to bolster their
scientific understanding and desire to prepare for college.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Professor May is designing and synthesizing asymmetric
organocatalysts that can promote the conjugate addition of vinyl and aryl
boronates to alpha, beta-unsaturated ketones for the synthesis of carbon-carbon
(C-C) bonds efficiently and with high levels of stereocontrol. This project is
advancing fundamental knowledge of organocatalysis, the reactivity of boronate
reagents, and stereoelectronic effects in C-C bond formation. The reagents and
intermediates involved are highly tolerant of sensitive chemical functional
groups, allowing great diversity in the substrate scope and access to atomic
arrangements commonly found in bioactive molecules. The synthesis of sterically
encumbered C-C bonds that are otherwise difficult to form is an aim of this
project. This research is transformative as the use of organocatalysts and
boronates avoids many of the problems associated with transition metal catalysts
including a lack of tolerance of heterocycles or heteroatoms. The synthesis of
targets and analogs of the indolyl propylene glycol class of natural products,
which have been shown to exhibit antibacterial, antimetastatic,
acetocholinesterase blocking, and immune system stimulating bioactivities is
also being developed. The supported research effort has a broad educational
impact at all levels (Graduate, Undergraduate, and High School). Professor May
continues to support a partnership with KIPP Sharpstown Junior High to introduce
the students to experimental chemistry and other physical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.