* 1800252
* A Coordination Chemistry Approach to the Synthesis of Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Jeffrey Long, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2021
* USD 539,999.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic & Mechanism B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jeffrey Long of the Department of Chemistry
at the University of California, Berkeley is designing and synthesizing new
single-molecule magnets. Single-molecule magnets are molecules that behave as
nanoscale magnets at low temperatures and can display magnetic properties akin
to both classical and quantum systems. A potential direct application of this
work is in the fields of magnetic data storage, quantum computing, and
spintronics, however the knowledge gained by understanding magnetic properties
on the molecular level is applicable to a wide variety of magnetic materials.
Single-molecule magnets typically only operate at very low temperatures (less
than 60 K). The goal of this project is to synthesize new molecules which have
even higher operating temperatures. The project lies at the interface of
inorganic chemistry, coordination chemistry, and physics. Both Professor Long
and the members of his group are active in disseminating their work to a broad
scientific audience, and the graduate students in the group participate in
programs which place them in local elementary and middle school classrooms for
hands-on science lessons.

Single-molecule magnets are molecules with magnetically bistable ground states.
When thermal energy is small relative to the thermal barrier between these
states the magnetic molecule can retain its magnetization in the absence of an
applied field. The proposed research adopts three strategies to synthesize
single-molecule magnets which operate at higher temperatures. The first is to
design systems with enhanced magnetic anisotropy, which will increase the
thermal barrier to magnetic relaxation. Highly axial coordination environments
will be employed for both transition metal and lanthanide complexes to achieve
higher magnetic anisotropy. The second strategy is to utilize strong magnetic
coupling to mitigate the effect of relaxation processes which shortcut the
thermal barrier. Both transition metal and lanthanide complexes will be coupled
with radical bridging ligands that promote strong metal-radical magnetic
exchange. For transition metal complexes, direct metal-metal interactions will
also lead to strongly coupled magnetic centers. Additionally, mixed 3d-4f
systems will be developed to take advantage of both the large magnetic
anisotropy of the lanthanides and the strong exchange coupling of the transition
metals. Finally, the third strategy will place magnetically anisotropic moieties
in the rigid coordination environments of metal-organic frameworks. In this
manner it may be possible to minimize the effects of low energy lattice
vibrations in causing through-barrier magnetic relaxation pathways.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.