* 1800177
* RUI:  Molecular Design for Redox Active Deep Eutectic Solvents
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* John Goeltz, University Corporation at Monterey Bay
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2022
* USD 245,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor John Goeltz of the School of
Natural Sciences at California State University, Monterey Bay is developing new
classes of liquids for applications in energy fields. This research targets
liquids that can store charge without the addition of any active materials for
development of new capabilities for existing battery materials such as fast
charging without reduced battery lifetimes and a chemical method of protecting
against failure due to overcharging. This project is especially well suited to
the training of undergraduate scientists with diverse interests and career
goals. Development of student researchers' writing and assessment techniques
will also be part of the funded project as the students develop and deploy
training materials to enable other undergraduate scientists to advance beyond a
first-year level skill set in electrochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solvents
that exhibit reversible redox activity hold promise in energy conversion and
storage yet remain relatively uncommon. This project involves application of
chemical design principles to low-temperature ionic melts known as deep eutectic
solvents (DESs) and related materials. Researchers will synthesize and
characterize precursor molecules and prepare redox-active liquid ionic
materials. They are characterizing these materials by rheology, voltammetry, UV-
vis spectroelectrochemistry, and 2-dimensional NMR techniques. Undergraduate
researchers are: 1. thermally and electrochemically characterizing a solvent in
multiple oxidation states; 2. measuring the energetics of hydrogen bonded
assemblies that define the solvents through voltammetry and NMR; and 3.
demonstrating the first bifunctional redox active solvents that can be
reversibly reduced or oxidized and isolated in any of three oxidation
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.