* 1800909
* Skills for Biomedical Emerging Technology Applications
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Kathy Bakhit, Forsyth Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 991,744.00

Advances at the intersection of biomedical devices and tissue engineering are
creating new workforce demands for advanced technological education. With the
development of combination devices, sensors, photonics, and implantable systems,
employers need technician-specialists who understand more than classical
biological and chemical sciences and traditional engineering. The emerging
technician-specialist will also need to understand fundamental principles of
electronics engineering, mechanical engineering, nanotechnology, optics,
photonics, and process-control/quality assurance. Through its National Center
for the Biotechnology Workforce, Forsyth Technical Community College will lead
the effort to define the skills and knowledge needed by these technician-
specialists, and develop educational strategies that can help students learn
those skills. This project includes a collaboration between Forsythe Technical
Community College (NC), Ivy Tech Community College (IN); Anoka-Ramsey Community
College (MN); and College of the Canyons (CA). These four states account for 25%
of the employment nationwide across all biosciences industry subsectors and 32%
of jobs in medical devices and equipment. The project goal is to initiate,
support, and nurture a national effort for advanced technological education that
reflects the convergence of science and technology at the interface between
biomedical devices and tissue engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skills for
Biomedical Emerging Technology Applications (BETA Skills) will be defined in
collaboration with multiple employers, industry groups, educators, workforce
agencies, researchers, innovators, and other stakeholders, radiating outward
from the four institutions. The project has two objectives: (1) Define BETA core
skills for national use by educators, industry, researchers, and employers, and
(2) Connect BETA core skills to educational and career pathways with multiple
on- and off-ramps. The Biotech-Careers.org website will provide an online
platform to curate national information about jobs and opportunities related to
BETA core skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.