* 1800418
* Molecular Simulations of Biological Active Matter
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Garegin Papoian, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Garegin Papoian of the University of Maryland College Park is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods Program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop, optimize, and apply the MEDYAN (MEchanical
DYnamics of Active Networks) computational framework for modeling
chemomechanical active matter. The Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program
in the Division of Materials Research also contributes to this award.
Traditional states of matter, such as solids, liquids, and gases, self-organize
through interactions among constituent molecules. Active matter, on the other
hand, arises from external energy-driven self-assembly. Such systems are
challenging to model due to the strong intrinsic coupling of chemistry and
mechanics. Active matter has emerged as a new frontier in science, at the
interface of chemistry, materials physics, and biology. In fact, the cells in
one's body can be viewed as a form of highly complex active matter, where the
external energy is derived from food. Within each cell, an elaborate interplay
of interacting molecular motors, self-assembling filaments, the cell membrane,
and organelles continuously convert chemical energy into forces that determine
cellular shape, motility, and sensing of the extracellular environment.
Papoian's group, by developing and applying the MEDYAN software framework, is
working toward the grand challenge of modeling individual cells in all of their
extraordinary complexity, by incorporating new models of the cell's constituent
chemical, mechanical, and transport processes. MEDYAN is thus enabling critical
new understanding of the molecular principles underlying cellular active matter.
As part of this project, MEDYAN is being used to study self-assembly and
structural stability of dendritic spines in neurons, which support formation of
long-term memories in the brain, and cell shape oscillations, whose origin and
biological role are not well understood. The software has applications to
biomaterials as well as to cell biology and is expected to advance the national
health. MEDYAN is being made available to the public as open source software,
and an active matter community website and learning resource is being developed
as part of the project. Research is coupled with education and outreach through
inclusion of high school students in lab research, and ongoing efforts to expand
diversity in applicants within the university's chemical physics
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is extending MEDYAN to support
essential components of eukaryotic cell modeling. These include a deformable,
chemically-active plasma membrane model expressed in terms of a 2D mesh and
associated Voronoi polygons; incorporation of a free energy penalty for in-plane
and out-of-plane membrane deformations; steric and tethering interactions of
cytoskeletal filaments with local membrane patches; volumetric forces due to
osmotic pressure or associated with the volume conservation; and reaction-
diffusion of membrane bound proteins, including the ability of some proteins to
induce spontaneous membrane curvature. These advances are further leveraged to
formulate computational models for internal organelles such as the cell nucleus.
In addition, a model is being constructed to describe self-assembly of spectrin
proteins into a dynamically rearranging 2D sheet transiently tethered underneath
the plasma membrane. To achieve the computational efficiency needed for
simulating at biologically-relevant length- and timescales, MEDYAN is being
parallelized on state-of-the-art CPU and GPU architectures. These new modeling
and simulation capabilities are being used to study two important problems in
cell biology: the molecular underpinnings of the structural stability of
dendritic spines, which underlie the stability of long-term memories in animals;
and collective oscillatory cycles, propagating as a migrating front from one
cell to another, which are based on a cytoskeletal phenomenon called
pulsatility. For both of these projects, there is close collaboration with an
experimentalist on iterative model development and validation. This next
generation of MEDYAN is providing important new modeling capabilities with
applications to programmable matter integrating active and non-active components
to achieve smart materials with unique properties. The MEDYAN software and
documentation are freely disseminated as open source. As part of this project,
Dr. Papoian is creating a community web resource centered around active matter,
with class-ready educational materials for secondary schools, undergraduate and
graduate courses, and research sections bringing together information on
publications relating to active matter and the scientific groups working in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.