* 1800331
* Hexacoordinate Silicon Complexes for Electronic Devices
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Thomas Schmedake, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 511,682.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports an
interdisciplinary research team led by Professors Thomas A. Schmedake (Dept. of
Chemistry), Michael Walter (Chemistry), and Yong Zhang (Electrical and Computer
Engineering) at the University of North Carolina - Charlotte to develop
hexacoordinate silicon complexes for optoelectronic device applications like the
development of photovoltaics for harvesting light energy or fiber optic
communications. The goal of the project is to overcome some of the current
limitations of organic electronic devices by developing new silicon-based
molecular materials with electronic and optical properties superior to those of
current materials. To accomplish this goal, the team at UNC Charlotte is
developing new methodology for synthesizing chemically stable and robust silicon
complexes with optimized electronic and optical molecular properties. Once made,
the complexes are incorporated into prototype devices to measure their effect on
device performance. This interplay between the synthesis of the complexes and
device fabrication serves to elucidate the molecular-level synthetic design
principles needed for macroscale device optimization. The interdisciplinary
project spans the fields of chemistry, materials science, and electrical
engineering and provides exceptional training for students at various stages in
their careers ranging from high school through graduate school. In addition, the
collaborators work with a local science museum, teachers, and schools to develop
and provide outreach programs in chemistry and STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
team at UNC Charlotte is synthesizing new electron transport layer and
electroluminescent materials based on neutral hexacoordinate silicon complexes
with dianionic pincer ligands for added chemical stability, robust redox
chemistry, low dipole moments, simple stereochemistry, and low reorganization
energies. These are ideal properties for molecular components in organic light
emitting diodes, phosphorescent LEDs and other molecular electronics devices.
The complexes are also attractive candidates for vacuum deposited, high-
efficiency, and earth-abundant replacements of rare-earth element phosphor
coatings for inorganic LEDs. The program involves both the development of the
synthetic complexes and their incorporation into prototype devices so that their
properties can be measured. These research components are being integrated with
both the classroom teaching of the investigators and ongoing collaborations with
a local science museum, teachers, and schools to develop and provide outreach
programs in chemistry and STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.