* 1800666
* Noncommutative Geometry and Analytic Grothendieck Riemann Roch Theorem
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Xiang Tang, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

In classical geometry, functions on a geometric space, like the Cartesian
coordinates on a plane, commute with each other. More precisely, the
multiplication of coordinate functions does not depend on the order. However,
the Heisenberg uncertainty principle in quantum mechanics indicates that the
position and momentum, the two important observables of a quantum system, do not
commute. Such noncommutative phenomena turn out to appear naturally not only in
mathematics and physics but also everywhere in life. For example, clicking
button A before B in a game may produce a completely different outcome from
clicking B before A. Noncommutative geometry is an emerging branch of
mathematics to study the geometry of "noncommutative spaces", where the
functions, like the position and momentum, do not commute with each other. This
project will explore various interesting noncommutative spaces motivated by
problems in operator theory, singular spaces, and mathematical physics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator proposes to investigate several
projects in noncommutative geometry. In the first project, the principal
investigator will take ideas from different branches of mathematics including
algebraic geometry, differential geometry, and differential topology to
investigate the Arveson-Douglas conjecture. An analytic generalization of the
Grothendieck Riemann Roch theorem for (singular) analytic varieties will be
developed to identify the K-homology class associated to the essentially normal
Hilbert module in the Arveson-Douglas conjecture. A secondary invariant theory
in noncommutative geometry will be introduced to understand the Hilbert modules
associated to Brieskorn varieties. The aim of the second project is to develop a
longitudinal index theory for open foliated manifolds. In particular, cyclic
homology of a proper Lie groupoid will be applied as a key tool to study such an
index theory. The third project is devoted to the study of the quantum geometry
of étale gerbes on orbifolds. Inspired by results in physics, the principal
investigator intends to establish a duality theory for the quantum geometry of
étale gerbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.