* 1800487
* Enantioselective Formation of All-Carbon Quaternary Centers via Pi-Allylic Rearrangements of N-Alloc Enamines and Ynamides
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Cook, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 07/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry is
supporting the research of Professor Matthew Cook of the Department of Chemistry
and Biochemistry at Montana State University. Professor Cook is studying new
catalytic reactions that produce molecules containing a carbon atom bound to
four other carbon atoms. Such carbons atoms are called "all-carbon quaternary
centers". These carbons can possess a property known as "chirality" or
"handedness". Chiral molecules, like human hands, are not superimposable on
their mirror images. The two-handed forms of such molecules (like the left hand
or the right hand) can be difficult to generate selectively. This is even more
so in the case of compounds that bear all-carbon quaternary centers. Roughly 10%
of the 200 top selling pharmaceuticals contain chiral all-carbon quaternary
centers; however, none can be synthesized entirely in a laboratory. Instead,
they are formed from naturally occurring sources. Professor Cook addresses this
problem by developing new palladium-catalyzed methods that can selectively form
chiral, all-carbon quaternary centers with a preference for one handed form over
the other. Professor Cook also works closely with Professor Neufeldt, also at
Montana State University, to investigate the mechanism of theses reactions so
they can be further improved and optimized. This project provides excellent
preparation for graduate and undergraduate students in future careers in STEM
fields, in either academia or industry. Professor Cook also works on an outreach
program to introduce K-12 school students living in Montana's rural areas
(including a large Native American population) to practical science and modern
instrumentation, with the aim of fostering their interests in STEM subjects and
improving their enrollment rates at college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Cook
is exploring the use of new pi-allylic rearrangement chemistry to generate
stereogenic all-carbon quaternary centers with high levels of stereoselectivity.
He is adopting two approaches, both of which utilize N-alloc carbamates that
undergo a decarboxylative rearrangement to generate the requisite stereocenter.
These methods overcome the major challenge in pi-allyl chemistry in acyclic
systems, efficiently controlling E/Z selectivity in the nucleophile. By
utilizing N-alloc enamines, which are much more configurationally stable than
their enolate analogs, geometric fidelity can be retained. This allow catalyst
control to dictate the stereochemical outcome. Another strategy being pursued
uses N-alloc ynamides, which generate ketenimines following a pi-allylic
rearrangement. These ketenimine intermediates then undergo a subsequent
sigmatropic rearrangement, nucleophilic addition, or a second pi-allylic
rearrangement to generate an all-carbon stereocenter. These ketenimine
intermediates are chiral but undergo epimerization, and are being used in
dynamic kinetic resolution reactions. Detailed mechanistic studies of both of
these reactions are being conducted experimentally and computationally in
collaboration with Professor Sharon Neufeldt at Montana
State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.