* 1800414
* Cavity-Vibration Mixed States:  Chemistry in Etalons
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Jim Coe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Molecules typically vibrate at frequencies that correspond to infrared light
(the wavelength range important in night vision technologies). Etalons are
optical devices that consist of two parallel reflective metal plates whose
spacing corresponds to infrared wavelengths (roughly 1 micrometer to 1
millimeter). If molecules are placed inside an etalon with just the right
spacing, their vibrational properties can change. The molecule+cavity system is
called a "mixed state", an interesting combination of light and matter. Since
molecular vibrations have very important roles in how molecules undergo chemical
reactions, there is the possibility that by simply changing cavity spacings, we
can change vibrational properties of the molecules as well as their reactivity.
In this project supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor James Coe and his graduate
students at The Ohio State University seek to demonstrate the feasibility of
making mixed states of infrared etalon cavity modes and condensed phase
vibrations to change reaction rates. "Chemistry in Etalons" would represent an
entirely new field of chemistry, and may offer significant opportunities for
producing chemicals more efficiently. The students involved in this project are
gaining experience in both advanced optical spectroscopy and theoretical
chemistry calculations. Professor Coe also plans to collaborate with professors
at Cal State Dominguez Hills, which has an ethnically and economically diverse
student body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project begins with the construction of
alignable and adjustable etalons in order to produce etalon fringes of variable
width. The etalon is filled with a condensed phase material which has vibrations
of interest. Etalon fringes are angle-tuned into resonance with the vibrations
and an infrared transmission spectrum is recorded which enables the measurement
of Rabi splittings--the energy difference between the mixed states of cavity and
vibration. In order for the measured Rabi splittings to be related to
fundamental quantum mechanical properties such as dipole derivatives, our models
show that the etalon fringe width and vibrational transition width should be the
same. Since vibrational features show a wide range of widths, there is a need to
be able to carefully design etalons that match molecular vibrations. This
project is focusing on: 1) the effect of etalon fringe width on measured Rabi
splittings, 2) the conjugated double bond system of CO2 in water, and 3)
broadened gas phase systems, all in order to establish the relation of these
measurements to fundamental quantum mechanical properties. Finally, selected
reactions are being studied within the wavelength-scale etalon cavity as
informed by the previous results and as followed by infrared transmission
spectra that allow assessment of whether the rates of reactions can be affected
by mixed states of cavities and vibrations. While this project seeks fundamental
insights into etalon-molecule mixed states, there is a potential for
implications in a wide range of technological applications, including chemical
and nanoparticle sensors, and even in heterogeneous catalysis (e.g., the etalon
mirrors could serve as catalysts or catalyst
supports).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.