* 1800798
* Catalyst Project: Identification of Effective Heat Conductivity Coefficient of Particulate Two-phase Materials
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Abhinandan Chowdhury, Savannah State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2023
* USD 175,079.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. This project at
Savannah State University focuses on mathematical modeling for the
identification of heat conductivity coefficients of two-phase materials and
provides an opportunity for undergraduate students to enhance their education
through research experiences in mathematical modeling. The researcher has
established a strong collaboration with faculty at Purdue University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the central issues of the contemporary mechanics of
continuous media is the problem of identification of the mechanical properties
of particulate two-phase materials and flows based on the respective properties
of the constituents. This project will investigate the problem of identifying
one such mechanical property, namely, effective heat conductivity. The
particulate material (or suspension of particles in a fluid, such as a liquid-
solid mixture) can be conceptualized as a particulate "phase" comprised of
randomly dispersed particles throughout a continuous "phase". The presence of
suspended particles strongly influences the overall mechanical properties. This
phenomenon remains a major challenge in the field of fluid mechanics especially
while estimating the effective transport coefficients, such as the heat
conductivity coefficient or the viscosity coefficient, of suspensions. The long-
term goal is the estimation of the effective heat conductivity coefficient for
suspension by developing an in-depth mathematical model. This model will be
based on a system of stochastic differential equations. This system will be
recovered from the steady and unsteady heat diffusion equations by applying a
method called random point approximations - also, expanding the temperature
field by using a suitable stochastic functional series. In this process, the
model will be fully capable of countering the problems associated with the
randomness of sizes and positions of the suspended particles in a continuous
media. Furthermore, it will also be able to tackle the significant issue of
inhomogeneity interactions which is strongly validated by experimental data.
Once developed, this model will lead to a mathematically rigorous formula for
effective heat conductivity coefficient of suspension, improving Maxwell's
formula for terms up to the square of concentration of the suspension. The
expected outcomes will also improve our understanding of the mechanism and
theory that underlies this phenomenon which will subsequently extend design
options in manufacturing devices and developing processes applicable to these
mechanisms, therefore opening the door to possibilities of novel processes and
devices that use heat transfer and fluid flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.