* 1800173
* New Catalysts for Hydrocarbon Partial Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Thomas Gunnoe, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 470,000.00

The starting materials for the chemical industry are hydrocarbons derived from
fossil sources (primarily natural gas and petroleum), which must be chemically
converted into higher value materials. The chemical industry's energy
consumption for these process is substantial and accounts for approximately 10%
of total global energy use and greater than 5% of global carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions. Thus, while there are opportunities to dramatically increase the
energy efficiency of large-scale chemical processes, there are also substantial
scientific challenges to realizing this goal. In this project, T. Brent Gunnoe
of the University of Virginia is developing a better understanding of how to
perform selective and energy efficient chemical conversions that are essential
to the goal of using natural gas and other fossil resources in a more
environmentally benign manner. The project is a foundation for Professor Gunnoe
to work with primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to develop a program to
increase interest among students from diverse backgrounds in careers as
scientists and engineers, especially in the energy arena. In this program,
graduate students visit PUIs to deliver short courses based on their research,
and undergraduate students participate in summer research internships in
Professor Gunnoe's laboratory. This project impacts the chemical industry both
in terms of sustainable innovation and workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Gunnoe is developing new catalysts based on
rhodium (Rh), iridium (Ir) and copper (Cu) for the functionalization of carbon-
hydrogen (C-H) bonds of hydrocarbons. A primary focus is how to combine
transition metal mediated C-H activation and reductive functionalization of
metal-hydrocarbyl ligands into catalytic cycles. Both transformations must be
accessed under oxidizing conditions, which requires design of ligands to control
the thermodynamics of metal-based redox chemistry. The outcome of these efforts
is to access new catalysts that use air recyclable oxidants, thus enabling new
catalytic processes for net aerobic oxidation of hydrocarbons. The proposed
chemistry builds on three primary developments, based on combined experimental
and computational studies. The development of ligand designs that optimize Rh-
and Ir-mediated C-H activation in acidic solvents is investigated along with the
development of ligand motifs that optimize reductive functionalization of RhIII-
Me and IrIII-Me bonds to form Rh(I) and Ir(I) and MeX in acidic solvents (HX).
The investigators also examine the use of Cu(II) mediated arene
functionalization by a non-free radical pathway. The project is a foundation for
Professor Gunnoe to work with primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to
develop a program to increase interest among students from diverse backgrounds
in careers as scientists and engineers, especially in the energy arena. In this
program, graduate students visit PUIs to deliver short courses based on their
research, and undergraduate students participate in summer research internships
in Professor Gunnoe's laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.