* 1800582
* Collaborative Research:  Observed and Future Dynamically Downscaled Estimates of Precipitation Associated with Mesoscale Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 08/25/2017,07/31/2021
* Vittorio Gensini, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2021
* USD 49,537.00

A mesoscale convective system (MCS) is a collection of thunderstorms organized
on a larger scale than the storms it contains, in which the individual
thunderstorms act in concert to generate the atmospheric motion that organizes
and sustains the system. These large storm systems produce extreme weather
including hail, floods, and tornados, but they also make an important
contribution to water resources over the eastern two thirds of the continental
US (CONUS) during the growing season. This project seeks to understand MCS
behavior in an aggregate sense, including the long-term contribution of MCS
precipitation to the overall water balance of the CONUS and the importance of
year-to-year variability in MCS activity for anomalously wet (flood) or dry
(drought) conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key tool for conducting the
research is the Weather Services International (WSI) National Operational
Weather radar (NOWrad) data set, a 20-year record (currently 1996-2015) created
from the National Weather Service radar stations which provide continuous near-
total coverage of the CONUS. A primary goal of the project is to develop and
apply an automated procedure to detect and track MCSs in the radar data. The
algorithm identifies MCSs as contiguous or semi-contiguous features in radar
maps over an area of at least 100km along the system's major axis exceeding a
threshold reflectivity value. MCS tracking is complicated by the the tendency of
MCSs to split and merge as they propagate, and the algorithm incorporates a
method for identifying mergers and splits. A further issue is that large regions
of intense precipitation can occur in frontal cyclones and landfalling
hurricanes, and a classification scheme is necessary to distinguish these
regions from MCSs. A machine learning technique to perform this classification
is developed using expert judgement to train a random forest classifier (RFC)
scheme. Further expert judgement is solicited through a survey which invites the
research community to participate in the development and validation of the
tracking and classification schemes. The catalog of MCS events and their
characteristics (intensity, duration, structure, etc) is then used to study MCS
seasonality, interannual variability, and contribution to CONUS rainfall
including floods and droughts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further work uses a global
climate model (GFDL-CM3) in combination with a regional convection permitting
model (WRF-ARW at 4km horizontal resolution) to simulate MCSs over the CONUS
under present-day and projected future climate conditions. The simulations are
analyzed according to the tracking and classification schemes developed for the
NOWrad data, and the model simulations allow examination of how MCS behavior
depends on climatic factors such as tropospheric moisture, soil moisture,
atmospheric stability, and large-scale atmospheric
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts due to the
importance of MCS rainfall as a water resource for agriculture and the severe
weather hazards related to MCS activity. The algorithms and datasets produced
for the project will be shared with researchers and operational climatologists
and hydrologists through an online portal. In addition, the project supports and
trains a graduate student and provides summer support for an undergraduate,
thereby providing for the future scientific workforce in this area.