* 1800506
* Pseudo-Finiteness of Combinatorial Theories
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Cameron Hill, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2021
* USD 149,992.00

Model theory is a branch of mathematical logic in which one can exploit the
linguistic/formal description of a mathematical object to study the object
itself. This object might be a single algebraic structure or a class of
structures that share a common description (theory). In this project, the PI
will study the phenomenon of pseudo-finiteness, in which every (finite) fragment
of the description of an infinite object also describes a finite object -- even
while the full description captures only infinite structures. In recent years,
pseudo-finiteness has been exploited to prove theorems in finitary discrete
mathematics and additive combinatorics. On the other hand, pseudo-finiteness has
only been completely characterized in a small number of settings. Ax's
characterization of pseudo-finite fields is probably the best known. Here, the
PI intends to give such a characterization of pseudo-finiteness for theories
that are "purely non-algebraic" -- theories that arise from classes of
structures that are specifically of interest in discrete mathematics, such as
classes of graphs and regular hypergraphs. In the very long term, one might
expect to see applications of this research in network analysis, treating very
large networks (i.e. graphs) like the internet and the human brain.

Here are some more technical details. The project provides a detailed study of
the phenomenon of pseudo-finiteness in what is called "combinatorial theories"
-- countably-categorical theories with quantifier elimination and trivial
algebraic closure operation. Such theories correspond immediately to commonly
studied classes of finite structures from discrete mathematics, such as graphs
(directed and undirected) and regular hypergraphs. In practice, it is quite
difficult, if not impossible, to construct pseudo-finite combinatorial theories
without appealing to probability theory in apparently essential ways: either the
constructed theory is itself obtained from a 0,1-law or it is some sort of limit
of such theories. Upon determining exactly what the appropriate limit processes
are, the PI plans to show that this is, in fact, the only way to construct
pseudo-finite combinatorial theories. A proof of this sort of claim will require
a more or less complete understanding of 0,1-laws in this setting -- especially,
connections and equivalences between conditional independence and higher
amalgamation properties in classes of finite structures. In turn, this analysis
seems to require deep exploration of connections between model theory, on one
hand, and (for example) functional analysis and measure-theoretic probability on
the other. Capturing pseudo-finite theories as limits of almost-sure theories
will require development of an extensive technology for selecting/extracting
well-behaved sub-classes inside of a given class of finite structures.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.