* 1800051
* Molybdenum-Promoted Dearomatization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Walter Harman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 512,240.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor W. Dean Harman. Professor Harman is a faculty member and current chair
in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Virginia. He is developing
new methods for the preparation of novel chemical compounds that have the
potential to serve as lead compounds for pharmaceutical development. His unique
approach exploits the unusual chemical properties that arise when an aromatic
ring is complexed to a metal. These unusual chemical properties lead to new
chemical reactions that convert the originally flat aromatic ring into a
significantly more complex molecule. The presence of the metal allows for
introduction of the complexity in a controlled fashion. The invention of the new
methods allows for completely new approaches to the synthesis of a variety of
interesting and potentially useful molecules. While not part of this proposal.
The project lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, and medicinal
chemistry. Students work in a fully interdisciplinary research environment on a
wide range of problems and become integrated into the scientific community
through attendance and presentations at professional meetings, participation in
writing peer-reviewed manuscripts, participating in the proposal-writing
process, and meeting other scientists. Thus, it is well suited for the education
of scientists at all levels. Professor Harman's group is also well positioned to
provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving K-12 students will
also be part of the funded project. Finally, collaborations with professors from
undergraduate institutions allow these professors greater exposure to current
research methods, and expose their students to major research programs.

The goal of this work is the development of new methods for the syntheses of
novel molecular substances from aromatic molecules. This is being accomplished
by leveraging the unique chemical properties of an aromatic molecule that result
from its dihapto-coordination to a transition metal. Such action modifies the
chemical reactivity of the aromatic substrate, allowing its elaboration into
novel organic compounds. Significantly, these dearomatization reactions are
leading to new molecules with considerable stereochemical complexity that are
well suited for biological evaluation. Previously, heavy metal dearomatization
agents derived from osmium, rhenium, and tungsten have been investigated,
exploiting their powerful pi-donating abilities. In this work, the PI is
exploring the feasibility and practicality of a dihapto-coordinate
dearomatization methodology based on a second-row metal. Fundamental chemical
features of molybdenum-based aromatic complexes are being investigated and
compared to the analogous heavy metal systems. Differences in bond energies,
oxidation state stabilities, pi-interactions, tolerance of chemical reagents,
cost, and recyclability are ultimately leading to new synthetic opportunities
that complement those provided by the heavy metal based systems. The molecular
frameworks that are formed through these studies are providing novel
architectures that ultimately will be valuable in the development of new
biologically active materials. In many cases there are simply no other means for
easily obtaining these compounds. Other broader impacts of this work are related
to the professional training of graduate and undergraduate students in the areas
of Organic, Inorganic, and Organometallic Chemistry. In addition, graduate
students develop their mentoring skills by training and collaborating with
undergraduate students.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.