* 1800734
* RUI: Geometric Intersection Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Csaba Toth, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 99,966.00

This project envisions two main objectives: First, it studies the theory of
geometric representations of graphs, building on a broad array of mathematical
methods, and integrating the results into new technology. Second, it trains the
next generation of students for careers in mathematics, sciences, and
engineering, focusing on solid foundations in discrete mathematics, and
developing mathematical skills for handling geometric objects efficiently.
Visualizing complex systems and large data sets has become routine, including
user-friendly handling of virtual objects in low dimensions. Designing efficient
computer tools in this context is a challenging task, it calls for a thorough
understanding of how geometric objects and relations between them are
represented, as well as highly qualified developers and scientists who are
familiar with the capabilities and limitations of these mathematical
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representing graphs in space is constrained by
topological, metric, and algebraic properties. Topological constraints are
typically captured by unavoidable patterns in the intersection graph of curves
or surfaces, and is closely related to Ramsey-type results in combinatorial
geometry. Metric constraints correspond to patterns in distances, slopes,
angles, and areas that can be realized simultaneously. Algebraic constraints
play an important role when edges are represented by algebraic curves (including
straight lines). This project will study the intersection patterns of geometric
objects, where the intersection relation is represented by an undirected graph,
and it will also examine the intersections created by embeddings of geometric
graphs, topological graphs, hypergraphs, or simplicial complexes into Euclidean
spaces of low dimensions. Related enumerative problems will be considered, as
well, where metric and topological constraints combined with classical
combinatorial problems yield new challenges. Quantitative bounds for the
realization spaces of basic geometric objects (such as points, line segments,
lines, and quadrics) have applications in cartography, computer science,
optimization, and solid modelling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.