* 1800940
* EAGER: Distributed Iterative Control of Soft Robotic Arms
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Wenlong Zhang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 08/31/2021
* USD 186,100.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will create a new
method of controlling compliant robot manipulators resembling octopus arms or
elephant trunks, and will experimentally validate these new control laws. This
project will explore two innovative aspects. First, control will be distributed.
That is, a large number of sensors and actuators will be spread throughout the
manipulator, and information gathered by each sensor will be used to control
only a small number of nearby actuators. This distributed control strategy
avoids the transmission of large amounts of data across the structure, and
eliminates the need for a powerful central computer to process this flood of
data. Second, the control law will be iterative. That is, the soft manipulator
will learn to achieve its objectives over multiple attempts. Although the
approach taken is not explicitly based on biological behavior, both these
features are present in animals that manipulate objects using compliant
appendages. Computer simulations will be used to study performance of the new
control laws on extremely complex robots, with hundreds of individually
controllable segments. Physical experiments will be conducted on systems with
between five and ten such segments. The modeling and control approaches will
advance the national health and economic prosperity, by enabling reliable
autonomous operation of soft multi-segment robots, to increase their usability
in numerous applications, including manufacturing, surgery, search and rescue,
navigation, and personal home assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
explore novel distributed planning and control approaches for multi-segment soft
robotic systems. In contrast to the large amounts of training data required by
machine learning, this approach aims to create intuitive and computationally
efficient algorithms with high robustness and scalability. Specific research
goals include i) novel 2-D and 3-D goal reaching and obstacle avoidance
algorithms, using only local sensor measurements and information processing, ii)
feasible high-fidelity dynamic models to capture non-linear material properties
and pressure dynamics, iii) a robust iterative learning control algorithm for
gravity compensation and motion control of the soft arm, and iv) validation of
the control laws using a physical multi-segment soft robotic
arm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.