* 1800507
* Design rules for synthesis of stable single-site catalysts from experiment and first principles theory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Robert Rioux, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 473,205.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Drs. Rioux and Janik of Penn State University are developing
fundamental principles to provide new, more effective catalysts. Most catalysts
used today consist of aggregates of metal atoms on a support material. The
metals are often rare and expensive, and the metal atoms inside the aggregates
are not active in catalysis. Much more efficient use of these expensive metals
is possible if they are used as single atoms, and not aggregates, on the
support. Thus, there is significant motivation for preparing single atom metal
catalysts. The Penn State team is using a combination of experimental and
computational methods to determine and understand the conditions under which
single atom catalysts can be successfully prepared. Undergraduates from groups
underrepresented in science and engineering are being included in these research
efforts. In addition, student researchers are developing teaching modules that
demonstrate how energy production impacts our environment for inclusion in
outreach activities directed at students and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Single-atom catalysts represent an exciting new
class of catalysts that have demonstrated high activity for chemical reactions
relevant in energy production. The research groups of Dr. Robert Rioux and Dr.
Michael Janik are developing computationally derived and experimentally
validated design rules for the stabilization of single-atom motifs on reducible
oxides. The synthesis approach is based on the strong electrostatic adsorption
of precious group metal precursors that will define the upper boundary for metal
loading on oxide supports. The combination of computational and experimental
techniques is allowing the determination of descriptors that guide the choice of
precursors, support, and pH for the synthesis of stable precious metal single
atom catalysts. Isothermal titration calorimetry measurements of adsorption at
the solid-liquid interface and density functional theory calculations are being
used to evaluate and predict conditions leading to formation of stable single
atom catalysts. The Pd on ceria system is being used as an initial testbed due
to its promise as a low-temperature methane oxidation catalyst. The research
project includes undergraduate involvement in research through the Minority
Undergraduate Research Experience and Women in Science and Engineering Research
programs, and is generating teaching modules that demonstrate the impact of
energy production on our environment for use in outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.