* 1800982
* Elucidating Pressure- and Field-Tuned Phases and Multifunctionality in Magnetic Spinels
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* S. Lance Cooper, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2023
* USD 455,588.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;"Magnetically responsive" materials have
properties that can be tuned with pressure and magnetic field. Such materials
exhibit a range of scientifically interesting and technologically useful
properties. Understanding the physical mechanisms responsible for these exotic
properties is not only important scientifically, but is an essential
prerequisite to optimizing these materials for use in technological
applications. This project combines the use of high pressures, high magnetic
fields, and visible laser light to identify and control the underlying
mechanisms responsible for magnetically responsive behavior in a select group of
materials. The diverse techniques employed in this research, including high-
pressure techniques using diamond anvil cell technology, high-magnetic-field and
low-temperature methods, optical and laser techniques, and materials growth
methods, provide the graduate student researchers outstanding training for a
diverse range of careers in academia, industry, or national laboratories. This
project is also dedicated to imparting scientific literacy and enthusiasm for
science in both the general public and K-12 students, through public lectures on
science, middle-school scientific demonstrations, and lab tours that highlight
the excitement of the materials studied, and the scientific techniques used in
this project. This project also includes efforts to increase the number and
mentoring of underrepresented PhDs in STEM fields; to improve scientific
communication skills of PhD students; and to provide guidance to current PhD
students concerning their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;Magnetically frustrated materials, such as the magnetic
spinels (chemical formula AB2X4), exhibit a range of diverse ground state phases
and phenomena that can be sensitively tuned with pressure and magnetic field,
including spin-spiral, charge-ordered, multiferroic, and spin/orbital-liquid
phases. The exceptional tunability of the spinels and other magnetically
responsive materials make them excellent scientific laboratories in which myriad
phases and phenomena can be sensitively controlled and studied. Yet, there is
limited microscopic understanding of the microscopic magnetostructural effects
that lead to the important pressure- and field-tuned behaviors these materials
exhibit, due largely to the absence of spectroscopic information that elucidates
how the spin- and lattice-dynamics of magnetically frustrated materials change
as functions of magnetic field and pressure. The purpose of this research is to
fill this important gap in our understanding by using inelastic light scattering
techniques to study the spin- and lattice-excitations of select magnetically
frustrated materials while field- and pressure-tuning through their diverse
phases. The goals of this research are to clarify the relationship between
competing phases observed in different phase regions, to study as-yet-unexplored
phase regimes and phenomena in magnetically frustrated materials as functions of
temperature, pressure-, and magnetic-field, and to realize exotic new phases of
matter that are of scientific or technological importance. This research also
sheds light on the general conditions that are conducive to enhancing
magnetoresponsive susceptibilities in magnetically frustrated materials; such
information is an essential prerequisite to controlling these materials for
useful technological applications. In addition to providing diverse technical
training to several graduate students, this research will impact the broader
community through laboratory tours aimed at exposing K 12 students and teachers
to the excitement of materials research and optics-related demonstrations to
middle schools students; through efforts to improve the numbers and mentoring of
underrepresented PhD students; and through scientific communication skills
training of PhD students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.