* 1800958
* Cybersecurity Opportunities and Methods that Promote Access and Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Diego Tibaquira, Miami Dade College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 10/31/2022
* USD 259,310.00

To meet the current need for cybersecurity professionals, opportunities for more
diverse populations to obtain cybersecurity credentials and degrees must be
available, leading to a more diverse workforce. The Cybersecurity Opportunities
and Methods that Promote Access and Student Success project at Miami Dade
College in Florida aims to meet this need by increasing the diversity of
students entering the cybersecurity workforce. The project aims to (1) improve
the understanding and evidence base regarding learning approaches and their
impact on retention and completion of underrepresented students; (2) improve
industry engagement through involvement with curriculum development; (3)
increase the knowledge base on the effects of competency-based summer camps that
result in industry-certification and continuation into a cybersecurity-related
degree program of study; (4) increase recruitment, retention, and completion of
underrepresented students in cybersecurity programs; (5) increase the number of
students who complete a College Credit Certificate and/or an AS in cybersecurity
who are employed in industry; and (6) create dual enrollment pathways that
retain cybersecurity majors from high school to two-year colleges. The program
will share pedagogical best-practices for underserved populations across the
Miami Dade College system; with the surrounding school systems; via the National
CyberWatch Center; and with other institutions across the nation, including
existing and emerging Hispanic-Serving Institutions, Minority-Serving
Institutions. and Historically Black Colleges and Universities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will adapt and evaluate materials and methods
developed through the ATE National Center in Cybersecurity, CyberWatch, and
other ATE projects. It aims to increase the number and diversity of students who
complete a state approved one-year College Credit Certificate (CCC) and a two-
year Associate in Science degree in cybersecurity. The overarching goal is to
create the foundation for a seamless pipeline across two critical educational
transitions: high school to college and college to workforce. The project aims
to achieve this goal by implementing and evaluating the following objectives:
(1) building the capacity of college faculty and high school teachers to provide
relevant and up-to-date education in cybersecurity; (2) integrating
instructional approaches into cybersecurity curriculum that have been shown to
be effective in engaging and retaining diverse students; and (3) creating
pathways into cybersecurity degree programs through dual-enrollment
opportunities, a competency-driven boot camp, and certificate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.