* 1800126
* Synthesis, Properties and Dynamics of BODIPY-based Fluorophores
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Maria Vicente, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 420,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Maria G Vicente of the Department
of Chemistry at Louisiana State University, in collaboration with Professor
Petia N Bobadova-Parvanova of the Department of Chemistry at Rockhurst
University, are developing fluorescent dyes for use in biological and material
applications, including in bioimaging, and chemosensing. The goal of this
research is to design, synthesize and then investigate the photophysical,
electrochemical, and cellular properties of the new dyes toward the development
of near-infrared absorbing and emitting fluorophores that can be conjugated with
proteins and other biomolecules. The project involves both computational and
experimental methods to design, synthesize and evaluate new fluorescent dyes and
their conjugates, of enhanced stability, biocompatibility and performance for
practical applications. This project involves organic and inorganic chemistry,
spectroscopy, chemical kinetics, computational modeling, cell and molecular
biology, molecular recognition, and biomedical imaging, and is therefore well
suited to the education of scientists at all levels. This group is also well-
positioned to provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Outreach activities involving K-12 students will
also be part of the funded project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Boron dipyrromethene
(BODIPY) dyes display a rich array of photophysical and optoelectronic
properties, including intense absorption and emission profiles, high molar
extinction coefficients, high fluorescence quantum yields and long fluorescence
lifetimes. Previous work demonstrated that reactions of the basic BODIPY core
can be used for the tuning of the absorption and emission wavelengths, Stokes
shifts, stability, quantum yields, water-solubility, and for introduction of
functionality for conjugation. The proposed syntheses will afford BODIPY-based
systems with enhanced stability, solubility, and photophysical properties for
practical applications in bioimaging and biosensing. In this project, the main
strategies are 1) use of benzo-annelation via efficient intramolecular
cyclizations to produce fused BODIPY systems with enhanced rigidity, and near-IR
absorptions/emissions, 2) regioselective functionalizations to create push-pull
BODIPY systems and BODIPY dyads with enhanced molar extinction coefficients,
fluorescence emissions, Stokes shifts, as well as with increased oxidation
potentials and solubility, and 3) use of polyfluorination for enhancement of
cellular permeability, stability, and biocompatibility. The project takes
advantage of computational methods to assist the target design and to model
BODIPY mechanisms and properties, and explores new methodologies for the
synthesis and functionalization of BODIPYs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.