* 1800510
* New Approaches to Site-Selective Fluorination
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas Lectka, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 08/31/2021
* USD 460,000.00

Nearly one fourth of the top pharmaceuticals on the drug market contain
fluorine; thus the installation of fluorine in molecules has become an important
problem for chemists. In fact, "fluorination screens" have become commonplace in
pharmaceutical chemistry. In this method, molecules are fluorinated methodically
at each and every accessible site to render new candidates for evaluation. Thus,
one very important goal is to place fluorine atoms in very precise positions
within complex molecules - in short, achieving "site selectivity." In this
project, the P.I., Prof. Thomas Lectka of Johns Hopkins University, is
developing methods to install fluorine in a site selective manner that would
allow new and desirable passageways to large fluorinated bioactive molecules.
Simple reaction conditions, safety, and ease of use are important goals as well.
The fluorination of especially complex molecules, including natural products and
peptides, is highlighted. These types of molecules are becoming of ever more
interest to chemists. In terms of broader impacts, Prf. Lectka has fostered a
research group that contains predominately undergraduates. The majority of these
students leave the lab with at least one co-authored publication that serves as
a valuable accomplishment and credential for further studies in science. Prof.
Lectka aims to continue to engage minority high school students as part of the
Women in Science and Engineering (WISE) program for a semester. Graduate
students and advanced undergrads participate in a program cosponsored by JHU and
the NSF called SABES. This program is an NSF-funded collaboration between
Baltimore City Schools and JHU and aims to improve educational outcomes in STEM
disciplines with a focus on community engagement in three neighborhoods.

With funding from the Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Thomas
Lectka of Johns Hopkins University is developing new photochemical methods
focused on site-selective fluorination to produce chemically and
pharmaceutically interesting products not easily accessible by other means.
Application 1 involves the use of carbonyl-based directing groups (enones,
ketones, and dienones) to achieve predictable site-selectivity on complex
molecules. Application 2 involves carboxylic acid derivatives (amides, lactams,
and lactones) as directing groups for fluorination. Once again, predictable
site-selectivity is the paramount goal. Application 3 is addressing strategies
to render the site-selective reactions highly diastereoselective through the use
of phase transfer catalysis, Lewis acids, chiral fluorinating agents, and a
combination of the aforementioned strategies. The use of visible light-emitting
diodes (LEDs), cheap photosensitizers and fluorinating agents is featured, and
operational simplicity, mutual compatibility, mild conditions, and broad scope
are fundamental goals as well. The fluorination of especially complex molecules,
including polycyclic natural products and peptides is a focus as is achieving
and understanding fluorination at a single site in a molecule and rendering it
diastereoselective. Prof. Lectka is heavily involved in the STEM outreach
programs such as the "Women in Science and Engineering" (WISE) Program, and
SABES, which is an NSF-funded collaboration to improve educational outcomes in
the Baltimore City Public Schools. In this research group, undergraduates
(including members of many underrepresented groups) are heavily invested and are
thus highly encouraged to follow a path into STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.