* 1800549
* Holomorphic and CR mappings in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Ming Xiao, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 160,783.00

The proposed research has interplay with many other fields of mathematics,
theoretical physics, and applied science. The PI will study geometric objects
(such as CR manifolds) and develop techniques (such as microlocal analysis) that
arise from several complex variables. They are deeply connected with various
areas in physics and engineering such as quantum field theory and control
theory, and have extensive applications to topics including magnetic
hydrodynamics and electrical networks. Hermitian symmetric spaces studied in the
project play a fundamental role in mathematical physics. For instance, the
classical domain of type IV is biholomorphically equivalent to the future tube.
The future tube in four-dimensional complex Euclidean space is a basic object in
modern cosmology as it is the natural defining domain for holomorphic
relativistic fields. The PI's research will deepen the understanding of the
geometric structure of such objects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal
investigator proposes to study mapping problems in complex analysis and Cauchy
Riemann geometry. More precisely, the project focuses on studying the geometric,
analytic and algebraic aspects of holomorphic and CR mappings by employing
techniques from partial differential equations, algebra, and differential
geometry, in addition to complex analysis. In particular, the PI would like to
investigate rigidity, existence and regularity problems for mappings between
complex or CR manifolds,as well as related questions that arise in arithmetic
algebraic geometry and complex geometry. The PI will also study the intrinsic
connections between the Kahler geometry of a domain in a complex space and the
CR geometry of its boundary. The techniques that are needed for this study come
from several complex variables (CR invariant theory, asymptotic behavior of
Bergman kernel and Chern-Moser theory, etc), Kahler geometry and geometric
analysis. The objective of the research project is to further the present
understanding of geometric function theory in several complex variables, as well
as its profound connections with aspects of algebraic geometry, complex
geometry, dynamical systems, and number theory. The PI also expects the project
to develop substantially new methods and ideas that will influence these areas,
and provide interesting research topics for graduate students and postdocs as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.