* 1800850
* Bioscience Technician Expansion Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Justin Tickhill, North Central State College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 222,833.00

This project meets a growing industry demand for skilled bioscience technicians,
specifically at the College's industry partner, Charles River Laboratories. The
primary goal of the grant will be to create an evening cohort of students drawn
from Charles River Laboratories that work day shift and take evening courses to
advance into higher level positions. A secondary benefit of this grant will be
the generation and promotion of a pathway for students from a career center
(Ashland County West Holmes Career Center) to a two-year institution (North
Central State College), or to one of two four-year institutions (Ashland
University and the University of Findlay), all of which are within a one-hour
driving radius of Charles River Laboratory. Course offerings will be modified to
better use distance learning, with the goal of reducing face to face lecture
time while maintaining in person lab instruction. The enhancements to the
Bioscience Program and pathways are designed to advance the technical education
of a diverse group of students ranging from graduating career center students,
to future and current students employed as
biotechnicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The North Central State College Bioscience
Technician Expansion Project aims to support and increase knowledge in the field
of biotechnology in north central Ohio by bringing new opportunities for
students to advance through a prescribed pathway culminating in a career in
biotechnology. The project will design and enable a pathway from high school
career centers through a two-year community college and on to four-year
universities. The project leaders will investigate and disseminate experiences
using a variety of educational tools, pedagogy, and curriculum changes that aim
to support students new to the biotechnology field, as well as incumbent
workers. These pathways have the potential to demonstrate and/or establish best
practices for supporting student progression through a pathway from career
center to 4-year institutions that will function as a self-sustaining system.
The program will also incorporate assessment methods for the incumbent student
population to assess knowledge gained on the job and give them credit for the
skills and training they already possess. Evening courses for incumbent workers
in local Biotechnology facilities will be offered. To facilitate these changes,
the institution will modify course and curriculum delivery to meet the needs of
the students. The modifications of delivery have measurable, predetermined
expected outcomes. These outcomes will be measured to assess the educational
effectiveness of these course alterations, contributing information about
student learning within different presentation styles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.