* 1800531
* Dynamics of Molecules in Extreme Rotational States Made with an Optical Centrifuge
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Amy Mullin, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 568,710.00

Most molecules are stable at room temperature, but become more reactive at
higher temperatures. Increasing the temperature makes molecules fly through
space faster (in other words their "translational kinetic energy" increases),
and this in turn can lead to greater chemical reactivity because the collisions
between molecules occur with greater energy. As temperature increases, molecules
also vibrate more (their bonds stretch and bend with more energy); higher
vibrational energies also can increase chemical reactivity. Many studies in the
past have asked how translational and vibrational energies affect chemical
reactions. However, there is another kind of molecular motion that is not so
well-studied: molecules also rotate, and if they do so at very high rates, their
bonds can stretch or even break. In this project funded by the Chemical
Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Amy S. Mullin of the University of Maryland uses sophisticated laser
techniques to prepare and study molecules with large amounts of rotational
energy. Professor Mullin and her students create molecules in high-energy
rotational states using what they call an optical centrifuge. This technique
uses intense pulses of light to trap molecules and cause them to spin with very
high energy. This approach enables them to study how fast molecular spinning
affects how closely atoms are held together in a chemical bond and how energy is
shared by collisions with other molecules. The research has broader impacts of
potential societal benefits from an increased understanding of molecules in
high-energy environments such as found in nature (i.e., in astrophysics and
planetary atmospheres) and in high temperature industrial and geological
applications. The project is also training students in the design, construction
and use of advanced experimental instruments and computer-based modeling. In
addition, the research promotes dialogue with the general public through
interactive live-streaming videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
investigating the behavior of CO2, N2O, CO and H2CO molecules in extreme
rotational states (e.g., J &gt; 200). The optical centrifuge functions by
spatially and temporally combining two oppositely chirped pulses of light, each
with opposite circular polarization, from a Ti:sapphire laser system with two
stage amplification. The optical centrifuge spins the molecules unidirectionally
into high rotational states with oriented angular momenta. The creation and
collision dynamics of the centrifuged molecules are measured using time-resolved
IR polarization spectroscopy. Doppler line profiles for individual rotational
states give information about the translational energy distribution and spatial
orientation of the centrifuged molecules as they undergo collisions. Relative
capture and acceleration efficiencies for different species in the optical
centrifuge identify the molecular properties of efficient centrifugation. These
spectroscopic studies of high-energy states are testing whether low-energy
molecular models are valid for high rotational energies. The experimental
observations are interpreted using to current models for structure and collision
dynamics of low energy molecules to identify the bonding and collision forces of
rotationally excited molecules. Research results may impact knowledge about
molecular behavior in environments that have non-local thermodynamic equilibrium
such as in astrophysics, planetary and stellar atmospheres, plasmas, combustion,
and high temperature industrial and geological applications. The research is
training research students in sophisticated laser-based research at the
forefront of controlling and interrogating molecular
motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.