* 1800089
* Developing homogeneous catalytic systems for aerobic oxidative methylation with methane
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Andrei Vedernikov, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 470,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Andrei Vedernikov of the University of Maryland College Park is developing
novel platinum catalysts that convert methane from natural gas to high value-
added chemicals. Oxygen from the air is used as a reactant and so these
reactions avoid expensive and potentially toxic reagents Water is the major
reaction by-product, so there is little waste produced. Methane is known for its
chemical inertness and the development of greener processes for its
economically-viable conversion to high-value added products is a fundamental
chemical challenge. To tackle this problem, Dr. Vedernikov is studying novel
platinum catalysts and designing new catalysts. He is taking advantage of
theoretical and computational chemistry to explore plausible reaction pathways
and guide his catalyst designs and experimental work. Dr. Vedernikov is working
with high school students from low-income families. These students are
interested in chemistry and have been selected by the local Washington D.C.
section of the American Chemical Society (ACS Project SEED). The students intern
in his lab, contributing to the experimental work in this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Vedernikov is studying Shilov-type systems wherein
electrophilic Pt(IV)Me intermediates are generated using O2 as the oxidant. Two
complementary experimental approaches are used in this work. One relies on the
use of redox mediators, e.g., Cu(II), while another utilizes a ligand-enabled O2
activation by Pt(II)R intermediates. The electrophilic Pt(IV)R intermediates are
then intercepted by various nucleophiles (carboxylic acids, amines, etc.) to
form hydrocarbon derivatives, such as quaternary ammonium salts or esters, that
are protected from further oxidation. Dr Vedernikov is developing a fundamental
mechanistic understanding of how the ligand environment at the Pt(II) center
enables and tunes its reactivity toward both the hydrocarbon C-H bonds, and O2
to generate the Pt(IV)R intermediates. The viability of both approaches has been
recently demonstrated in Dr. Vedernikov's group. Density functional theory is
being used to guide the design of these novel systems and to carry out
mechanistic analyses. The development of more efficient and environmentally
benign protocols for methane functionalization is transformative. As a part of
the broader impacts, Dr. Vedernikov is working with and training local high
school, undergraduate and graduate students in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.