* 1800105
* Conformationally-flexible, reactive manganese clusters to probe possible mechanisms of oxygen-oxygen bond formation in photosystem II
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Michael Zdilla, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2022
* USD 488,766.00

In the early stages of the development of life on earth, perhaps the most
significant evolutionary breakthrough was the sunlight-driven oxidation of water
to oxygen (O2) by the ancient ancestors of cyanobacteria and modern plants.
These organisms discovered a way to make their own food using the virtually
limitless supply of water and sunlight available near the surface of the oceans.
As far as science knows, organisms have found only one way to perform this water
oxidation process, and it is possible that modern plants and photosynthetic
organisms are still using that same evolutionary innovation from billions of
years ago, although presumably significantly evolved. The enzyme that performs
this reaction is called Photosystem II, and despite the central importance of
this reaction to the fields of biology and energy, many questions remain about
how this enzyme works. Professor Zdilla is working to build molecular models of
the enzyme active site, which is a cube-shaped cluster of metal atoms containing
manganese and calcium. The working models developed by Professor Zdilla may lead
to insights on how photosynthetic organisms are able to perform this important
reaction. Professor Zdilla continues his community engagement of youth and adult
communities through talks during the Philadelphia Science Festival and at
Philadelphia elementary schools. Professor Zdilla also develops the Database of
Educational Crystallographic Online Resources (DECOR), a free, downloadable
source of educational materials for the study of crystallography.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary source of cellular energy on earth is the sun,
whose visible light energy is harvested by photosynthetic organisms to drive the
oxidation of water to O2 and drive the concomitant reduction of carbon
dioxide(CO2) to organic molecules, which are then used as fuel and as raw
materials for the construction of living things. Photocatalytic water oxidation
coupled to proton reduction is also an important goal for the generation of
sustainable solar fuels. The enzyme responsible for the biological water
oxidation reaction is photosystem II (PSII), a multi-subunit enzyme containing a
tetramanganese-calcium-oxo cluster as the catalytic active site. Since enzymes
are often a challenge to study directly due to their complexity, bioinorganic
chemists frequently turn to biomimetic model complexes. Despite hundreds of
examples of synthetic manganese oxo-cluster, very few show compelling reactivity
that models PSII. Professor Zdilla and his group develop new approaches to
designing biomimetic manganese clusters by prioritizing low-coordination
number(to provide water binding sites) and cluster flexibility (to promote
molecular rearrangement). These approaches have resulted in clusters that
perform a diverse set of difficult reactions including N-N, C-H, C-N, and O=O
bond making/breaking reactions, and catalytic water oxidation. This project
seeks to further mechanistically investigate their molecular mechanisms, which
may inform understanding of the function of the enzyme, and provide clues on how
to design superior water oxidation catalysts for energy purposes. Professor
Zdilla continues his community engagement of youth and adult communities through
talks during the Philadelphia Science Festival and at Philadelphia elementary
schools. Professor Zdilla also develops the Database of Educational
Crystallographic Online Resources (DECOR), a free source of educational
materials for the study of crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.