* 1800957
* Real-Time Feedback-Enabled Simulation Modeling of Dynamic Construction Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2017,12/31/2019
* Amir Behzadan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2019
* USD 133,726.00

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, in 2015, the U.S. construction industry
will surpass $1 Trillion Dollars in spending. Construction and infrastructure
projects consist of interconnected networks of people, equipment, and materials.
Most often, finding optimal work strategies, and making timely operational
decisions that lead to maximum productivity while minimizing project completion
cost and time is not trivial. Unlike manufacturing and industrial systems,
construction projects involve dynamic (constantly evolving) layouts, complex
resource interactions, uncertainties in workflows and processes, and unforeseen
conditions that can result in deviations from plans and unwanted delays. Figures
show that only 30 percent of construction projects finish on time and within
budget. Therefore, the accuracy and timeliness of operational-level decision-
making in construction projects is of utmost importance. This award supports
fundamental research to enhance construction decision-making accuracy by
reducing uncertainties through the seamless integration of process-level data
into decision-making. This will be achieved by building the theoretical
foundation and significantly advancing the current state of construction
simulation modeling through enabling real-time interaction with a simulation
model as the real project evolves, and communicating the simulation output
through a feedback loop to steer the events in the real project. Therefore,
results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy and the society since
it leads to better decision-making which results in reducing waste, rework,
cost, time, and ensures safety. The multi-disciplinary nature of this project
will help broaden participation of underrepresented and diverse student groups
in integrated research and pedagogical activities, and positively impact
engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The knowledge-based simulation
modeling framework in this project enables process-level models to autonomously
learn from and adapt to ever-changing and evolving construction systems.
Process-level knowledge that serves as the input of such simulation models is
obtained from ubiquitous sensory data that describe relationships, interactions,
and uncertainty attributes of field processes, and enable the generation and
maintenance of more accurate simulation models. In doing so, some scientific
barriers are yet to be overcome to realize the full accreditation and
application of this framework. The research team will design and test methods
that draw from data mining, machine learning, forecasting, and control to fill
the existing knowledge gaps in capturing and mining complex data and meta-data
from equipment and human crew interactions. The resulting process-level
knowledge will be rich enough to describe, model, analyze, and project the
uncertainties of construction systems at any point in time and consequently help
adjust resource allocations and operational scenarios on the job site.