* 1800283
* Near Threshold Excited State Dynamics in Nucleobases and Related Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Mattanjah de Vries, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 12/31/2022
* USD 550,850.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. de Vries at the University of
California Santa Barbara will study how isolated DNA bases respond to
ultraviolet (UV) light. Understanding the response of DNA bases to UV radiation
is critical for both practical and fundamental reasons. Nucleobase
photochemistry following UV absorption constitutes a fundamental step in
radiation induced DNA damage. The extremely efficient response of the
nucleobases to absorption of ultraviolet light is often described as nature's
strategy to protect the building blocks of life against UV photodamage. UV
photo-selection may have played a key role in prebiotic chemistry on an early
earth. These same processes also find applications in a variety of modern
materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on gas phase
spectroscopy of nucleobases and their clusters in the picosecond time domain and
close to the threshold for absorption. Experiments will study the excited state
processes with the isomer specificity afforded by double resonant spectroscopy
in the gas phase and in the sub-nanosecond time domain. Collaboration with
computational chemists will provide comparison of the results with quantum
chemical modeling. Choosing low energy excitation wavelengths will make the work
most sensitive to the details of the relaxation processes. This approach will
make it possible to directly investigate the key mechanisms of the response of
nucleobases to UV irradiation so this research will contribute to the most basic
understanding of fundamental processes that govern the molecular building blocks
of life. These topics, in combination with cutting-edge laser and computational
techniques, lend themselves extraordinary well to outreach activities that will
be based in this work, which also provides for the training of both
undergraduate and graduate students in the design and construction of advanced
experimental instrumentation, complex computer simulation, and conducting
fundamental research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.