* 1800968
* Practicing Radical Innovation in Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dwayne Arola, Green River Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 595,536.00

Additive manufacturing is an emerging advanced technological field that uses a
set of technologies, such as 3D printing, to make products based on a digital
model. Additive manufacturing is a valuable tool in many industries, including
defense, aerospace, automotive, medical or dental, and metal manufacturing
industries. Workers with skills in advanced technologies are in high demand in
the nation's technical workforce. The inclusion of additive manufacturing in
technical education programs helps prepare technicians to meet the demand.
Effective instruction in this new technology requires careful consideration of
best practices for course design and enhancing student learning. In this
project, Green River Community College will update its manufacturing courses and
adopt an instructional approach that lets students demonstrate the skills they
have learned. The instructional approach involves experts from industry who
judge how well students have mastered the skills for use on the job. The project
will contribute to growing the STEM workforce by educating students for thriving
technical careers in additive manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of
this project at Green River Community College are to enhance the instruction of
future technicians and to produce diverse, well-qualified graduates for the STEM
technical workforce. Project activities will include research-based practices
such as industry-based curricula and authentic assessment. The project will: 1)
Integrate core competencies in additive manufacturing identified by the National
Resource Center for Materials Technology Education into existing courses; 2)
Develop the long-term capacity of faculty to conduct, assess, and refine
instruction in additive manufacturing; 3) Develop and test the effectiveness of
authentic assessment models for continuous course and program improvement, so
that instruction remains technically relevant with modern industry techniques,
applications, equipment, and methods; and 4) Provide workshops on the use of the
authentic assessment approach for faculty in other STEM technical programs. The
project?s authentic assessment approach builds on a model developed and
implemented by the Community Colleges of Spokane over the last fifteen years.
The distinctive feature of this model is the integration of industry experts as
volunteer examiners to ensure consistency between the assessment and the real-
world applications for which students are being prepared. The project will also
align the updated courses with the statewide, industry-based, Core Plus high
school curriculum to promote pathways for students in this technology field.
Results from the project will be widely disseminated with the aid of industry,
educational, and state governmental partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.