* 1800913
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Impact of freshwater runoff from Hurricane Harvey on coral reef benthic organisms and associated microbial communities
* GEO,OCE
* 12/01/2017,05/31/2020
* Jason Sylvan, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2020
* USD 68,399.00

Coral reefs are ecologically and economically important ecosystems, and are
threatened by a variety of global (climate change) and local (overfishing,
pollution) stressors. Anthropogenic climate change is increasing the frequency
and severity of storms, which can physically damage reef structures and reduce
reef health through changes in seawater quality. In August of 2017, Hurricane
Harvey caused widespread flooding in southeast Texas when it released more than
50 trillion liters of rain, which then accumulated along the Texas Shelf. This
runoff is expected to impact nearby coral reefs in the Flower Garden Banks
National Marine Sanctuary (FGBNMS, northwest Gulf of Mexico) via eddies and jets
that transport coastal waters offshore. Findings from this project will allow
managers to quickly predict whether extreme storm events are likely to induce
reef mortality and ecosystem decline due to freshwater accumulation, by tracking
of low salinity water masses coupled with microbial community characterization
and metrics of coral health. These data are critical to managing coastal
ecosystems, including the high coral cover reefs in the FGBNMS, and will help
stakeholders (e.g., diving and fishing communities) plan for and minimize
disruption to their livelihoods following these storms. Results will be
communicated broadly across scientific arenas, in graduate and undergraduate
education and training programs, and to the general public through outreach. The
investigators have seven 7 square meter 2-D Reef Replicas from 2014 depicting
representative FGBNMS reef bottoms, and will construct additional 2-D Reef
Replicas from both banks following the arrival of Harvey runoff, allowing the
public to directly experience and quantify the effects of Hurricane Harvey on
local reefs using quadrats and identification guides. This project will also
synergize with NSF REU programs at Boston University and Texas A&amp;M
University, providing transformative research experiences for undergraduates.
One post-doctoral scholar, four graduate students, a technician and more than 5
undergraduates will be involved in all aspects of the research. All datasets
will be made freely available to the public, and will serve as an important set
of baselines for future lines of inquiry into the processes by which hurricanes
and other extreme storms impact reef health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hurricanes and
other extreme storm events can decimate coral reefs through wave-driven physical
damage. Freshwater runoff from extreme storms is also potentially detrimental to
reefs but has received comparatively less attention. This research will provide
unprecedented resolution on how hurricanes and other extreme storm events may
trigger cascading interactions among water chemistry, declines in metazoan
health and shifts in their associated microbial communities, ultimately
resulting in coral reef decline. The freshwater runoff initiated by Hurricane
Harvey is likely to impact reefs within the FGBNMS, one of the few remaining
coral-dominated reefs in the greater Caribbean. The effects of Harvey runoff
will be compared to a previously documented storm-driven runoff event that was
associated with invertebrate mortality on the same reef system. Sampling
seawater chemistry, microbial communities (water column and benthic), and host
gene expression and proteomics before, immediately after, and six months after
Harvey runoff enters the FGBNMS will allow us to identify commonalities among
large-scale freshwater runoff events and track the response of benthic
invertebrate health, microbial community diversity, and the trajectory of reef
community recovery or decline. The investigators will determine if changes in
water chemistry induce pelagic microbial shifts, if microbial communities
typically associated with corals and sponges are altered, and whether feedbacks
occur between these potential drivers of benthic invertebrate mortality.