* 1800080
* RUI: Rigorous physical interpretation of vibrational probe frequencies in proteins
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Casey Londergan, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2022
* USD 320,854.00

Understanding the structures of proteins and how these structures change in
response to their surroundings is a challenge of broad relevance to biology,
biochemistry, biomedical science, and disease treatment. Chemists often use
optical spectrometers (instruments that measure how molecules absorb, emit or
scatter light)to obtain information about molecular structure. But as proteins
are large molecules (hundreds or thousands of atoms) that are also flexible, it
is very difficult to determine their structures from optical spectroscopy alone.
In this project, supported by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Casey Londergan of
Haverford College is using a combination of experimental spectroscopy and
computational chemistry to develop "vibrational probe" techniques for the
determination of the structures and internal motions of proteins. A vibrational
probe is a small molecule that vibrates at a known frequency (typically
corresponding to infrared light) when it is isolated, but exhibits a change in
frequency when it interacts with other molecules (including other probes). One
such probe being investigated is thiocyanate, which contains sulfur, carbon and
nitrogen (SCN). By attaching SCN or other vibrational probes to different parts
of the protein, Prof. Londergan hypothesizes that the changes in probe
frequencies can be associated with changes in their local probe environment. In
principle, the vibrational probes thus report on local regions of the proteins
and their interactions with other parts of the protein or with other molecules
(water, dissolved ions, etc.). However, in order to interpret the experimentally
observed probe frequency changes, computer simulations of the different protein
shapes and local environments is necessary. This project is being conducted
mainly by undergraduate students and is providing them with an interdisciplinary
research experience with a network of local and international collaborators.
This project also includes educational outreach activities, for example dance-
based workshops and instructions designed to engender a more human-level
understanding of proteins and their interactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project is focusing on a model regulatory protein (calmodulin), a model
membrane protein (alpha-synuclein), and other proteins at the center of
bacterial biosynthesis. Well-sampled molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are
employed to propose ensembles of structures, and then further simulations with
vibrational probe groups explicitly included to produce simulated spectral
lineshapes that can validate or help to re-weight the simulated structural
ensembles. The initial model associations between measured spectra and local
probe environments are being developed based on the relatively broadly-used SCN
probe group. As the methodology improves in accuracy, it will ultimately be used
to provide quantitative interpretation of new data from less-used probe groups
that this project will develop (e.g.,azido, isonitrile, alkyne, and nitro
groups). Some of these novel probe groups' signals are more easily collected by
Raman spectroscopy rather than infrared absorption. This project's development
of a quantitative vibrational probe methodology is likely to enable solutions to
many important biomolecular problems where current data are underdetermined for
representing the conformational distribution, which is of central importance in
disordered and "fuzzy" protein systems(most of which are regulatory and/or
disease-related species).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.