* 1800022
* Molecular Photonic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Gerald Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 659,891.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Gerald Meyer of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is characterizing
intermolecular electron transfer reactions for molecules anchored to metal oxide
surfaces. The goal of this research is to exploit self-exchange reactions as a
means to transport charge across oxide surfaces for applications in
optoelectronic devices, namely for the conversion of solar energy into stored
chemical energy or electricity (e.g. dye-sensitized solar cells). The project
lies at the interface of physical organic, inorganic, and materials chemistry,
and is therefore well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. This
group is also well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and
training for students underrepresented in science. Outreach activities to grade
school students in local and rural North Carolina are also part of the funded
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has shown that photo-oxidized dye
molecules anchored to the sensitized mesoporous nanocrystalline (anatase) TiO2
thin films commonly used for dye-sensitized solar cells undergo self-exchange
intermolecular electron transfer reactions (termed hole-hopping) with dynamics
and efficiencies that can be tuned at the molecular level. These findings
provide an opportunity to transport charges to desired locations without a loss
in Gibbs free energy. Particular focus wiis being given to address the following
fundamental questions: How can molecular structure be tuned to control
intermolecular electron transfer? Is there a correlation between self-exchange
reactions in fluid solution and those on oxide surfaces? Does self-exchange
electron transfer between dyes influenced unwanted recombination reactions? Can
self-exchange with molecules that contain two (or more) redox active groups be
controlled by the bridge that links them? A kinetic approach that enables redox
equilibria at the adiabatic/non-adiabatic border to be quantified for the first
time is being utilized. The desired electron transfer chemistry is being
initiated by pulsed light excitation or with an applied potential and quantified
by in situ spectro-electrochemistry, absorption anisotropy, chronoabsorptometry,
and transient absorption spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.