* 1800725
* Asymptotic Representation Theory, Enumeration, and Combinatorial Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Dan Romik, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 200,000.00

The project concerns problems from several areas of pure mathematics such as
number theory, the study of the integers and their properties; representation
theory, the study of symmetry; and probability theory, the mathematical study of
randomness. These problems appear to have little in common with each other, nor
do they seem to have any obvious applications, and yet a deeper look reveals
many subtle connections between them and possible applications to other areas of
applied and theoretical science. For example, the question "how many alternating
sign matrices of order N exist?" which was asked by mathematicians in the 1980s
in connection with an obscure algorithm proposed by the logician Charles Dodgson
(aka Lewis Carroll) in the 19th century turned out to have connections to
"square ice," an exotic form of water ice that was detected experimentally a few
years ago by British researchers. Similarly, the Witten zeta function, which the
investigator plans to study in connection with the enumeration of certain types
of symmetry, was previously studied by other researchers (including the
physicist Edward Witten) in a different context related to problems in quantum
field theory. It is these sorts of connections that the investigator hopes to
shed light on through his research, and which make pure mathematics such a
fruitful area of study for the advancement of human knowledge.

The specific problems the investigator proposes to study are questions at the
interface of enumerative, algebraic and asymptotic combinatorics, with
connections to other branches of mathematics, notably representation theory,
probability theory, asymptotic analysis, and number theory. For example, one
problem involves a new direction in asymptotic representation theory, namely
that of finding asymptotic formulas for the number of n-dimensional
representations of a Lie group as n grows large. The investigator's recent paper
solved this problem for the group SU(3) using a difficult analysis of the so-
called Witten zeta function associated with the group, which highlighted some
intriguing connections between the problem and seemingly unrelated questions in
analytic number theory and the theory of modular forms. In an additional part of
the project, the investigator proposes to author a monograph on alternating sign
matrices, which have been the subject of great interest since their discovery in
the 1980s and are related to many contemporary research topics in combinatorics,
probability theory and statistical physics.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.