* 1800325
* Combining the quasi-classical mapping Hamiltonian approach with the generalized quantum master equation to simulate nonadiabatic molecular dynamics and its spectroscopic signature
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Eitan Geva, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 460,000.00

Eitan Geva of the University of Michigan is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop new theoretical and computational approaches to model and
simulate molecular systems involving more than one electronic state. In these
systems, some of the electrons are excited. There is coupling between the lowest
energy electronic state and higher energy excited states. Chemists refer to the
dynamics of these systems as "nonadiabatic" molecular dynamics. Nonadiabatic
dynamics are important in biological processes, for example cellular respiration
and photosynthesis. They are also important in emerging technologies such as
energy storage and photovoltaics. These systems also very difficult to simulate
because nonadiabatic dynamics are inherently quantum-mechanical. Truly quantum
calculations have a very large computational cost which puts them beyond the
reach of even the most advanced currently available computers. Computer
simulations of classical molecular dynamics, however, are cost-effective for
large and complex molecular systems. The Geva group is developing a methodology
for simulating nonadiabatic dynamics accurately and reliably at classical-like
computational cost, using what is called a "semiclassical" approach. Dr. Geva is
also involved in activities to modernize and improve the physical chemistry
curricula and to further develop a new Compute-to-Learn
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methodology combines the quasi-classical
mapping Hamiltonian approach for modeling the electronically nonadiabatic
dynamics of a multi-state molecular system with the generalized quantum master
equation, for describing the reduced dynamics of the electronic degrees of
freedom, and optical response theory, for calculating nonlinear time-resolved
spectral signals. The synthesis of the above-mentioned three components (the
quasi-classical mapping Hamiltonian, generalized quantum Master equation and
optical response theory) leads to a powerful methodology, which is necessary to
bridge the gap between theory and experiment. It does so by allowing one to
calculate experimentally relevant quantities like electronic transition rates
and nonlinear time-resolved spectral signals in an accurate, cost-effective and
self-consistent manner, starting from explicitly molecular models, where the
dynamics of the nuclear degrees of freedom is governed by anharmonic electronic-
state-specific force fields. Method development takes place in the context of
several model systems with increasing level of molecular detail, including two-
state donor-acceptor benchmark models, models of photosynthetic reaction centers
and models of triads and dyads in liquid solution. It should be noted that the
above-mentioned methodology is general and not limited to the systems in the
context of which it is being developed. The methods are disseminated broadly via
publications, presentations in professional meetings, collaborating with
experimental groups and the Software Infrastructure for Sustained Innovation NSF
program. Group members receive extensive training that prepares them for an
independent career in an academic institution, government lab or industry. This
research program also contributes to the university teaching mission via
strengthening the relationship between computational and experimental groups,
modernizing curricula of physical chemistry courses, and advancing a new
Compute-to-Learn pedagogy within a peer-led honors studio where students
registered to introductory physical chemistry undergraduate courses create
interactive computer demos that demonstrate physical chemistry
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.