* 1800245
* Thiosemicarbazone based materials as electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Robert Buchanan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 474,477.00

Hydrogen is an essential building block for industrial and agricultural
processes and a promising alternative carbon-free fuel. Currently, 95% of
industrial hydrogen derives from unsustainable fossil-fuel cracking. As global
demand for cheap energy grows, there is a need for sustainable alternative
sources. One of the major challenges in this area is the development of
efficient catalysts based on solid state and molecular materials that use
electricity to produce hydrogen by splitting water. Platinum is the most
efficient catalyst for producing hydrogen from acidic solutions. However, its
practical use is severely limited by its scarcity and prohibitive cost. In this
project, Professors Robert M. Buchanan and Gautam Gupta of the University of
Louisville are developing new catalysts based on inexpensive, earth-abundant
metals, such as zinc, copper, and nickel. The catalysts are inspired by the
protein environment in the naturally occurring hydrogenase enzymes. Professors
Buchanan and Gupta are actively engaged in outreach activities that promote
engagement of undergraduate students in the science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines with an emphasis on under-represented minorities
and first generation college students. Professor Gupta participates annually in
'Research Summer Camps' for high school students sponsored by the Conn Center
for Renewable Energy at UofL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Robert Buchanan and
Gautam Gupta of the University of Louisville (UofL) investigate the fabrication
and analysis of modified surfaces with hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)
catalysts based on redox non-innocent thiosemicarbazone ligands. The study
addresses the structure-function relationship of this largely underexplored
approach to new HER catalysts. It includes modification of carbon electrode
surfaces through physisorption and covalent/enhanced non-covalent attachment
methods to improve durability and facilitate electron and proton transfer. The
HER activity of a library of small molecule catalysts is being benchmarked with
the best performing catalysts incorporated in 3D nanostructured catalyst
supports to promote facile reactant and product transport, high electronic
conductivity and enhanced activity. The broader impacts of this project include
benefits at multiple levels. The project facilitates the development of
sustainable materials for hydrogen evolution from water splitting with practical
applications. At the university level, the project strengthens connections
between the investigators and the Conn Renewable Energy Center at UofL, a
network comprised of scientists, engineers, and industry leaders focused on
interdisciplinary solutions to complex, large scale energy-related issues. At
the participant level, two graduate students supported as research assistants
learn a diverse combination of skills and undergraduate research students make
contributions on a topic of interest and concern to many younger scientists-in-
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.