* 1800657
* Working with Industry to Incorporate Cybersecurity into Networking Programs
* EHR,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Marcia Schenck, Spartanburg Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 218,512.00

There is an increasing need for information technology and networking
technicians who have expertise in cybersecurity. To meet this need, community
colleges must work collaboratively with industry to develop programs that can
educate more workers with these skills. This project at Spartanburg Community
College aims to decrease the shortage of skilled technicians trained in
network/cybersecurity technology in the Upstate South Carolina region. The
project's leadership team will include regional industry employers, with the
goal of developing a networking/cybersecurity curriculum that meets the needs of
area employers. To ensure that future IT workers keep up with new developments,
Spartanburg Community College will enhance the current Associate of Applied
Science in Information/Network Technology by adding cybersecurity components.
This addition can help prepare students for modern challenges facing network and
cybersecurity professionals. In addition, these network/cybersecurity skills
will increase their competitiveness for IT technician jobs. Recruitment
activities include giving high school members of Cyber Patriot teams an option
to attend Spartanburg Community College to pursue a cybersecurity career. In
addition, undecided majors at the college will be encouraged to talk with
faculty about career opportunities in networking/cybersecurity. Finally, the co-
principal investigators, who are both veterans, will work with veteran groups
within the college and greater community. Many students in these groups are
members of underserved populations, who could benefit from increased employment
opportunities following completion of the enhanced networking/cybersecurity
degree. The program model will be shared with other colleges and universities
via conference presentations and through website updates. This information has
the potential to help small to mid-sized schools improve education for
cybersecurity technicians, reach out to underserved populations, and meet
industry demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will leverage the experience
and knowledge of regional business leaders, who will serve as the Business and
Industry Leadership Team. The involvement of potential employers has the
potential to enhance an existing educational model by including cybersecurity
content. Program activities include: 1) creating and expanding the Business and
Industry Leadership Team; 2) aligning the existing AAS curriculum with industry
needs by adding cybersecurity concepts to existing courses and developing two
new cybersecurity courses; 3) providing faculty with professional development
needed to teach the enhanced curriculum effectively; and 4) using recruitment
and retention activities to reach out to populations that will benefit from
expanded educational opportunities. Engaging in new processes with the Cyber
Patriot program will allow the college to reach underserved populations. The
project aims create an advanced Associate in Applied Science program in
Information/Network Technology that uniquely serves the needs of upstate South
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.