* 1800139
* Collaborative Research: Defects and Dopants in Critical Wide Band Gap Semiconductors - ZnO, InGaZnO, Ga2O3, and ScN
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* David Look, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 06/30/2021
* USD 187,000.00

Nontechnical description: The project explores the electronic and chemical
properties of atomic-scale imperfections in the semiconductors zinc oxide,
gallium oxide, indium gallium oxide, and scandium nitride with a specific focus
on controlling such defects for higher power, speed, and light output of
advanced electronic devices. Such defects may degrade semiconductor properties
by trapping charge carriers to reduce the current and charge speed. These
imperfections depend sensitively on the specific techniques used for growing
and/or subsequent thermal, chemical, and plasma treatments. The research, which
combines experimental studies with transport modeling, is aimed at measuring the
optical properties of lattice structural and chemical imperfections of these
relatively unexplored semiconductors, using growth variations, plasma, hydrogen
annealing, and irradiation treatments to identify their physical nature and
electrical measurements in magnetic fields to identify their ability to donate
or accept electrons. The project ultimate goal is to understand the nature of
these defects and eventually to eliminate them. The ability to remove these
structural and/or chemical defects impacts a range of technologies. Zinc oxide
is a prime candidate to replace today's high-cost materials in solar cells,
digital displays, and light emitting diodes. Gallium oxide's ability to handle
very high voltages can improve power switches for telecommunications and power
transmission. Indium gallium oxide can provide higher speed displays and high-
resolution TVs. Scandium nitride can lower resistance and power consumption of
metallic contacts to semiconductors used in cellphones. The activities provide
collaborative research opportunities for a graduate student, several university
undergraduates, and high school students from an all-girl's high school.

Technical description: The research focuses on fundamental studies of native
point defects in the semiconductors ZnO, Ga2O3, InGaZnO, and ScN, which have
emerged as critical materials for advanced high power and optoelectronic display
applications. ZnO, doped with Ga or Al, is the prime candidate to replace
expensive indium tin oxide in solar cells, displays, light emitting diodes, and
touchscreens. Ga2O3 is the dominant new material for power switches because of
its record high breakdown voltage. InGaZnO is the dominant amorphous oxide
replacing amorphous-Si transistors in displays and high-resolution TVs (e.g.,
Sharp). ScN can improve ohmic contacts in GaN-based devices and serve as a
buffer layer for GaN-on-Si technology. All four can be highly doped with
impurity donors, yet all four are impacted by deep level defects that compensate
free carriers and introduce scattering that reduces carrier mobility. The nature
of native point defects in Ga2O3, InGaZnO, and ScN as well as ZnO is almost
completely unexplored, yet these defects can have a major impact on carrier
density, mobility, and interface transport. The research team will measure the
spatial distribution and physical nature of specific defects using 3-dimensional
nanoscale optical spectroscopies coupled with donor /acceptor densities and
dielectric properties by temperature-dependent Hall effect and
reflectance/transmission measurements, respectively, in order to identify and
quantify defect densities on a near-nm scale and understand how to control them
through new growth and processing techniques. The goals of this work are to
understand the primary compensating defects in these compounds that limit
degenerate doping and produce lower mobilities, combining near-surface remote
plasma, implantation and thermal processing with optical and surface science
techniques to identify these native point defects, correlate them with
donor/acceptor densities, and chemically control them. The project also aims to
explore the impact of these defects on barriers and transport at Schottky
barriers and heterojunctions involving these semiconductors. The overall goal of
the project is to control these defects and their impact on carrier densities
and junction transport by selected growth and processing techniques that improve
conductivity and interface properties.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.