* 1800236
* Mechanisms of Surface Hydrogenation Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Trenary, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,715.00

Many metal surfaces can catalyze important chemical reactions. However, metals
with the highest catalytic activity are oftentimes some of the rarest and most
expensive elements, such as palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt). With support from
the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry
Division, Professor Michael Trenary of the University of Illinois at Chicago is
exploring a new class of bimetallic surfaces where isolated atoms of
catalytically active metals (e.g. Pd) are placed on a less expensive metal, such
as copper (Cu). When these single atom alloys (SSAs) are exposed to hydrogen gas
(H2), the Pd atoms dissociate the H2 molecules into H atoms, which spillover
onto the Cu surface. Working with his students, Professor Trenary is using
sophisticated spectroscopies to study hydrogenation reactions between the weakly
bound H atoms on the surface and small organic molecules. The project could
advance our understanding of catalytic hydrogenation reactions, and could lead
to the development of new catalytic materials that minimize the use of expensive
metals. The project is also training future scientist and fostering
international cooperation through collaboration with researchers in
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is using polarization dependent
reflection absorption infrared spectroscopy (RAIRS) under ambient pressure
conditions to characterize the fundamental steps of hydrogenation reactions.
Through analysis of the infrared spectra, Professor Trenary and his students
monitor the evolution of gas phase products while also characterizing adsorbed
surface species. The methodology is applied to the selective hydrogenation of
acrolein to 2-propenol over a Pd-Ag(111) SAA and to CO2 hydrogenation over Pd-
Cu(111) and Pt-Cu(111) SAAs. In addition to RAIRS experiments, the properties of
the surfaces and their hydrogenation chemistry are being studied with a variety
of other techniques including temperature programmed reaction spectroscopy
(TPRS), Auger electron spectroscopy (AES), and scanning tunneling microscopy
(STM). For each hydrogenation reaction, the objective is to obtain information
on the identity of reaction intermediates and to distinguish them from spectator
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.