* 1800517
* Enzyme-Inspired Catalysis in Multifunctional Metal-Organic Framework Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Tendai Gadzikwa, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 425,000.00

This project is addressing the synthesis of catalysts with designs inspired by
enzymes, Nature's premier catalysts. Enzymes catalyze reactions up to a million
times faster than synthetic catalysts. Moreover, they do so with unparalleled
selectivity, producing only the desired product. If industrial catalysts
performed as well as enzymes, then commercial reactions could be conducted with
greatly reduced energy costs and waste generation. With this motivation, Dr.
Gadzikwa and her research group at Kansas State University are developing
enzyme-inspired catalysts for the efficient conversion of petroleum raw
materials into chemical feedstocks for the pharmaceutical industry. A
significant portion of the work in this project is being conducted by novice
researchers. The Gadzikwa lab is thus providing valuable laboratory research
experience for undergraduates. Dr Gadzikwa is enhancing the participation of
underrepresented groups in science by engaging first-generation and
underrepresented minority students. Outreach to the public is being made by
facilitating activities for elementary school children at the Flint Hills
Discovery Center, for middle-schoolers through the KState Girls Researching Our
World (GROW) program, and for high school students at the KState Annual
Chemistry &amp; Physics Symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chiral amines,
frequently occurring constituents of biologically active molecules, are
currently accessed via an inefficient 3-step industrial process. These valuable
products could potentially be obtained more efficiently via the hydroamination
of unfunctionalized internal alkenes, which are produced on a large scale via
petrochemical processes. Unfortunately, the reactions of these so-called
unbiased olefins are prohibitively too slow and indiscriminate to undertake
industrially. To address these problems, Dr. Gadzikwa's lab is co-opting the
strategies of enzymes and transferring them onto the solid-state scaffold of
metal-organic framework (MOF) materials. This work is motivated by the
hypothesis that the combination of three of the most distinguishing
characteristics of enzymes - (i) catalytic sites isolated within shape-
selective, confined spaces, (ii) side chains within the cavities that promote
and direct the reaction, and (iii) flexibility that allows the cavity to
strongly bind all species in the reaction pathway - will result in solid-state
catalysts whose activities and selectivities will finally render the reactions
of unbiased olefins industrially feasible. This project involves MOF synthesis
and functionalization, both of which are amenable to the busy schedules of
undergraduate researchers. The Gadzikwa lab draws students from the Kansas Louis
Stokes Alliance for Minority Participation (KS-LSAMP) and the KState Developing
Scholars Program for first generation university students. The Gadzikwa lab also
seeks to broaden participation via public outreach, routinely participating in
activities to promote Chemistry to Kansas' K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.