* 1800691
* Research Initiation Award: Mechanisms regulating intrinsic levels of antimicrobial resistance in planktonic cells and biofilms of commensal Neisseria
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2022
* Maira Goytia, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 152,045.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Spelman
College aims to characterize commensal Neisseria levels and mechanisms of
antimicrobial resistance, in planktonic cells and cells forming biofilms, and
whether these bacteria should be considered a reservoir for the spread of
antimicrobial resistance genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commensal bacteria persist
inside or outside multicellular organisms, usually without causing harm. Several
commensal Neisseria species live in the human oral and nasopharynx as part of a
complex and diverse microbiome. They are related to the pathogenic N.
meningitidis, an agent of meningitis, and N. gonorrhoeae, the agent of the
sexually-transmitted disease gonorrhea. As much as pathogenic Neisseria are
studied, commensal Neisseria are poorly characterized. Deciphering the factors
and regulatory pathways affecting antimicrobial resistance in commensal
Neisseria will elucidate the molecular mechanisms that evolved in commensal and
pathogenic species. The goals of this study are to characterize antimicrobial
resistance levels of planktonic cells, of cells in biofilms, and to identify the
factors and regulatory mechanisms involved in antimicrobial resistance in these
cell populations of commensal Neisseria species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.