* 1800520
* Synthesis and Mechanistic Studies of Active Site Analogues of Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenase and Nitrous Oxide Reductase
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* James Donahue, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2022
* USD 401,639.00

The conversion of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide and the reverse conversion
of carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide are extremely important industrial
processes that require considerable energy. Additionally, nitrous oxide is one
of the oxides of nitrogen that contribute to air pollution and smog. Its
conversion to innocuous nitrogen gas has environmental importance. There are
naturally occurring substances, carbon monoxide reductase (CODH) and nitrous
oxide reductase (N2O reductase), that can perform both of these transformations
quickly and in an energy efficient manner. In both of these the chemical
transformations occur at a copper atom that is surrounded by several sulfur
containing groups. Since these biological systems are very efficient, Dr. James
P. Donahue, Chemistry Department of Tulane University, with the support of the
Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division, is preparing small
copper/sulfur compounds that mimic the copper sites in CODH and N2O reductase.
These compounds are designed to function like CODH and N2O reductase and provide
new more economical ways to perform the reactions mentioned above. As a part of
the project undergraduate and graduate students are trained to enter the science
and technology workforce. In addition, collaborations are established with
nearby, often minority serving institutions, to provide access to instrumental
facilities and to provide summer research opportunities for undergraduate
students from colleges where research opportunities are minimal or
nonexistent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets the synthesis of small
molecule analogues of the active sites of two copper-containing enzymes: CODH
and N2O reductase. These metalloenzymes mediate the two electron oxidation of
carbon monoxide to carbon dioxide and the two electron reduction of nitrous
oxide to dinitrogen, respectively. Heterodimetallic Mo-Cu compounds with
bridging carbonyl and sulfido ligands are prepared as analogues of intermediates
in the catalytic cycle of CODH. This portion of the study first involves an
investigation of the of CO binding to two-coordinate Cu(I) bis(thiolate)
complexes. This resembles the first step of the CO oxidation pathway in CODH.
The resulting three coordinate adducts are converted into the Mo-Cu compounds
that resemble the active site in CODH. In connection with N2O reductase, various
bis(amino) bis(thiolate) ligands are prepared and examined for their ability to
support the formation of multi-copper complexes of compositional relevance to
the catalytic site of N2O reductase. Variation in the steric bulkiness of the
ligands and variation in the hardness of the donor atom set are probed for their
effect upon the aggregation of the multicopper clusters. This work provides a
breadth of experience to undergraduate and graduate students, who will be
trained in synthesis and characterization methods including crystallography
spectroscopy, electrochemistry, and computations. Summer students from New
Orleans area institution that offer few undergraduate research opportunities are
involved and these institutions, which are often minority serving, are provided
access to the PI's crystallographic facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.