* 1800387
* Multiconfigurational methods for copper cluster catalysts in copper-exchanged zeolites involved in methane-to-methanol conversion
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Samuel Odoh, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2023
* USD 399,990.00

The United States has large reserves of natural gas, and the major component of
this natural gas is methane. Methane is expensive to transport to locations
where it can be utilized to make fuels and chemicals. Conversion of methane to
methanol, a liquid and easily transported material, is one solution to this
problem. To be economically feasible, the conversion of methane to methanol must
be efficient. It must also occur using oxygen (air) and under practical
conditions. Improved catalysts are needed for this reaction to be economically
useful. Scientists have not yet discovered how to improve these catalysts, and
it remains an unsolved problem and an active area of research. In this project,
Dr. Samuel Odoh of the University of Nevada Reno is developing and using
computational chemistry methods to understand exactly how these catalysts work
and how to improve them. The new computational approaches being developed to
solve this problem also have applications to other problems in chemistry and
catalysis. The techniques and software being developed will be provided to the
research community. Dr. Odoh and his group are providing education and research
opportunities students from underrepresented groups and low-income families in
Northern Nevada. These activities include summer research internships for high
school students in Dr. Odoh's laboratory as well as outreach and recruitment
drives to the inner-city areas of Reno-Tahoe. These activities are improving
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics education at the middle
school, high school and college levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Odoh of the
University of Nevada Reno, is developing fundamental understanding of how the
properties of copper-exchanged zeolites dictate their activity, turnover rates
and selectivity in the oxidation of methane with oxygen to form methanol under
mild temperature conditions. A theory-based understanding of the physical and
chemical properties of these catalytic platforms can lead to improved
predictions of materials with better performance for methane-to-methanol
conversion (MMC). The researchers are developing and using new and existing
quantum-mechanical methods capable of accurately describing the multireference
properties of the metal oxide clusters that are the active sites for MMC. These
methods are being used to investigate the nature and identity of the active
sites in copper-exchanged zeolites. Dr. Odoh's laboratory is providing greater
understanding of MMC and side-reactions in these materials. This work is guiding
the design of better catalysts and leading to a pivot in the direction of
developing catalysts for MMC. In addition, the computational techniques and
software being developed will be provided to the research community for use in
attacking other problems in chemistry and catalysis. Dr. Odoh is actively
engaged in STEM outreach programs focused on recruiting students from low-income
families and under-represented backgrounds. This is being done through high
school student research internships, mentoring drives and educator development
in support of the broader impacts of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.