* 1800998
* (Collaborative Research) A Collaborative Approach to Work-Based Learning: Addressing the Needs of Community College Biotechnology Students and their Research University Mentors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Laurence Clement, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 132,989.00

Although technical training at community colleges can prepare students for work
in the biotechnology industry, industry and academic employers are sometimes
hesitant to hire students with less than bachelor-level degrees. Successful
internship programs that integrate work-based learning and undergraduate
research experiences can increase the competitiveness of community college-
trained students for these positions. The City College of San Francisco (CCSF)
is collaborating with the Office of Career Planning and Development at the
University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) to address this problem. This
collaboration aims to align the Biotechnology Internship program at CCSF with
the PhD-level Mentor Training program at UCSF. The CCSF students will work on
research projects under supervision of UCSF mentors, while both are being
trained on how to build effective mentor/intern relationships. In this way, the
project will support productive relationships between UCSF mentors and their
CCSF interns. This collaborative mentor/intern model is expected to help the
interns develop technical and employability skills, and help mentors enhance
their ability to train and supervise a diverse workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to increase the number of
CCSF interns who work with trained UCSF mentors and to improve the quality of
the intern-mentor relationship. The project aims to achieve these goals through
an evidence-based, iterative approach to curriculum and program development by:
a) identifying the needs of the CCSF students and their UCSF mentors; b)
modifying the CCSF Internship and UCSF Mentor Training programs to respond to
unaddressed needs; and c) examining whether joint interventions to align both
training curricula improves the intern's and mentor's experience. The project
includes a research component that can contribute new knowledge about and
understanding of practices that increase the success of mentored research
experiences. Furthermore, enhanced curricula, interventions, and tools
identified by this project can be used more broadly to develop and enhance
professional development for internship programs, graduate and postdoctoral
training of mentors, faculty training, and industry professional training, with
a focus on improved retention of diverse student
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.