* 1800981
* Northeast Washington Geospatial Technician Education Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Erin Rudders, Spokane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2021
* USD 224,873.00

Rural Washington has a strong demand for environmental and natural resource
technicians with knowledge and skills in geospatial tools, data, and analysis.
However, rural schools have challenges in meeting performance benchmarks in STEM
disciplines needed for geospatial careers, including technical careers in
environmental and natural resources. The reasons for lower rural school STEM
outcomes are complex. Cited factors for lower rural school performance in
preparing students for STEM career pathways include a fewer number of
experienced STEM teachers, fewer resources, and geographic isolation. This
project explores the opportunity to better leverage community college resources
to overcome barriers of geographic isolation. Specifically, the project aims to
expand the number of rural high school teachers with training in geospatial
applications that are relevant to the region. In addition, it aims to increase
dual-credit (high-school and college) geospatial courses offered in rural
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will deliver geospatial
professional development training to twelve high school teachers from four
isolated rural school districts, with the potential to involve two additional
districts. Three instructors from Spokane Community College who teach college-
level courses in rural northeast Washington communities will join high school
teachers as learners receiving professional development training, with the
intent to expand the college's capacity to teach dual-credit courses on
geospatial topics directly in rural communities. Over the course of the project,
the PI and Co-PIs will deliver two 3-day workshops at one of five Spokane
Community College rural (satellite) campus facilities. The participating high
school teachers and rural college instructors will also receive additional
resources to support independent exploration of geospatial tools, data, and
applications for integration into their classroom teaching. These additional
resources include the creation of locally relevant standards-mapped GIS learning
activities for high school classrooms. Rural communities and industries can
benefit from an expanded number of students who pursue STEM career pathways that
prepare them for meaningful local job opportunities and support local workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.