* 1800410
* Molecular Rydberg Spectra Encode Intramolecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Robert Field, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Molecules typically contain many electrons, and, being negatively charged, these
electrons repel each other as they move in space. Electron-electron repulsion
makes it difficult to calculate precisely the properties and behaviors of
molecules, and remains one of the greatest challenges for the science of
chemistry. With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms-A
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Robert Field and his research
team at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology are using advanced laser and
microwave spectroscopy techniques to prepare and interrogate what are called
Rydberg molecules. A Rydberg molecule is a normal molecule in which one electron
has been excited (by laser light) to such a high orbit that the system resembles
a simple hydrogen atom (one negatively charged electron plus one positively
charged proton). Because of their simplicity, Rydberg molecules can be modeled
more accurately with theory, and it becomes possible to answer other questions
with more accuracy, for example, how do electrons interact with light? Or how do
electrons exchange energy with each other and with the positive-charged "ion
core" of the molecule? This research project challenges conventional thinking
about the structure of molecules and how they interact with light. The
discoveries from this project may also have implications for the new field of
quantum computing. The post-doctoral scientists and undergraduate researchers
engaged in this project are gaining experience in both cutting-edge
laser/microwave technology and computational chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on three experimental goals and
targeted at answers to three fundamental questions. The feasibilities of the
principal experimental components have been independently demonstrated. The
experimental goals are: (i) to record Rydberg-Rydberg spectra at a spectral
velocity of 100,000 resolution elements per second, organized and assigned by a
suite of on-the-fly diagnostics; (ii) to exploit systematic spectroscopic access
to core-nonpenetrating Rydberg states, bypassing a region of fast nonradiative
decay previously deemed to be impassible (called the "zone of death"); (iii) to
exploit superradiance on Rydberg-Rydberg transitions to obtain information about
quantum many-body interactions. If these experiments are successful, our methods
and results will challenge spectroscopists to imagine and target new frontiers
for the spectroscopy of gas phase molecules. This project is leading to new
methods for the determination of multipole moments an polarizabilities of
molecular-ions, which are essential to model dense plasmas, which are relevant
to astrophysics and new technologies. The refinement of Multi-channel Quantum
Defect Theory promises a priori calibrated methods for production of state-
selected molecular ions devise new classes of schemes for external control of
molecular dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.