* 1800281
* Collaborative Research: Atomistic Switches on Pyridinol Based Pincer Ligated Catalysts for Carbon Dioxide Reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Jared Delcamp, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 150,543.00

With funding from the Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Elizabeth
Papish of the University of Alabama at Tuscaloosa, Dr. Jared Delcamp of the
University of Mississippi, and Dr. Charles Edwin Webster of Mississippi State
University are engaged in collaborative research designing new catalysts that
can harness sunlight to convert carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas leftover from
fuel combustion, into carbon monoxide, a fuel precursor. The ability to convert
carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide is challenging, and is an important step in a
strategy to harness sunlight to make diesel fuel from carbon dioxide. This
conversion may become useful for securing the energy future of the US, as it can
provide a means to replace oil reserves as are they are depleted. Furthermore,
solar fuel formation coupled with fuel combustion can be considered carbon
neutral, as this process does not add carbon dioxide to the atmosphere. The
research team is using synthetic chemistry to make new catalysts, test those
catalysts, and computationally optimize and understand the critical steps in
this process. The key innovation has been understanding how changes to small,
remote groups on the catalyst can influence the course of the reaction. This
project uses metals that are earth abundant and non-toxic making the chemical
reactions more sustainable and environmentally friendly. This project is
training a diverse group of graduate and undergraduate students at universities
in Alabama and Mississippi. This synergistic collaboration enhances the learning
experience for the students in these groups. The Papish group is conducting
outreach events, including "Careers in Chemistry" seminars at the University of
Alabama and science demonstrations at a nearby elementary school to engage
students in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Drs. Papish, Delcamp, and
Webster combine a wide variety of expertise in organometallic synthesis and
mechanistic studies, light driven catalysis and harnessing solar energy, and
organometallic computational chemistry. Their groups are designing, testing, and
studying new catalysts bearing pincer ligands with oxygenated substituents on
the periphery that are bound to both precious and earth abundant metals. The
groups are elucidating how the protonation state of the remote oxygenated
substituents on the ligands alters catalyst lifetime, reaction rate, and
selectivity with these complexes. By understanding how electron donor groups
influence proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) and reduces the energy
requirements for catalytic processes, the groups are designing highly durable
and active catalysts. This team is taking an iterative, mechanistic approach
with feedback between the synthesis, catalysis, and computational studies that
is leading to the development of highly active, durable catalysts. These
catalysts are also being integrated into a complete photoelectrochemical cell
where carbon dioxide reduction is coupled with water oxidation. This project is
training a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students over the project
period. Dr. Papish is hosting "Careers in Chemistry" seminars at the University
of Alabama each year. She and her group are also visiting local elementary
schools to perform demonstrations and discuss opportunities in science with the
students. New experiments are also being developed for undergraduate chemistry
labs to introduce catalytic chemistry research to the teaching
lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.