* 1800062
* Outer coordination sphere optimization of electrocatalytic CO2 reduction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jonathan Rochford, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2022
* USD 411,634.00

The security of an energy supply, its sustainability and environmental
consequences are global concerns in modern society. Nature has optimized the
mechanism of photosynthesis to absorb and harvest solar energy by transforming
carbon dioxide and water into carbohydrate fuels. Yet, this apparently simple
transformation of carbon dioxide and water - the most ubiquitous chemicals on
earth - to a sustainable fuel source still represents one of the grand
challenges of science today. In this project, Dr. Rochford of University of
Massachusetts Boston learns from nature and develops a next generation of
molecular catalysts that can mimic photosynthesis to efficiently transform
carbon dioxide and water into useful fuels. Just as we are strongly influenced
by our own environment in a macroscopic world, the behavior and properties of
carbon dioxide and water are also very sensitive to their local environment at a
molecular scale. Dr. Rochford and his students utilize "self-assembly"
techniques, inspired by photosynthesis, to leverage the environmental
sensitivity of carbon dioxide and water to optimize their sustainable
transformation into fuels. This grant from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the
NSF Chemistry Division enriches the undergraduate and graduate experiences of
many UMass Boston students and has a major positive impact on the UMass Boston
research portfolio. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a novel
approach to electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction through the design and
synthesis of molecular catalysts with engineered second- and outer-coordination
spheres providing selective control over product formation (carbon monoxide vs.
formic acid vs. hydrogen gas). Significant intellectual merit is achieved by
targeting first-row Mn(I)-based transition metal catalysts whereby tailoring the
second- and outer-coordination sphere of the ligand, transition-state energies
is optimized to promote proton-coupled electron transfer, thus reducing
activation energies for critical rate-determining steps to maximize catalyst
turnover frequencies, and reduce the minimum required overpotential. Dr.
Rochford and his students develop cutting-edge catalyst design methods, from
synthesis to self-assembly, combined with tailored electrochemical analyses,
which impacts on a host of research areas that employ nanostructured and
electroactive surfaces. Success in this area informs the chemical catalysis
community to better design, control and optimize first-row transition metal
catalysts for selective carbon dioxide conversion at accessible overpotentials.
Dr. Rochford is a strong advocate of education for young scholars regarding the
environmental impacts of carbon dioxide, renewable energy alternatives, and
advances in renewable energy technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.