* 1800354
* Electrostatic Regulation of Cavity-Mediated Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Zhenqiang Wang, University of South Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 420,000.00

Catalysis is a process in which a small amount of a substance (a catalyst)
accelerates the rate of desirable chemical reactions. Catalysis plays a vital
role in many industrial applications. Manufacturing valuable products such as
pharmaceuticals, plastics, agrochemicals, and clean fuels often requires
properly designed catalysts. Traditional catalysts are highly effective in
promoting a wide range of chemical reactions. However, it remains a daunting
task to make catalysts that emulate the remarkable performance of enzymes, which
are Nature's catalysts. The challenge arises largely from the difficulty of
constructing molecules that resemble the complexity of enzymes. In this project,
Dr. Zhenqiang Wang of the University of South Dakota is applying several
biology-inspired principles to synthesize new classes of molecules that mimic
enzymes. This research is integrated with educational outreach programs
targeting Native American students to promote STEM (science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics) education. These programs are engaging local
tribal college students through tribal student-faculty research teams hosted in
Dr. Wang's laboratory and through chemistry workshops at regional tribal
colleges. The outreach also includes onsite hosting of students from local
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) and "at-home" support for student-
faculty research teams at their home institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project funded by the Chemical Catalysis program of the Chemistry Division, the
team led by Dr. Wang at the University of South Dakota is utilizing a unique
class of synthetic receptors, known as metal-organic supercontainers (MOSCs), to
investigate new concepts of catalysis. The MOSC-based supramolecular catalysts
are structurally unique in that they are constructed from container-molecule
precursors (i.e., sulfonylcalixarenes) and feature multiple nano-cavities that
serve as substrate binding sites. The MOSC catalysts also feature functionally
versatile metal-bound H2O species, which may promote hydrogen-bond, Bronsted-
acid, Bronsted-base, and cascade catalysis. Two key strategies, namely,
multifunctional nano-cavities and electrostatic regulation, are used to promote
the catalytic efficacy, enhance reaction selectivity, and regulate
supramolecular reactivity. The unique structural characteristics of the MOSCs,
including their compositional versatility, structural modularity, and multi-pore
architecture, distinguish them from other synthetic receptor molecules and
provide unprecedented opportunities for functionalizing catalytic active sites
and engineering supramolecular reactivity. The strategy to modulate
supramolecular catalysis using ionic species as electrostatic regulators, which
are catalytically inert on their own, is conceptually distinct from conventional
methods that rely on encapsulating catalytically active species. The concept of
electrostatic regulation is not yet fully recognized by chemists, but has the
potential to not only significantly expand the scope of accessible reactions,
but fundamentally transform how supramolecular catalysis can be
designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.