* 1800687
* Research Initiation Award: Testing the Mechanisms Underlying Noise Avoidance by Animals
* EDU,EES
* 11/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Mesia Steed, Winston-Salem State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 10/31/2023
* USD 293,316.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at their home institution, and
to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Winston-Salem State University (WSSU) seeks to
advance the research capacity of a biologist by developing a collaboration with
a leader in the field of soundscape ecology at Boise State University. The
investigator and several minority undergraduate students will work on a research
project examining the influence of noise on wildlife. Noise is an important and
growing component in both natural and human systems. Anthropogenic sounds,
including those from transportation networks, power generation, motorized
recreation, urban development, and fossil fuel extraction are loud and
pervasive. Remote wilderness areas are not immune and transportation noise is a
near universal component of the modern acoustical landscape with noticeable
levels of airway, railway, and roadway noise reaching nearly all corners and
counties in the continental USA. Meanwhile natural sounds, such as a morning
birdsong chorus or the thunder of a mountain river, can be loud and prominent
environmental features that are present in virtually all environments. A
substantial body of work has revealed that organisms change behaviors and
distributions due to noise, yet the underlying mechanisms remain largely
unknown. The education and research experiences provided by this project will
contribute to WSSU's efforts to broaden the participation of underrepresented
groups in wildlife biology and also help prepare students for graduate school
and the Nation's STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three
hypotheses have been proposed to explain noise avoidance by animals: 1) masking
of important auditory information (when the signal and noise acoustically
overlap), 2) distraction, a limitation of available processing resources
(independent of signal and noise overlap), and 3) noise aversion (associated
with a stress response). To tease these hypotheses apart, the researcher and
students will conduct a series of lab-based experiments focused on performance
and stress in animals foraging in noise. Several species of bats and birds that
vary in their reliance on sound for hunting will be pitted against prey in a
large flight room. Simultaneously, behavior will be filmed with high-speed
cameras and heart-rate, a measure of perception and stress, captured using radio
tags. Predators will be trained to locate prey-generated sounds. During the
experiments the animals will be observed foraging in quiet control or two noisy
soundscape conditions (each with different frequency profiles). If masking is
responsible for noise avoidance, then a reduction in foraging success should
occur only when the noise overlaps with prey signals. If distraction underlies
noise avoidance, foraging deficits will be equal for both noise conditions.
However, if aversion explains noise avoidance, a heart rate response will be
observed with no decline in foraging success. Understanding the mechanisms
driving noise avoidance is critical for the development of sensory ecology
theory and anthropogenic noise policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.