* 1800313
* Oxidation Catalysis with 3d Complexes Bearing Fluorinated Alkoxide Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Linda Doerrer, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 05/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Oxidation reactions are critically important and widespread in modern chemistry.
The cheapest and most sustainable oxidant is atmospheric oxygen (O2). This
research expands on prior successes in the laboratories of Professor Doerrer,
Boston University and Professor Stieglitz of Roxbury Community College (RCC) in
preparing new copper (Cu) catalysts. The researchers are designing and
developing new catalysts that are longer lived and more selective in their
reactivity. They are also designing water-soluble catalysts to avoid the use of
expensive or toxic organic solvents. A new collaboration between Boston
University and Roxbury Community College develops a new summer research class
that brings together BU expertise in transition metal complexes and RCC
experience with natural products. Roxbury Community College (RCC) is a
predominantly under-represented minority institution. The research demonstrates
how to incorporate sustainability concepts into challenging and important
chemical reactions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation of carbon-hydrogen (C-H)
bonds remains a chemical transformation with many remaining challenges. This
research builds on recent success with Cu/O2 chemistry that has demonstrated the
effectiveness of fluorinated alkoxide ligands in making highly reactive species
for oxidizing carbon-hydrogen bonds. The fluorinated, chelating O-donor ligands
are developed to determine the effect of chelate ring size and overall metal
complex charge on the oxidation reactions by {CunO2} moieties. The researchers
then determine the potential breadth of this chemical formulation for oxidation
catalysts. Finally, the researchers build on recent work with more earth-
abundant metals from the middle of the d-block - chromium, manganese, and iron -
using the fluorinated alkoxide ligands in water, a more sustainable solvent. A
new collaboration between Boston University and Roxbury Community College
develops a new summer research class that brings together BU expertise in
transition metal complexes and RCC experience with natural products. This
collaboration enhances the capacities of RCC to train under-represented minority
students for science careers, while exposing them to research at an highly
research intensive university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.