* 1800523
* Multidimensional Femtosecond Studies of Chemical Reaction Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Jonas, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 08/31/2022
* USD 585,548.00

This project is funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division. Professor David Jonas of the
University of Colorado at Boulder is developing femtosecond laser techniques to
study the motion of electrons in molecules. A femtosecond is a millionth of a
billionth of a second. Inside molecules, atoms and slow electrons move on the
femtosecond timescale. The goal of the project is to measure how atomic and
electronic motions are linked when the forces driving their motion are weak.
Such weak forces can arise from energies on the order of the thermal energy.
This project explores the smallest energy required to drive motion of electrons.
Similar electronic motions are involved in lighting, displays, and
photosynthesis. Three dimensional spectra correlate electronic and atomic
motion. High symmetry molecules simplify the study of electronic and atomic
motions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 3D Fourier transform spectroscopy, four-wave
mixing is used to record transient signals as a function of three time delays
between pulses. Triple Fourier transformation with respect to the three time
delays generates a spectrum that is a function of three frequency axes. Unlike
most 2D spectra, the pulse spectra and pulse propagation effects can be divided
out in 3D. This reveals the underlying 3D nonlinear response, which should be
independent of experimental conditions. The signal from cross-phase modulation
in transparent solvents produces compact time-domain transients for initial
experimental recovery of the underlying 3D response. 2D and 3D electronic
spectroscopy of high symmetry molecules with pseudo Jahn-Teller effects can
reveal the mechanism of their femtosecond electronic population transfer through
comparison to quantum mechanical calculations. The calculations fully
incorporate non-adiabatic interactions between motion of electrons and the
vibrational motion of atoms. The broader impacts of this project include
training of students in modern experimental and computational techniques plus
potential societal benefits from a better understanding of the minimum energy
required to drive electronic motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.