* 1800310
* Revealing Hidden Safety Hazards Using Workers' Collective Bodily and Behavioral  Response Patterns
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/16/2017,12/31/2020
* Changbum Ahn, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 240,710.00

Current hazard-identification efforts in safety management are mostly limited by
humans' abilities to recognize hazards and/or by their existing knowledge of
known hazards. Consequently, numerous hazards go unidentified, creating
unmanageable risks. To enhance hazard recognition capabilities, this research
focuses on understanding and exploiting humans' bodily and behavioral responses
in their interaction with the physical environmental system. It is well
recognized that a potential hazard within the system may cause instability in
actions, and ultimately accidents. However, the unpredictable nature of human
behavior poses a critical challenge in utilizing the analysis of such actions
for the identification of unstable system conditions. Methodologies developed in
this research will enable the evaluation of collective patterns associated with
human responses to estimate the likelihood of hazard locations across a
construction site. Thus, knowledge gained from this research will advance our
ability to utilize response information for accident prevention, leading to
reduced injuries and fatalities from construction-related accidents. Research
outcomes will be integrated into engineering curriculum development,
undergraduate research activities, industry workshops, and outreach activities
for K-12 students and underrepresented student groups, especially women and
minorities.

The objective of this research is to examine whether, how, and to what extent
workers' collective bodily and behavioral response patterns identify
recognized/unrecognized hazards for the purpose of enhancing safety performance
in construction environments. This research focuses on detecting hazards that
causes fall accidents, a single most dangerous injury event within the
construction industry, using workers - kinematic sensing data captured from
wearable inertial measurement sensors. This research hypothesizes that the
collective abnormalities apparent in multiple workers' balance and gait in one
location is correlated with the likelihood of the presence (and/or the risk) of
a recognized/unrecognized fall hazard in that location. To test this hypothesis,
this project will: 1) identify appropriate metrics that characterize the
perturbation to workers' balance and gait caused by recognized and unrecognized
hazards; 2) model a near-miss index (NMI) that evaluates the abnormalities of
workers' gait and balance; 3) investigate the relationship between the
collective NMI patterns and the presence and risk of a hazard in each location;
4) identify and examine appropriate sensor network platforms for the scalable
implementation of the approach; and 5) validate the efficacy and usefulness of
the developed approach through its application within construction sites.