* 1800820
* Planning Grant: Collaborative Research: Increasing Montana's Tribal College Engagement in Language Documentation and Revitalization
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Susan Penfield, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 07/31/2024
* USD 59,006.00

The state of Montana is home to nine Native American languages (Blackfoot,
Montana Salish, Kutenai, Northern Cheyenne, Gros Ventre, Cree, Chippewa, Crow,
and Assiniboine) and has seven Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs). This
project reinforces the mandate of the Native American Languages Act, passed by
the U.S. Congress in 1990, which called for stakeholders, including Native
American activists, to act together to "declare to preserve, protect and promote
the rights and freedom of Native Americans to use, practice and develop" these
languages. The TCUs in Montana have been offering Native American language
courses to encourage the sustainability of Native languages. This collaborative
project between the University of Montana (UM) and one of the TCUs, Chief Dull
Knife College (CDKC), aims to support the efforts of Montana TCUs by enriching
language instructors' and activists' experience through an exchange of ideas and
knowledge with instructors and training partners from UM, CDKC and the American
Indian Language Institute (AILDI) of the University of Arizona. The proposed
activities foster a positive relationship across institutions and will help
identify current issues that may become the focus of future training workshops.
The project's broader impacts include building the capacity of language
documentation programs at Montana TCUs, enhancing STEM education through
technology utilized in language documentation and education, and serving
underrepresented populations who often have difficulty accessing training due to
the remoteness of their locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project seeks to cultivate common ground for communication across institutional
boundaries. It aims to promote the idea that an increased knowledge of
linguistics, as a science, can benefit TCU programs related to indigenous
language sustainability as well as the idea that linguistics can benefit from
community input. The indigenous languages spoken in Montana are from four
different families: Algonquian, Salishan, Siouan, and Kootenai, an isolate.
Because of this, the proposed project will advance our knowledge of the
linguistics of these languages. The project is also innovative in applying
collaboration among linguists and community language researchers, a method known
as Community Based Research (CBR) in a way that fosters and enhances our
understanding of these languages' phonetics, phonology, morphosyntax and
semantics through the lens of traditional environmental knowledge and
ethnosciences. A collaborative team, consisting of four language activists from
indigenous communities and four non-indigenous linguists, will travel to TCUs in
Montana to learn about the current efforts and future goals of their language
activities. The collaborative team will then host meetings with selected
participants from the Montana TCUs for further discussions. Results will be
compiled from these activities feed into future documentation research and
indigenous language education through workshops that will circulate the
information back to indigenous communities. These project outcomes have the
potential to implement indigenous ways of knowing into language documentation
projects.