* 1800482
* High Potential Redox Couples: Design Strategies for Survival in Diverse Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Susan Odom, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 324,100.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Susan Odom of the Department of
Chemistry at the University of Kentucky is developing high-oxidation-potential
organic compounds to serve as electro-active components of batteries with non-
aqueous electrolytes, and to develop a library of shelf-stable and organic
radical cation salts for use as chemical reagents. The research could have
significant impacts on overcharge protection of high-voltage cathodes in
lithium-ion batteries. It could also lead to more efficient preparation of
active components of pharmaceutical values. This project, which bridges organic,
materials, and electro-chemistry, is poised to train students in highly
collaborative research. Through annual Expanding Your Horizons Conferences,
middle school girls with interest in STEM fields are the focus of outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reactivity of radical cations of conjugated
organic compounds is difficult to predict, complicated by the combination of the
electron deficient and radical nature of these singly oxidized species. Despite
the numerous applications in which radical cations are used directly or appear
as intermediates, progress in developing new materials is hindered due to the
limited understanding of factors leading to stable oxidized states. Through the
proposed research, this research group hopes to develop electro-active materials
with stable radical cations and to extend the environments in which these
species can be utilized. In addition to more efficient compounds for overcharge
protections in lithium-ion batteries and new reagents for organic synthesis, the
research will elucidate reaction mechanisms of radical cations for a greater
understanding of the stability and decomposition pathways of these electron-
deficient species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.