* 1800756
* I-Corps: Lightweight Aggregates from Waste Bottom Ash
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Yaghoob Farnam, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Andre Marshall
* 05/31/2019
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to produce
lightweight aggregates (LWA) from unused waste bottom ash of coal electric power
industry that can be used for concrete and geotechnical applications. Each year
in the United States around 120 million tons of coal combustion products (e.g.,
fly ash and bottom ash) are generated of which 37% is reused. This has led to a
large historical stock of unused coal ash stored in on-site surface
impoundments. Production of LWA from unused bottom ash will result in conversion
of waste material to value-added product that can attract concrete and
geotechnical markets. The produced LWA can be used as an aggregate in (a)
structural lightweight concrete production, (b) internal curing of concrete, (c)
production of concrete masonry blocks for buildings, retaining walls and
landscape, (d) production of thermal/sound insulating concrete units, and (e)
lightweight fill for highways, bridge abutments, retaining walls, and
foundations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project will lead to significant
understanding of market size and commercial potential of lightweight aggregates
(LWA) produced from waste bottom ash. Bottom ash has high residual carbon and
the innovative sintering technology is to use this residual carbon with
appropriate fluxing agent to create a porous material encapsulated by a glassy
layer that exhibits pozzolanic reactivity. This novel material will possess an
active amorphous surface and an inert crystalline porous interior in a
controlled ratio. The technology uses a thermodynamic model and can target a
wide range of bottom coal ashes with various physical conditions and chemical
compositions.