* 1800536
* Development of New Catalytic Reactions for the Synthesis of Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2018,01/31/2022
* Sarah Reisman, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jin Cha
* 01/31/2022
* USD 473,200.00

Chemical synthesis plays an important and often rate-limiting role in the fields
of molecular medicine, agrochemicals, flavors and fragrances, and materials
science. The development and application of new, selective, and efficient
processes for the synthesis of functional molecules is therefore a fundamental
area of research with broad societal impact. Dr. Sarah Reisman's research funded
by this award is investigating new catalytic reactions as key carbon-carbon bond
constructions for the synthesis of complex molecules with improved efficiency
using the inexpensive and abundant metal, nickel. The research team is
developing new reactions that couple different reaction partners as strategic
steps in the synthesis of biologically active molecules. These investigations
are providing more efficient and sustainable access to molecules with
applications in medicine and agrochemicals. Dr. Reisman is engaged in outreach
activities focused on improving curriculum for science, technology, engineering
and mathematics (STEM) education in the Pasadena Unified School District, with a
specific interest in encouraging young women to pursue STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Sarah Reisman at the California Institute of Technology
is developing Ni-catalyzed cross-electrophile coupling (CEC) reactions as
strategic reactions for natural product total synthesis. Advances in the
synthesis of structurally complex, functional molecules are driven by the
development of new synthetic methods to prepare carbon-carbon and carbon-
heteroatom bonds, and the incorporation of these methods into increasingly
sophisticated synthetic strategies. Dr. Reisman and her research team are
developing new Ni-catalyzed double asymmetric reductive alkenylation reactions
to prepare macrocycles, and Ni-catalyzed convergent fragment coupling reactions
to prepare diterpenoid natural products. This research is contributing
fundamental studies of Ni-catalyzed cross- electrophile coupling reactions, and
demonstrating how Ni-catalyzed C(sp2)-C(sp3) bond constructions can be
incorporated into synthetic strategy. In partnership with the Caltech Center for
Teaching, Learning, and Outreach and the Community Science Academy, Dr. Reisman
is developing organic chemistry experiments to enhance high school science
curriculum in the Pasadena Unified School District
(PUSD).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.