* 1800284
* Understanding and predicting the performance of metal exchanged SSZ-13 zeolite in the conversion of methane to methanol
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Emmanouil Mavrikakis, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Vast reserves of shale gas are now being accessed around the globe. Shale gas is
mostly methane, which is difficult to transport and of relatively low value. The
conversion of methane into higher value products, such as methanol, requires new
and improved catalytic processes. Methanol is a platform chemical, with existing
technologies for transforming it into a variety of useful, important products.
Metal exchanged zeolites are a class of materials showing great promise as
catalysts for transforming methane to methanol. However, how these catalysts
work is not yet well-understood. Further, their catalytic performance depends on
many complex parameters which are difficult to optimize. In this project, Dr.
Mavrikakis of the University of Wisconsin is using both theory and experiments
to understand the performance of one specific zeolite structure, known as
SSZ-13, for the conversion of methane to methanol. His work is developing a
correlation between zeolite synthesis conditions and the resulting chemical
composition of SSZ-13, and between its catalytic performance and reaction
conditions. The insights gained are being used to design experimental synthesis
protocol to produce the ideal zeolite catalyst and reaction conditions for
methane conversion to methanol. During this project Dr. Mavrikakis is informing
the public about the importance of theoretical modeling in fundamental and
industrial research and practice. Dr. Mavrikakis is also educating undergraduate
students about communicating science to middle school and high school students,
as well as providing internships to undergraduate students to conduct research
in his group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Mavrikakis at the University of Wisconsin
- Madison is applying a combined theoretical/experimental approach for
understanding the fundamentals of converting methane to methanol using
transition metal exchanged SSZ-13 zeolite. This includes: (i) first-principles
modeling of zeolite synthesis through the development of correlations between
synthesis parameters, such as the identity of template and ions present, and the
obtained zeolite structure, such as the local Al distribution and defect
density; (ii) the ab-initio calculation of phase diagrams for different
transition metals (Cu, Fe, Co, Ni) and types of active sites for a wide range of
operating conditions, and (iii) the calculation of reaction pathways for the
most stable active catalytic sites. In a subsequent step, this information is
being used to develop a protocol for the experimental synthesis, elemental
composition and reaction conditions for maximized performance of the ideal metal
exchanged SSZ-13 zeolite for the conversion of methane to methanol. In parallel,
and in collaboration with the Wisconsin Institute for Chemical Education, Dr.
Mavrikakis' group is developing modules to teach undergraduate and middle school
students how thinking at the molecular level can lead to new powerful
technologies. Furthermore, the P.I. is participating in the Research Experience
for Undergraduates program at UW Madison, which is providing hands-on research
experiences to undergraduate researchers with a focus on female students and
students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.