* 1800999
* Cyber Up! Digital Forensics and Incident Response Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Nancy Jones, Coast Community College District System Office
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2023
* USD 224,296.00

Predominantly, cybersecurity education focuses on theory and skills to build
secure programs, networks, and systems, but in the event of a cyberattack, when
security is breached, theories and models are not enough. To increase national
security for the U.S. and meet its workforce needs, cybersecurity education must
develop new knowledge and skills. To address this need, the Cyber Up! Digital
Forensics and Incident Response (DFIR) project at Coastline Community College in
California will research, create, adapt, adopt, and implement a suite of course
content that supports a Certificate of Achievement and an Associate of Science
degree. As a Center for Academic Excellence-Two Year (CAE2Y), the implementation
of DFIR has the potential to be transformative, bringing about needed and
important change to U.S. education and security. Thus, the program expects to
increase the availability and readiness of qualified cybersecurity technicians
in the U.S. workforce, resulting in greater global competitiveness for the U.S.
economy and increased national security. A comprehensive project evaluation will
measure the DFIR program's effectiveness, which will in turn support adaptation
and replication by other institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on the development of curricula that will teach students and professionals
the cybersecurity knowledge and skills of digital forensics and incident
response, which need to be deployed in real-time and are dynamic to changing
situations during and in response to cyberattacks. Through the DFIR program, the
project intends to create adoptable educational resources; form academic,
government, and industry partnerships; and prepare qualified cybersecurity
technicians and professionals for entry into, or advancement within, the U.S.
workforce. The DFIR distance education modalities will be designed for a
national reach and assist in preparing students for successful employment. It
will work towards providing cybersecurity advancement through its various
modalities since the content, courses, certificate, and degree will all be
available online. The project will also develop virtual labs and faculty
resources. The DFIR program will aim to reach educators, institutions, and
diverse populations with important new knowledge and skills in digital forensics
and incident response. Faculty development will provide educators new knowledge
and enhance their abilities in these new technological and pedagogical skill-
sets, leading to enriched educational structures at the institution. Because of
the adoptable, modular content, other institutions can benefit through adoption
into their programs, creating pathways to greater skills and knowledge for
students and professionals. Increasing skills and knowledge in diverse and
underrepresented populations in cybersecurity will help to assure increased
participation of women, minorities, and special populations in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education and in the STEM
workforce. Thus, the program will strive to generate important new knowledge and
skills to share with students, professionals, and the academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.