* 1800979
* Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center: Resources to Improve Water Environmental Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Paul Bishop, Eastern Iowa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2022
* USD 717,873.00

Water and wastewater technician jobs are growing faster than average amid
concerns about source water availability, aging infrastructure, water quality,
remediation, and workforce issues. These jobs are regulated, cannot be
outsourced, and survive economic downturn because humans need clean drinking
water and wastewater treatment for health. In addition, businesses and
industries need clean water and wastewater treatment to safely produce goods and
services. The Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center will support
growth of leadership and program capacity in water environmental technology. To
achieve this goal, the Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center will
provide the nation's high schools, technical and community colleges, and the ATE
community with educational materials, professional association, and business and
industry information, contacts, research, evaluation, and
mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advanced Technology Environmental Education
Center will: 1) update the current website and create a new Toolbox for educator
information; 2) support and mentor prospective PIs to start or improve water
environmental technology programs; 3) coordinate and support additional water
environmental technology business, industry and academic partnerships; 4)
promote technician careers and the public image in the water environmental
technology field; 4) screen, validate, update and broadly distribute materials,
curricula, pedagogical practices, projects and appropriate sources including
supporting the adaption and implementation at new institutions of materials; and
5) connect and support PIs within the water environmental technology area. It is
expected that broader use of Advanced Technology Environmental Education Center
materials and curricula will result in an increased number of technicians in
water environmental technology jobs, helping the Nation meet the growing need
for a skilled, diverse workforce in advanced technology
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.