* 1800052
* "Electronic Relaxation Pathways in Nucleic Acid Derivatives Based on Functionalization of the Pyrimidine Chromophore"
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Carlos Crespo-Hernández, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 06/30/2023
* USD 627,171.00

On the most fundamental level, through the molecular origins of life and
photosynthesis, the interaction of light with matter has played an essential
role. The many applications of these interactions continue to revolutionize
society through advances in medicine, communications, technology, and
entertainment. Controlling the fundamental way in which matter interacts with
light represents a major priority for many phenomena of great importance for
society. This grand challenge is yet to be fully conquered despite the efforts
of many chemists and physicists. With this award, the Chemical Structure,
Dynamics and Mechanisms-B Program of the Division of Chemistry is supporting
Professor Carlos E. Crespo-Hernández of Case Western Reserve University to
investigate whether strategic structural modification of the DNA component
pyrimidine can be used to rationally control the dissipation of energy,
processes critical to DNA photochemistry and photostability. Prof. Crespo-
Hernández and his research students use a combination of experiment and theory
to examine this innovative idea. The transformative potential of this research
is the development of molecular design principles for the control of light-
induced pathways in biological and other organic molecules in general. Prof.
Crespo-Hernández seeks to motivate students to enter and persist in scientific
studies and careers by providing research opportunities to high school,
undergraduate and graduate students, and by mentoring and serving as a role
model. The interests of these students are heightened by opportunities for
cross- and multidisciplinary research and training in important areas of modern
photochemistry and photobiology, time-resolved techniques, and computational
methods, and by exposure to national and international collaborations. Research
opportunities are provided for economically disadvantaged and underrepresented
students from the Greater Cleveland area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
Professor Crespo-Hernández is investigating whether selective functionalization
of the pyrimidine chromophore can be used to rationally control the radiative
and nonradiative decay pathways that are critical to nucleic acid
photochemistry. Prof. Crespo-Hernández and his research students examine this
innovative idea by gathering experimental and theoretical data using femto-to-
microsecond transient absorption spectroscopy and multiconfigurational
calculations. The objectives include: 1) unravel the electronic relaxation
pathways in rationally selected nucleic acid derivatives; 2) map the topology of
the potential energy surfaces; and 3) establish structure-dynamics relationships
to reveal how functionalization regulates radiative and nonradiative decay
pathways. Close collaboration with the theoretical group of Professor Inés
Corral of the Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Spain enhance the impact and
increase fundamental understanding of the transformative science proposed.
Understanding how functionalization of the pyrimidine chromophore regulates the
electronic relaxation pathways in nucleic acid derivatives can assist in the
development of therapeutic drugs, crosslinking agents, and fluorescent
biomarkers, and may hold the key for understanding why the genetic alphabet is
composed of only four nucleobases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.