* 1800305
* Collaborative Research:  New Decouplings and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Ciprian Demeter, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 270,000.00

The principal investigators have recently advanced a new set of tools called
decouplings, that can successfully quantify the ways in which waves traveling in
different directions interact with each other. While these tools were initially
intended for certain problems about differential equations, they have also led
to important breakthroughs in number theory. More precisely, Diophantine
equations are potentially complicated systems of equations involving whole
numbers, and mathematicians are interested in counting the number of solutions
to such systems. Unlike waves, numbers do not oscillate, at least not in an
obvious manner, but one can think of numbers as frequencies, and thus associate
them to waves. In this way, problems related to counting the number of solutions
to Diophantine systems can be rephrased in the language of quantifying wave
interferences. This project will further extend the scope of decouplings towards
the resolution of fundamental problems in harmonic analysis and number theory.
The project will make new tools accessible and useful to a large part of the
mathematical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Decouplings have proved remarkably
flexible in addressing a wide variety of problems in such diverse fields as
number theory, partial differential equations and harmonic analysis. One
important circle of questions that remain to be addressed concerns the
decoupling inequalities for curves on small spatial balls. Also, the cone poses
a lot of interesting problems, even in three dimensions. The square function
estimate, the local smoothing conjecture and, the decoupling into small caps are
just a few examples of related problems for the cone. Progress on these problems
is likely to lead to progress on many other problems. Finally, the combination
of decouplings and the polynomial method has recently led to significant
progress in the restriction theory of curved manifolds. The principal
investigators intend to seek further improvements in this exciting and rapidly
developing area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.