* 1800471
* Dynamics of Excited States in DNA Strands and DNA-Silver Nanoclusters
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Bern Kohler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 466,789.00

Silver ions (Ag+) can bind to the nitrogen and oxygen atoms in DNA giving rise
to unusual and interesting molecular structures. DNA acts as a scaffold that
precisely controls the positions of individual silver ions. When another
chemical reagent is added to provide electrons to the Ag+ ions, the array of Ag+
ions in the DNA become small clusters containing no more than a few dozen metal
atoms. These miniscule clusters have remarkable optical properties, including
for example fluorescence. Fluorescence is a process by which a molecule absorbs
light at one wavelength and shortly afterwards emits light of another color.
This is a property that macroscopic silver objects do not possess. Their
fluorescence properties makes these silver clusters attractive for sensing and
imaging applications. However, despite widespread interest in these clusters,
very little is known about what controls their light emission. In this project
funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Bern Kohler of The Ohio State University and
students working under his direction are investigating DNA-metal assemblies that
are excited by short laser pulses (a few hundred femtoseconds, where a
femtosecond is one quadrillionth of one second). The Kohler team observes how
the color of the light emitted from the silver clusters depends on the color and
time interval of the impinging laser pulse. Under some conditions, no light is
emitted at all. These studies are revealing the mysteries of how light energy is
absorbed by small metal clusters, and either emitted again as light or
dissipated into the clusters' surroundings. The undergraduate and graduate
students involved in this project are gaining experience in state-of the-art
laser techniques, and the kinds of analysis needed to solve problems at the
interface of spectroscopy and nanoscience. This multidisciplinary training is
important for upholding the nation's workforce of scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project targets fundamental understanding of excited
electronic states formed by UV and visible excitation of DNA-metal complexes and
nanostructures. Silver ions coordinate to the nitrogen and oxygen atoms of the
nucleobases, giving rise to metal-mediated base pairs and a rich variety of
self-assembled structures. Reduction of the bound silver ions produces compact
metal nanostructures containing small numbers of silver atoms with remarkable,
but poorly understood photophysical properties. Using femtosecond spectroscopy,
nonradiative and radiative decay pathways are being observed and characterized
in mononucleotide-metal ion complexes and their self-assembled nanostructures,
and in DNA-hosted silver nanoclusters. Time-domain measurements are employed to
develop a comprehensive photophysical model of silver nanoclusters. Fundamental
understanding of the electronic interactions between DNA and metals can provide
new insights into hybrid organic-inorganic interfaces that are attractive for
controlling the separation and recombination of photogenerated carriers and
redox equivalents. The study of few-atom noble metal nanoclusters by ultrafast
spectroscopy promises to accelerate societally beneficial advances in science
and technology. The ability to control and manipulate the excited states of
metal nanoparticles could advance the fields of chemical imaging and sustainable
energy production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.