* 1800991
* Advancing Technicians in Manufacturing
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Tanya St Julien, South Louisiana Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

Advanced manufacturing industries are vital to the global competitiveness of the
United States. As a result, community colleges must work collaboratively with
industry partners to develop associate degrees and certifications that educate
technicians to support these industries. To meet the needs of growing regional
industries such as Forum Energy, Halliburton, Cleco, and Data Communications,
this project is designed to provide industry-recognized credentials to students
through the Certified Production Technicians curriculum and examinations. These
credentials will be combined with the hands-on experiences needed to be
successful in a competitive labor market. The project aims to prepare both
faculty and students for these examinations and to produce graduates who are
Certified Production Technicians. This certification has the potential to reduce
initial training time and hiring cost for employers. Graduates with Certified
Production Technician certification will have knowledge about the most recent
safety issues and solutions, making them more competitive for available jobs.
Rigorous evaluation methods, data, and feedback will inform continuous project
improvements and program enhancements through the implementation period.
Recruitment efforts will target students who are underrepresented in production
technician careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to prepare more
students to complete Certified Production Technician certification, as well as
to earn a Technical Diploma, Associate of Applied Science in Industrial
Electronics Technology, or Associate of Science in Industrial Technology. During
the project, the college will modify and offer revised manufacturing courses to
include Certified Production Technician curriculum; provide professional
development for faculty so that they can become Manufacturing Skill Standards
Council-authorized trainers; and hold advisory committee meetings with industry
partners to increase awareness of technician industry-based credentials and
receive continuous feedback of the implementation results. Manufacturing Skill
Standards Council-authorized faculty will prepare students for tests in four
areas: 1) Safety; 2) Quality Practices &amp; Measurement; 3) Manufacturing
Processes &amp; Production; and 4) Maintenance Awareness. The project will adapt
the best practices of other community colleges that have implemented similar
curriculum changes. In turn, the project will strive to serve as a model program
for other community college manufacturing programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.