* 1800491
* New Nonlinear Optical Approaches for Probing the Microscopic Nature of Liquids and Solutions
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* John Fourkas, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 477,535.00

When we think of a chemical reaction, we often envision a beaker filled with a
solution and sitting on a lab bench. Most chemistry takes place in solution,
where the liquid surrounding the reactants and products can affect a chemical
reaction in unexpected ways. While chemists have appreciated the complicated
nature of solutions for some time, they do not typically consider the
container's size to be a factor. This is true of the container is large.
However, when the container holding the solution is reduced to just a few
hundred nanometers across, or about 1/10,000 the diameter of a human hair,
interaction of molecules with the walls of the container alter the solution
properties, making the problem even more difficult. With support for the
Chemical Structure Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A) Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Professor John Fourkas at the University of Maryland-College Park
is developing new experimental and simulation methods for characterizing
solutions, both in large containers, and under nanoconfinement. Insights gained
from the project could advance our fundamental understanding of solutions, as
well as enable more accurate measurements, both of which could have broad
implications for range of technologies such as chemical separations,
lubrication, oil recovery, and catalysis. The project also provides
interdisciplinary training of the next generation of scientists, and outreach
activities are fostering public appreciation of scientific exploration and
discovery. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;New nonlinear optical spectroscopic approaches
are being pursued to address important outstanding problems in liquids and
solutions. Working with his students, Professor Fourkas is combining Optical
Kerr effect (OKE) spectroscopy with molecular simulations to develop a general
approach for measuring the intrinsic density of liquids in nanoconfined
environments, which is a crucial property in determining the behavior of a
liquid, as well as to study hydrogen bonding interactions between solvents and
silica surfaces. The project is also pursuing substantially improved
measurements of the high-intensity optical absorption properties of solutions of
strongly absorbing molecules and nanomaterials. A new class of methods, 2-beam
action (2-BA) spectroscopies, is being developed to make improved measurements
of multiphoton absorption cross sections. 2-BA spectroscopies allow for the
detailed and accurate characterization of the photophysics of multiphoton
fluorophores, and set the stage for the application of analogous techniques to a
broad range of other processes that involve nonlinear
absorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.