* 1800558
* RAPID: Preservation of the Cayo Santiago macaque colony and post-storm behavioral and biological data in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria
* SBE,BCS
* 10/15/2017,11/30/2022
* Susan Anton, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 11/30/2022
* USD 199,080.00

Extreme and unexpected environmental changes have posed both risks and
opportunities for humans and our close primate relatives, in both evolutionary
and modern contexts. This RAPID award will support stabilization efforts and
data collection in the aftermath of Hurricane Maria from the island of Cayo
Santiago, Puerto Rico and the free-ranging monkey groups that live there. This
project preserves important short-term data during a critical, immediate post-
storm period when vegetation and water are limited, landscapes have been
changed, but marine resources are more abundant. These data will allow the
testing of several hypotheses regarding severe environmental change on behavior
and biology. The monkey colony has been well-studied for 79 years, and pre-storm
data integrating behavior, genetics and morphology are abundant. These data have
been foundational for advances in biological anthropology, primate ecology,
cognitive science, and related medical fields. Importantly, this RAPID will
support preservation of the Cayo Santiago macaques themselves, by repairing the
island water cisterns and feeding corrals. This scientifically necessary
infrastructural support provides societal benefits by creating a context in
which Cayo staff and local student researchers, all of whom are under-
represented minorities, can continue their work. Public access to the research
results will be provided through partnership with an NSF-funded science
mentoring program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key to understanding, modeling and
mitigating the influence of severe change on humans and nonhuman primates is the
combination of quality pre-event data, immediate post-event data, and long-term
follow up data. The investigators will pursue several key research questions
related to modeling the influence of severe environmental and dietary
perturbation on individual plasticity and survival. These questions provide key
information for studies in the deep past (human evolution) as well as
prospective modelling for better outcomes in future events. Hurricane Maria
offers scientific opportunities to test the effect of severe environmental
change on behaviors and bodies, precisely because Cayo Santiago has been a rich
and foundational resource for long term behavioral study. Primate populations of
precise known lineage (pedigree) are rare, and the Cayo Santiago macaques are
unique in being free-ranging populations with a long documented history and rich
behavioral, genetic and anatomical research programs. The PIs will collect data
(resource surveys &amp; isotopic baseline values, animal uptake values) that
allow evaluation of post-storm behavior and the consequences of the forced
dietary change (from reliance in the first post-storm periods on washed-in
marine resources, to greater vegetation and provisioning) with direct relevance
to hypotheses about human evolution. Through daily census and observation data,
they will assess survival and positioning of social groups and response to
shifting landscapes (including passage of the submerged isthmus between
islands). These data will add insight to future models of the effects of
environmental degradation. The ability to collect these data, as well as ongoing
and future long-term studies, requires the survival of the colony. Without the
immediate interventions supported here, the comparative science is impossible,
the survivors will likely die and the long-term scientific advances that build
from them will be terminated.