* 1800669
* Houston Summer School on Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Andrei Torok, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2020
* USD 40,000.00

This award provides funding to help defray the expenses of participants in the
workshop ``Houston Summer School on Dynamical Systems'' (HSSDY) for graduate
students in late May or early June 2018. The 2018 HSSDY workshop will be held at
the University of Houston. The 2018 HSSDY workshop will bring together roughly
40 graduate students from institutions across the country, who will attend the
9-day event, along with 10-15 exceptional undergraduates, who will arrive
several days earlier and will receive a series of background lectures giving
them some of the tools they need in order to attend the main event. Additional
information about the conference can be found on the website
https://www.math.uh.edu/dynamics/school/school2018/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
HSSDY was funded by NSF from 2013 to 2017. The 2018 HSSDY workshop will continue
the tradition of past workshops. The goal of the 2018 HSSDY workshop will
introduce students both fundamental techniques and recent progress in dynamical
systems. Moreover, the 2018 HSSDY workshop will introduce students the
interrelationship between dynamical systems and other areas of mathematics and
physics, including number theory, probability theory, statistical mechanics, and
quantum information theory. Each lecturer in the 2018 HSSDY workshop will give
students an appropriate bird's-eye view of the area in which he/she is
working.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.