* 1800965
* New Approach to Building a Workforce Pipeline for Electro-mechanical Technician Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Pamela Mazur, Northeast Wisconsin Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 04/30/2023
* USD 311,689.00

In Northeast Wisconsin, the demand for skilled electro-mechanical technicians
continues to exceed the supply of qualified applicants. This project builds a
collaboration between Northeast Wisconsin Technical College, the Northeast
Wisconsin Manufacturing Alliance, and local industry to meet the regional need
for electro-mechanical technicians. These partners work together to design and
implement strategies that can interest current entry-level workers in pursuing
an Industrial Maintenance Certificate. This certificate is the first step toward
an Electro-Mechanical Associate Degree, but does not require the level of
mathematics needed in later courses in the curriculum. To prepare certificate
students for success in the associate degree courses, this project aims to
interweave math lessons into the lab portion of the certificate courses. In this
way, the project expects that students will learn math concepts at the beginning
of the career pathway, and will develop the confidence and math comprehension
needed to succeed in the associate degree
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Activities will include development of curriculum
and educational materials to contextualize math and student success skills
within the program courses. The project will support the laboratory needs of
rural students by providing equipment upgrades. By the end of three years, it is
expected that the project will benefit at least 60 entry-level adults, five
college faculty, and multiple regional industry employers. This project will use
multiple platforms to disseminate the practices and knowledge gained by the
project to other regions. The project will specifically study how technical
colleges and industry partners work together to encourage enrollment in an
educational pathway to create a career pipeline. This research will add to the
current body of knowledge surrounding industry engagement in education and
barriers to returning adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.