* 1800732
* Research Initiation Award: Determining the Role of Cytoskeletal Proteins in the Fibrillation of Amyloid-beta Peptides in the presence of Tryptamines and Flavones
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Pradip Biswas, Tougaloo College
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 03/31/2022
* USD 299,294.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in immersive research experiences. The award to
Tougaloo College has the potential to broader impacts in a number of areas. This
project will support active research-based laboratory programs by assisting in
the development a molecular dynamics simulation lab, thereby enhancing the
research infrastructure of the institution and expanding research opportunities
for students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study is to understand the
structure and interactive dynamics of peptides and proteins which are
responsible for dementia. The project integrates experimental and computational
studies to understand the chaperone activities of the cytoskeletal proteins
tubulin and actin on the aggregation of amyloid beta (Abeta) peptides, which
compose the main component of neurodegenerative plaques in Alzheimer disease
(AD). The proposed research will be performed with two distinct aims, which are
to determine the link between the structural integrity of cytoskeletal proteins
(tubulin and actin) and Abeta aggregation, and understanding the folding
processes of full-length Abeta (1-42) and its smaller counterparts in the
presence of mono and dihydroxyflavones as well as hydroxyl and methoxyl
derivatives of tryptamine (serotonin and melatonin,
respectively).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.