* 1800243
* Activated and nonlinear kinetics in biomolecules and interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Dmitry Matyushov, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 03/31/2022
* USD 458,873.00

Dimitry Matyushov of Arizona State University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division of
Chemistry for theoretical and computational studies of proteins. Proteins
provide the main building material of cells and multicellular organisms. In
addition, protein enzymes are working horses of the cell catalyzing all chemical
reactions required for life. All energy of life is produced and stored by moving
electrons in protons across the cellular membrane, a function performed by
membrane-bound proteins. At the same time, 80% of the cell's volume is water,
which mostly exists in its interfacial form surrounding proteins and lipids of
membranes. How proteins and interfacial water, the "matrix of life", couple in
their function is still largely a mystery requiring both theoretical and
experimental studies. The set of questions, addressed by this project, touches
on the deepest problems of energy efficiency of life, its physiological energy
flow, and the fundamental principles of work produced by non-equilibrium
molecular systems. Professor Matyushov and his research group are actively
engaged in an outreach, research and education program involving local high
school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This theoretical project,
which is deeply connected to experimental studies, suggests that proteins are
fundamentally non-equilibrium systems in which the time-scales of protein
function are often shorter than the time-scales of equilibration achieved
through conformational dynamics. This non-equilibrium nature of proteins
requires two temperatures: the configurational temperature of the non-
equilibrium protein and the standard thermodynamic temperature of the
surrounding bath. Computational studies performed in the previous funding cycle
have shown that proteins are up to three times "hotter"than water. A direct
consequence of this perspective is a strong depression of the reaction
activation barrier. The catalytic action of the enzyme is very much a function
of its non-equilibrium state, which ages to the ?dead state? of the Gibbs
distribution due to conformational dynamics exploring the configuration space.
The aging process has to be terminated and the enzyme reset before this
equilibrium state is reached. The project connects enzymatic efficiency of redox
active proteins with the protein-water interfacial structure and glassy aging
dynamics of collective variables linked to the activated barrier crossing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the following practical
questions: (a) Configurational temperature of redox proteins and the dynamics of
equilibration with the thermal bath. (b) Theories and simulations of interfacial
susceptibility of water and its distinction from water in the bulk. This problem
connects to a number of experimental techniques such as depolarized light
scattering, THz absorption, dielectric spectroscopy, and protein
dielectrophoresis. (c) A theory of non-linear dielectric response of solutions
applied to testing of interfaces. Collaborative initiatives as a part of the
project aim at linking theory to experiment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.