* 1800589
* CyberWatch West Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Stephen Miller, Whatcom Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 720,000.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a critical challenge.
Business, industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can
prevent, detect, and investigate cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-
threats has created a need for many more workers who have cybersecurity
knowledge and skills. To address this national challenge in education and
workforce development, the CyberWatch West Resource Center will assist colleges
around the nation with the development and improvement of educational programs
in cybersecurity. This Advanced Technological Education (ATE) resource center
will build on the foundation that has been laid by the CyberWatch West ATE
regional center (NSF Awards DUE-1104278, DUE-1361636, and DUE-1500375), the
Catalyzing Computing and Cybersecurity in Community Colleges (C5) project (NSF
Award DGE-1548315), and the National Security Agency/Department of Homeland
Security "Centers of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense National Resource
Center" (CNRC) at Whatcom Community College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CyberWatch
West Resource Center will support colleges that want to develop or enhance their
cybersecurity education programs and strengthen the cybersecurity workforce
through four interrelated efforts: (1) Expand participation in the Centers of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense National Resource Center program through
mentor-mentee training for two-year and four-year institutions. This work will
directly complement the NSA-funded CNRC at Whatcom Community College. (2)
Catalog and disseminate, through an online repository, resources that strengthen
cybersecurity courses and curricula in higher education, including instructional
modules developed under a previous NSF-funded project. (3) Expand
business/industry-academic partnerships nationwide and build regional
cybersecurity communities that engage business/industry with cybersecurity
faculty and students. (4) Disseminate resources that aid faculty mentoring and
professional development, and student development. Through these efforts, the
center aims to: promote the standardization of cybersecurity content in college
programs; build awareness of community college cybersecurity programs and the
qualifications of students who earn an associate degree or certificate in a
community college program; address the national need for cybersecurity workers
across all sectors, including government, defense, healthcare, and commerce;
diversify the talent pool from which employers can draw their cybersecurity
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.