* 1800585
* Probing catalyst-support interactions via experiment and theory
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Svitlana Pylypenko, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 448,748.00

Industrial catalysts often use precious metal nanoparticles on supporting
surfaces to speed up a wide range of chemical reactions that are important in
the chemical industry. Carbon-based materials that contains small amounts of
nitrogen represent a class of materials for catalyst supports that offer an
opportunity to improve the performance of current nanoparticle catalysts.
Scientists do not yet understand the fundamental interactions between the
nanoparticle catalysts and these nitrogen-doped carbon supports. In this
project, the research groups of Dr. Svitlana Pylypenko and Dr. Shubham Vyas of
the Colorado School of Mines are using both targeted experiments and chemical
computations to improve the interaction between nanoparticle catalysts and these
nitrogen-doped carbon supports. Their results may produce less expensive and
more earth-abundant catalysts while improving the yield of the desired product
(no by-products). Drs. Pylypenko and Vyas are engaged in a multi-level outreach
and educational program that involves K-12 students and teachers, as well as
undergraduate and graduate researchers. Their recent developments blending
experimental and computational approaches are discussed during a distinctive
summer field session at the Colorado School of Mines. The insights gained by
this research may advance the improve the performance of a wide range of
catalytic applications that are vital to the chemical industry and domestic
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Pylypenko and Vyas are developing a fundamental
understanding of catalyst-support interactions by investigating nanoparticle
catalysts supported on nitrogen-doped carbons. Despite abundant reports of the
advantageous impact of nitrogen functional groups on catalyst nucleation,
stability, and, in some instances, catalytic activity, the underlying phenomena
associated with catalyst-support interactions for these systems has not yet been
elucidated - mainly due to the overall complexity of the system. The team is
using a synergistic approach that includes electronic structure calculations,
controlled synthesis with targeted composition and morphology, and advanced ex
situ and in situ characterization to decrease the cost of metal catalysts,
reduce national dependence on precious metals, and lower the environmental
impact associated with mining and processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.