* 1800266
* Chemical Dynamics of Polyatomic Molecules at Surfaces: New Insights into Complex Systems from State-Selected Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2022
* Arthur Utz, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 04/30/2022
* USD 533,483.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Arthur Utz from Tufts University is
using sophisticated laser and molecular beam techniques to study the reactions
of molecules on metal surfaces. Metal particles are commonly used as catalysts
in commercial chemical processes. They selectively convert reactants to the
desired product, reduce production of wasteful byproducts, increase reaction
rate, and lower energy requirements. Understanding how catalysts work is a key
step toward improving their performance. The problem is challenging, however,
due to the wide range of reactant energies, and the many different atomic
structures found on a working catalyst. To unravel this complexity, Professor
Utz and his students are preparing reactants with precise quantities of energy.
They then measure their reactivity on a series of surfaces containing well-
defined structures that resemble the features present on a working catalyst. The
work is providing a systematic and quantitative understanding of how reactant
energy, and surface structure, lead to catalytic activity. Insights gained from
the project could advance our ability to design and optimize catalysts, which
could have important benefits to society. The project is also training students
in advanced experimental methods and interfacial science, and it is providing
outreach activities that stimulate interest, and enrich the K-12 Science and
Technology curriculum at local schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on the energetics and dynamics of dissociative chemisorption to build a
mechanistic picture of catalytic activity. A key goal is to understand how
increasing the structural and chemical complexity of the gas phase reagent and
the surface affects reactivity. A supersonic molecular beam and infrared laser,
respectively, impart reactant molecules with a precisely defined kinetic and
internal energy. Metal surfaces are chosen to systematically introduce
structural features characteristic of working catalysts. Molecular beam
reflectivity and surface-sensitive spectroscopies quantify reaction probability
as a function of reagent's translational, vibrational, and rotational energies,
as well as the surface structure and temperature. In concert with collaborators'
electronic structure and reactive scattering calculations, the results paint a
detailed picture of the underlying processes that govern gas-surface reactivity
and reveal how reactivity patterns persist or change as complexity
increases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.