* 1800151
* Metal-Ligand and Metal-Metal Cooperativities as Design Principles for Base Metal Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Hairong Guan, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Hairong Guan of the University of Cincinnati is developing new catalysts for the
synthesis of organic molecules. Catalysis reactions play indispensable roles in
making new drugs and novel materials, reducing energy consumption, preventing
chemical waste, and utilizing renewable feedstocks. Precious metals such as
ruthenium, rhodium, palladium, iridium, and platinum are often used in catalytic
reactions. However, they are expensive, limited in supply, and difficult to
remove from the chemical products. To develop more sustainable syntheses,
efforts are being directed at using base metals, which include iron, cobalt,
nickel and copper, for catalysis. The difficulty is that catalysts derived from
these metals are usually less reactive and more prone to decomposition. In this
project, Dr. Guan is developing new catalysts featuring cooperativity between a
metal and a ligand, or cooperativity between two metals. With this strategy,
catalysts derived from inexpensive and abundant metals are more efficient and
robust, mimicking the reactivity of their precious metal analogs. Dr. Guan
develops research-based educational materials for an undergraduate laboratory
course focusing on catalysis. He also provides research opportunities to
students from groups that are underrepresented in the STEM fields, enhancing
student professional development through his collaborations with the local
chemical industry. This research enhances national welfare, by providing
sustainable innovation in advanced chemical manufacturing, renewable energy and
chemical industry.

Dr. Guan is developing new strategies to design base metal catalysts with
reactivity akin to the precious metal catalysts. Iron and copper complexes
supported by tridentate ligands capable of transferring protons are synthesized
and tested for catalytic hydrogenation of aldehydes, ketones, esters, amides,
and carbon dioxide (CO2). Heterobimetallic complexes of Fe-Cu or Fe-Zn are
prepared and used to catalyze reduction reactions under water-gas shift reaction
conditions. These reactions may be relevant to industry, for example
manufacturing of detergent alcohols. The catalysts may also have impact in the
areas of carbon dioxide conversion and energy storage. Mechanistic studies are
carried out for a better understanding of structure-reactivity relationships,
particularly the synergy between ligand and metal or between two metals. In
support of the broader impacts of the project, Dr. Guan is actively engaged in
programs focusing on providing research opportunities to underrepresented STEM
students including those at collaborating primarily undergraduate institutions
and community colleges. Through research-based teaching and collaborations with
local companies, Dr. Guan is assisting students to develop their creative and
critical thinking skills and facilitating their career development.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.