* 1800733
* Stochastic Differential Equations, Heat Kernel Analysis, and Random Matrix Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Todd Kemp, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2023
* USD 210,000.00

Random processes dominate our world: from the fluctuations of stock prices, to
the large-scale behavior of queueing systems in computer or biological networks,
to the core behavior of quantum systems. Most science and engineering problems
in part boil down to separating random noise from structure, or sometimes
utilizing random noise to amplify structure. One of the great triumphs of 20th
Century science was the development of many robust tools for understanding and
analyzing random noise in many kinds of systems. One such set of tools is
stochastic analysis, which presents a rigorous mathematical treatment of ideas
that first appeared in physics, adding random noise to the equations of state
that describe our world. These so-called stochastic differential equations have
playing a fundamental role in advancing our knowledge in many area: economics,
systems engineering, biological dynamics, and within mathematics, with
applications to fields like differential geometry and quantum information
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses questions relating
stochastic differential equations, heat kernel analysis, and random matrix
theory. The central theme is understanding how differential equations with some
randomness affect the evolution of eigenvalues of random matrices. These ideas
connect with geometry, since the flow of heat on Lie groups (groups of
continuous symmetries of geometric objects) can be characterized by such matrix
stochastic differential equations. Herein, ten research projects are proposed
which yield connections between these topics and applications to others.
Generally, these problems can be described as studying the large-dimension
asymptotic behavior of geometrically-motivated matrix-valued stochastic
differential equations. Of particular note are questions related to the fine
(edge) structure of Brownian motion on high dimensional Lie groups from the
classical compact families. The intended research, upon completion, will settle
several interesting open questions and present a major contribution both to the
theory of stochastic differential equations and random matrix
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.