* 1800376
* Investigations of Binary Transition Metal Oxide Electrocatalysts for the Oxygen Evolution Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Bruce Koel, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2021
* USD 459,719.00

Some energy conversion and storage technologies use chemical reactions driven by
electricity in a process known as electrocatalysis. Examples of these
technologies include new metal-air batteries, water splitting for hydrogen
evolution, and production of chemicals from the carbon dioxide (the byproduct of
burning fossil fuels). All of these technologies share a crucial chemical
reaction known as the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The efficiencies of these
technologies are often limited by the sluggish rate of the OER. In this project,
Dr. Bruce E. Koel of Princeton University is conducting experiments on iridium
(Ir) and cobalt (Co) based mixed oxide materials to develop a greater
fundamental understanding of the OER. This project may lead to the discovery of
novel electrocatalytic materials to enhance OER. Dr. Koel's research prepares
students for careers in high-tech and emerging industries that value the ability
to solve complex problems and that utilize sophisticated instrumentation.
Undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students are involved in the research
and work together to conduct experiments, construct theoretical models, provide
physical insight, and develop new explanations. The importance of this research
for addressing the energy needs of the planet enhances student awareness of the
impact of their work on society. This research prepares students for careers in
academia, national laboratories, and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With support
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry and Catalysis
and Biocatalysis Program in the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environment and Transport Systems, Dr. Koel is conducting experiments on Ir and
Co based mixed oxide electrocatalysts that are providing a greater fundamental
understanding of OER electrocatalysis. Establishing clear relationships between
atomic level surface properties and performance of active electrodes provides a
better understanding of electrocatalysts for OER and provides rational
strategies for improving OER kinetics. Active structures/motifs are identified
during OER by operando Raman spectroscopy and key aspects of the water oxidation
mechanism are revealed by identification of surface species during OER by
operando Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy along with fundamental surface
science experiments. Iridium based oxide catalysts are studied with the prospect
of forming superior OER catalysts. The researcher also seek to reduce the
loading of the expensive Ir metal and provide new materials for the development
of cost-effective, high performance, stable OER catalysts. Cobalt based oxide
catalysts are investigated because of their OER performance under alkaline
conditions. They have potential for increasing catalyst activity and possibly
lowering the pH range of operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.