* 1800929
* Cybersecurity Education for Advanced Manufacturing Organizations
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2019,07/31/2024
* William Chaplin, Northwest State Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 488,426.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can detect,
investigate, and prevent cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have specific knowledge and skills to
meet these workforce demands. The Ohio Cyber Range is a cloud-based, web-
accessible environment where cybersecurity students, faculty, and incumbent
workers can access educational materials and conduct lab exercises. It provides
a virtual setting that simulates the information technology (IT) infrastructure
found in a business workplace. Using this virtual cybersecurity training ground,
students and faculty can explore real-world scenarios involving networks that
would be expensive or impractical to set up in physical lab environments. This
project will develop eight to ten cybersecurity training scenarios that focus on
specific cybersecurity situations within advanced manufacturing. These scenarios
will be deployed on the Ohio Cyber Range, along with associated guides, to
facilitate wide usage. The scenarios will also be incorporated into IT courses
at Northwest State Community College. The scenarios, the learning objectives,
and the related materials will be developed with the advice of engineers and IT
professionals from local manufacturing companies. Students and incumbent workers
who use the scenarios around the state will be better prepared to meet the
cybersecurity needs of Ohio employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
develop training scenarios focusing on topics ranging from basic (e.g., basic
networking, subnetting, and enumerating a network) to advanced (e.g.,
attacking/defending Human Machine Interface [HMI] passwords, attacking/defending
Programmable Logic Controller [PLC] register values). Each scenario will have a
detailed document that describes the background, instructions, tasks, goals, and
learning objectives for the learning exercise associated with the scenario. An
independent subject matter expert will review each scenario to ensure that it
meets the stated learning objectives and is aligned with national and industry
standards. Faculty at Northwest State Community College will incorporate
scenarios into several courses, including Networking Fundamentals, Security
Auditing, and Programmable Logic Controllers. The project team will offer
workshops to faculty from colleges in Ohio and surrounding states to help them
effectively add the scenarios to their own courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program, which
focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that
drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.