* 1800559
* Removing the Barriers to the Calculation of Activation Energies, Activation Volumes, and Mechanistic Insight for Chemical Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Ward Thompson, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 456,741.00

Ward Thompson of the University of Kansas is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry to develop methods for predicting the temperature dependence of
dynamics in chemical systems. Changing such external properties is a key way to
control chemistry in a laboratory or industrial setting. Thus, it is important
to understand how these variables affect the timescales of the important motions
involved in the chemistry. This knowledge also provides insight into the
molecular-level motions that determine the timescale. The methods developed in
this project, for example, allow the direct calculation of the temperature
dependence of any timescale (such as the time for a chemical reaction to take
place) from simulations at a single temperature. At the same time, they give
information about the molecular interactions that influence the temperature
dependence. Currently, no other method can provide such information. In addition
to the behavior with temperature, the effect of other properties such as
pressure or system composition may be calculated. While the approaches apply to
any chemical system, the Thompson group is focusing on dynamics in liquids. The
award also supports an outreach program for elementary school students to
increase their interest in and motivation for science. It is designed to let the
students see what scientists do and encourage them to view themselves as
scientists through activities and interactions with graduate students and
faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed fall into three categories:
1) Those enabling the calculation of activation energies for reactions and other
dynamical processes from simulations at a single temperature. These approaches
provide otherwise unattainable information: the contributions of different
interactions to the activation energy. 2) Those evaluating changes in dynamical
timescales with physical conditions other than temperature, such as pressure or
chemical potential. This makes quantities like the activation volume available
from simulations at a single pressure. 3) Approaches for calculating derivatives
of rate constants and other dynamical timescales with respect to components of
the underlying Hamiltonian, such as masses or potential parameters, to gain
insight into mechanisms, force fields, and kinetic isotope
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.