* 1800135
* Enhancement of Air Cavities for Ship Drag Reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Konstantin Matveev, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Marine vessels are the dominant transportation means in the global trade of
goods, as well as a major consumer of fossil fuels. Reducing the hydrodynamic
resistance of ships can substantially decrease energy consumption and emissions.
A promising technique for drag reduction in water involves air-ventilated
cavities formed on the underwater portion of surface ship hulls. These cavities
can decrease the hull wetted area and therefore ship drag. However, it is
difficult to create and sustain stable large-area air cavities on real ship
hulls in broad operational conditions. The proposed research will investigate
the application of hydrodynamic actuators for enhancing air-ventilated cavities
and maintaining their effectiveness in adverse regimes. Educational activities
of this program will result in improving engineering curriculum, developing a
new course on drag reduction and flow control, involving undergraduate students
in research, and organizing workshops for K-12 summer camps.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Air-ventilated cavities can be formed by supplying air
into water flow around completely or partially immersed solid objects.
Characteristics of the flow with air cavities restricted by solid surfaces
depend on many factors, including hull geometry, speed, gravity, air supply, and
fluid properties. Waves inside the cavities and shedding of air pockets from the
cavities add to this complexity. The drag reduction potential of the air
cavities is often compromised by non-optimal operating conditions, resulting in
short or unstable cavities. The influence of compact actuators on the air-cavity
properties and hull resistance will be investigated in a range of important
factors. Promising actuator candidates include interceptors, hydrofoils,
morphing surfaces, and variable air supply. The investigation will involve
experimental studies with model-scale hulls and computational simulations with
the state-of-the-art modeling tools. The focus of these efforts will be on
understanding and controlling the conditions that produce efficient flow
regimes, resulting in formation of stable large-area cavities at small air
supply rates. The results will guide the development of practical air-cavity
drag reduction systems and will advance knowledge on multi-phase flows and flow
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.