* 1800165
* Research Initiation Award:  Novel Imidazole Compounds to Investigate the Unfolded Protein Response (UPR)
* EDU,EES
* 04/15/2018,09/30/2020
* Jacqueline Smith, Bowie State University
* Standard Grant
* Emanuel WAddell
* 09/30/2020
* USD 150,000.00

Catalyst Projects provide support for Historically Black Colleges and
Universities to work towards establishing research capacity of faculty to
strengthen science, technology, engineering and mathematics undergraduate
education and research. It is expected that the award will further the faculty
member's research capability, improve research and teaching at the institution,
and involve undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to Bowie
State University has potential to broader impact in a number of areas. This
proposal aims to synthesize a library of compounds with subtle structural
changes to determine how a non-functional binding site on a protein can affect
the protein?s function. Gaining an understanding how small molecule affect this
protein can help scientists understand and control cell death. Undergraduate
students will gain research experience in organic synthesis and biochemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The cell has many adaptive mechanisms used for the
cellular repair during endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress. If proteostasis is not
re-established, unfolded proteins are tagged for clearance through the
ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS). Aberrant cells have been shown to exploit
these prosurvival mechanisms as a way to circumvent cell death. However
proteasome disruption leads to cell death. Valosin-containing protein (VCP) is a
key component of the UPS which may be targeted to investigate its role in
proteostasis. Small molecule heterocycles such as imidazoles have the potential
to allosterically bind to VCP to disrupt the UPS in rogue cells. The utilization
of a two-step synthesis of a library of novel imidazole compounds through
microwave-assisted multicomponent reactions will allow a variety of imidazole
compounds to be rapidly synthesized. Ultimately these compounds will be used to
identify the structural features which are key for allosteric binding to
VCP.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.