* 1800317
* AF: Small: New Directions in Learning Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2017,05/31/2019
* Avrim Blum, Toyota Technological Institute at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 05/31/2019
* USD 98,041.00

This project is to develop core principles and technologies for systems that
learn from observation and experience in order to better help their users. While
there is already a significant body of work in the area of machine learning,
today's interconnected world provides both new challenges and new opportunities
that classic methods are not able to address or take advantage of. This project
has three main thrusts. The first involves development of methods that can
extract useful information from auxiliary sources in addition to traditional
labeled data. This includes methods for quickly learning multiple related tasks
by taking advantage of ways in which they relate to each other. The second
involves approaches for learning about what different users or agents want by
observing the results of their interactions. Finally, the third thrust involves
development of new rigorous methods for quickly estimating the amount of
resources that would be needed to solve a given learning task. Broader impacts
of the project include the training of a diverse set of graduate students,
improving undergraduate curricula with respect to machine learning technology,
and developing a new book for advanced undergraduates on algorithms and analysis
for data science.

More specifically, the first main thrust of this work involves a combination of
unsupervised, semi-supervised, and multi-task learning. This work will
investigate problems of estimating error rates from unlabeled data, unifying co-
training and topic models, learning multiple related tasks from limited
supervision, and learning new representations of data using tools from high-
dimensional geometry. The second main thrust will focus on reconstructing
estimates of agent utilities from observing the outcomes of economic mechanisms
such as combinatorial auctions. This thrust also includes problems of learning
the rules of unknown mechanisms from experimentation. Finally, the last thrust
focuses on development of the theory of property testing for machine learning
problems, with the goal of quickly estimating natural formal measures of
complexity of a given learning task.