* 1800348
* Reduced Scaling Many-Body Electronic Structure Methods: Improved Accuracy and Precision
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Edward Valeev, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Edward Valeev of Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University is
supported by an award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods
Program in the Chemistry Division to develop efficient and accurate methods for
studying the electronic properties of large molecules, crystalline solids, and
interfaces. It is possible to predict the properties of matter around us by
applying the laws of quantum mechanics to describe the behavior of electrons in
atoms, molecules, and solids. Unfortunately, exact computational and theoretical
modeling of electron behavior in systems with more than a few atoms is beyond
the ability of even the most powerful supercomputers currently available due to
the steep increase of computational cost with the number of electrons. Valeev
and co-workers are developing methods that reduce the computational cost of
accurate calculations by many orders of magnitude and make predictive
simulations possible for systems with thousands of atoms. Such advances are
crucial for our ability to design molecules and materials for particular
functions, such as creating new catalysts for converting solar light into fuel.
The methods developed are being included in widely-used software packages that
may enhance research capabilities for national and international
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the development of
many-body electronic structure methods (such as the diagrammatic perturbation
theory and coupled-cluster) with reduced scaling with respect to system size (by
exploiting low-rank and sparse structure of the operators and states) and
precision (by building in the correct analytic structure via explicit
correlation). This development builds upon recent advances by Valeev and co-
workers that demonstrated that complete basis set coupled-cluster with singles,
doubles, and perturbative triples calculations could be performed on closed-
shell molecules with more than a thousand atoms. This project extends the
approach to the treatment of molecules with open-shell electronic states, to
manifolds of electronic states, and to electronic states of crystalline solids.
The efficiency of the rank compression is being improved by tailoring
representations to the particular electronic structure model. Lastly, the
project applies these ideas to the high-order coupled-cluster models to extend
their applicability to systems with 30-50 atoms. In addition to making these
codes available through a widely-used software package, the work being done
provides excellent training for graduate students and postdoctoral
fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.