* 1800423
* Combinatorics and Asymptotics of Structure Constants from Representation Theory and Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2019
* USD 98,707.00

Symmetries and patterns capture the essence of our complex world and give the
abstraction necessary to study it with algebraic and discrete methods. As
objects change and interact, so do the inherent symmetries. How do symmetries
combine, restrict, project or transform into other symmetries? How do we
decompose a complex system of irreducible components? In general we want to
describe this interaction quantitatively -- how many components of each type are
contained in another bigger symmetry structure. While the computational
complexity of the problem in general hints that no "closed-form" answer would
exist, it is the goal of this project to find these numbers approximately and
see how a typical structure looks like. These problems appear in many disguises,
and lie at the intersection of combinatorics, algebra, representation theory,
probability and statistical mechanics, and computational complexity theory.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the PI aims to solve problems in algebraic
combinatorics involving "structure constants" and Young tableaux. Structure
constants are generally defined as the multiplicities of irreducible symmetric
or general linear group representations in the decomposition of tensor products
or compositions, or, more generally, the nonnegtive integral coefficients in the
decomposition of various symmetric functions in certain bases. The PI aims to
determine the behavior of such constants -- asymptotics, positivity, relation to
each other, combinatorial interpretation. Among the flagship problems and
ultimate goals are: combinatorial interpretation for the Kronecker and plethysm
coefficients, Foulkes' conjecture on the relative order of plethysm
coefficients, asymptotics of Littlewood-Richardson and Kronecker coefficients,
the asymptotic number of skew (semi)Standard Young tableaux in various growth
regimes for the parameters, limit behavior of lozenge tilings of "skew"
(general, nontrapezoidal) domains, inequalities of multiplicities in Geometric
complexity Theory leading to obstructions distinguishing between polynomials,
positivity of e-expansions for q-analogues of chromatic symmetric functions and
Schur positivity for LLT polynomials. The methods range from extension of
existing approaches in the PI's work, to further combination with methods from
statistical mechanics like the variational principle, enumeration via large
deviations, algebro-geometric interpretations, etc.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.