* 1800108
* QLC: Goblet-Shaped, Lanthanide-Based Molecular Spin Valves
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Claire Besson, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 310,466.00

The goal of this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp;
Mechanism B Program of the Chemistry Division, is to demonstrate the storage
and/or processing of quantum information in a single goblet-shaped magnetic
molecule deposited on a surface and controlled electrically. Quantum information
processing could lead to quantum computers, which could be more powerful than
the current computers. Quantum information processing is also important in
secure communication and precision measurement. Samples resulting from this
research will be widely distributed to the spintronics community to support the
expansion of the fields of molecular spintronics and molecule-based quantum
computing. Students from diverse backgrounds, from high-school to PhD candidate
level, will be involved in the project, giving them the opportunity to acquire
competences not only in chemistry but also in material science and physics. They
will be well prepared to enter the workforce on quantum computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, f-block elements, with their strong magnetic
anisotropy, are excellent spin quantum bit candidates. The molecules designed
for this project take the shape of a goblet, with a tricyclopentadienyl bowl
holding a lanthanoid ion, a stem of tunable length and rigidity and an aromatic
foot ensuring a strong interaction with a metallic surface. Taking advantage of
this modular architecture, an extensive investigation of the structure-
properties relationship will be conducted from the bulk state down to the single
molecule level. The decoupling of the magnetic center from the underlying
surface is expected to protect its magnetic characteristics and make them
accessible to a top electrode or the tip of a scanning tunneling microscope.
This type of setup opens the door to the realization of a single molecule spin
filter or, on a ferromagnetic surface, a molecular spin valve, which paves the
way to the construction of electrically addressable single molecule spin quantum
bits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.