* 1800650
* EAGER: A Novel Approach to Achieve Real-time Wireless Network Optimization
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2018,09/30/2020
* Wenjing Lou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2020
* USD 300,000.00

Resource optimization is a fundamental problem in wireless network research. As
wireless technologies become increasingly sophisticated, resource optimization
problems also become more complex. For example, a major technical challenge in
the design of current and future cellular networks is to solve scheduling
problems involving a large number of resource units in spectral and temporal
domains. Although some schedulers have been proposed to achieve optimal (or
near-optimal) objectives, they typically cannot be used in the field due to
excessive computation time. Instead, operators have to adopt simple schedulers
and settle for performance far from optimal. This goal of this EAGER project is
to tackle this fundamental problem by exploring a novel approach that could make
real-time resource optimization possible. By real time, we mean that a solution
to the resource optimization problem can be found in a time resolution that can
be readily used in the field. Our approach is to decompose a complex resource
optimization problem into a large number of extremely simple subproblems that
can be matched precisely into a given Graphical Processing Unit (GPU) computing
platform. By solving each small subproblem independently and all the sub-
problems in parallel, it is possible to meet the stringent timing requirement
for real-time scheduling. The proposed idea, if successful, has the potential to
revolutionize how resource optimization is performed in the field. The proposed
research activities will have a profound impact on developing new educational
curricula and broadening participation in computing from underrepresented
groups. New teaching materials will be developed from this research and will be
used in classrooms at Virginia Tech and other universities. Special efforts to
broaden participation in computing by female and underrepresented students will
be made through our Wireless@VT education and research programs. Finally, the
two investigators will continue their efforts to support N2 Women events at a
networking conference to nurture female junior researchers to become leaders in
the networking community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some major technical challenges
must be carefully addressed before we can reap the benefits of our proposed
idea. In this project, the investigators plan to explore the following two
thrust areas as proof-of-concept: (i) how to optimally decompose and map a
resource optimization problem into a given state-of-the-art GPU platform so that
the solution can be obtained in real time; (ii) how to apply the methodology for
real-time optimal scheduling for next generation cellular networks as well as
other (non-cellular) wireless networks. The proposed approach is
interdisciplinary and involves exploring new methods and tools from the fields
of computing (GPU) and optimization (decomposition) to address fundamental
problems in wireless networks. Validation of the proposed ideas will be carried
out on off-the-shelf low-cost GPU platform. Once the proposed idea is proven to
be valid, we expect to see a new and practical methodology to achieve real-time
resource optimization and significant performance improvement in the real
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.