* 1800411
* Utility and Application of Unsaturated Acylammonium Salts in Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Daniel Romo, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2022
* USD 503,790.00

With this award, funded by the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry
Division, Prof. Daniel Romo of Baylor University is developing "cascade"
reactions that occur sequentially and rapidly build up structural complexity in
organic molecules. As co-PI, Professor Dean Tanillo of the University of
California, Davis, is studying the mechanistic details that provide for
selectivity in the reactions developed in the Romo lab. Modern day organic
synthesis research seeks to develop reaction processes that generate multiple
carbon-carbon, carbon-oxygen, and carbon-nitrogen bonds in a single operation,
and with control of the 3-dimensionnal arrangement of atoms around carbon. This
approach significantly increases the efficiency of the synthesis of a variety of
molecules, including bioactive natural products and compounds of pharmaceutical
interest, and provides access to molecular architectures not previously
accessible. In this project, Dr. Romo is utilizing small organic molecules that
serve as catalysts to activate substrates leading to initiation of various types
of bond constructions with high selectivity. He is exploring a new activation
mode that is already proving broadly useful for the development of novel cascade
reactions, and greatly impacting efficiency in organic synthesis. Undergraduates
working in the research group and in particular those associated with the
"Baylor Undergraduate MiniPharma Program" that he initiated, are gaining
teamwork and leadership experience, a taste of various aspects of chemical
research relevant to the pharmaceutical industry, new research skills, and
experience with state-of-the-art equipment, ultimately contributing to
publishable research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prof. Romo is pursuing a novel and
broad design principle for organic synthesis based on readily generated chiral
unsaturated acylammonium salts, significantly impacting the growing field of
scalable, asymmetric organocatalysis. The organocascade processes he is studying
include tandem reactions typically initiated by Michael additions (with carbon,
nitrogen, and sulfur nucleophiles) that lead to highly practical,
enantioselective synthetic routes to carbocycles and heterocycles commonly found
in bioactive natural products and pharmaceuticals. Given the importance for
organocascade catalysis, mechanistic studies of the various unsaturated
acylammonium salt intermediates accessed in this research will be undertaken in
collaboration with Prof. Tantillo. These collaborative studies are providing a
greater understanding of the mode of activation and enantioselectivity observed
with these chiral intermediates. The utility of the developed synthetic methods
is being demonstrated by targeting natural products bearing beta-lactones. These
in turn serve as proteomics probes with appropriate reporter tags for
fundamental studies at the chemistry/biology interface with Prof. Stephan Sieber
(Tech Univ of Munich, Germany). The Baylor Undergraduate MiniPharma Program
enables undergraduates to get a 'taste' of the pharmaceutical industry by
designing, synthesizing, and testing novel derivatives toward a common goal of
identifying lead compounds for potential cancer treatment, including
glioblastoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.