* 1800239
* Artificial Glycosidases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* James Cowan, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tong Ren
* 06/30/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Carbohydrates are among nature's most abundant biomolecules, with roles ranging
from structural biopolymers to a multitude of cellular processes. Biomass is a
potential source of renewable energy and a source of value-added small molecule
products, but requires molecular catalysts capable of efficiently degrading
these materials in ways that are more energy efficient and environmentally
friendly. Such catalysts (glycosidases) have broad application in the
pharmaceutical and food technology industries, as well as in the production of
valuable fuel products. Dr. Cowan's research program provides training in a
diverse and multidisciplinary array of experimental tools and techniques in
areas of chemical, biological, and physical sciences. While the questions being
addressed are primarily curiosity-driven, the research has broader relevance to
areas of bimolecular recognition and catalysis. The most significant impact of
any research endeavor is the development of intellectual capital that in turn is
reinvested in society and the scientific work force of the future. To that end,
Dr. Cowan has developed internship and training opportunities with local biotech
businesses, and personally mentors K-12 and undergraduate trainees. Dr. Cowan is
actively engaged in outreach activities that build upon his research to promote
engagement of students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include summer research internships
in Dr. Cowan's laboratory, are directed at improving the education of promising
high school seniors and women students and encouraging their interest in STEM
careers, as well outreach to local elementary schools and Cub Scout dens and
packs.

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Cowan, of The Ohio State University, is developing artificial glycosidases that
promote recognition and selective cleavage of complex oligosaccharides and
carbohydrates. This work develops metallopeptides as glycosidase catalysts, and
seeks a fundamental understanding of the structural basis for peptide-saccharide
recognition that will guide the design of selective sugar-targeting catalysts.
By use of nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy as a tool to determine
structure, and isothermal titration calorimetry and surface plasmon resonance to
evaluate binding energetics, Dr. Cowan and his coworkers are elucidating the
role of specific amino acids in promoting sugar recognition and binding. Liquid
chromatography and a variety of mass spectrometric methods are used to
characterize catalyst reactivity, reaction products, and mechanism of action.
Dr. Cowan's research program is developing catalysts for selective cleavage of
oligo and polysaccharides, both as chemical tools for biochemical study, and for
practical application in biomass degradation. His laboratory provides training
in a diverse and multidisciplinary array of experimental tools and techniques in
areas of chemical, biological, and physical science, including analytical
reasoning. While the questions being addressed are primarily curiosity-driven,
it is reasonable to expect that a fuller understanding of carbohydrate
recognition and efficient catalytic degradation of stable sugar molecules has
broader relevance to areas of bimolecular recognition and catalysis. The most
significant impact of any research endeavor is the development of intellectual
capital that in turn is reinvested in society and the scientific work force of
the future. To that end, Dr. Cowan has developed internship and training
opportunities with local biotech businesses, and personally mentors K-12 and
undergraduate trainees. Dr. Cowan is actively engaged in outreach activities
that build upon his research to promote engagement of students in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities,
which include summer research internships in Dr. Cowan?s laboratory, are
directed at improving the education of promising high school seniors and women
students and encouraging their interest in STEM careers, as well outreach to
local elementary schools and Cub Scout dens and packs.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.