* 1800612
* Manufacturing Experiential Advancement Readiness Network Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Ronald Zitek, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 549,730.00

The manufacturing workforce is one of the largest sectors in the nation's
workforce. In the state of Ohio, employment in industries such as food
manufacturing and computer and electronic product manufacturing are expected to
continue to grow. In this project, Columbus State Community College will
collaborate with Lorain County Community College, other educational
institutions, as well as state and industry partners to address this growing
need. The project will build a statewide network to advance experiential work-
based learning programs and recruitment for the advanced manufacturing field.
The work-based learning model will focus on students applying their skills in a
specific occupation. The network will promote best practices for this model and
support faculty in using the principles of work-based learning at community
colleges. The project will enhance the preparation of students, increase the
number of skilled technicians, and help strengthen the regional
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will aim to increase the supply of
qualified advanced manufacturing technicians by creating new opportunities for
work-based learning and outreach to students through a collaborative, structured
statewide network. Three objectives will guide the work of the project. First,
the project team will create a work-based learning online platform to collect
and share best practices and resources, and provide promotional tools for
companies, educators, and students. Second, the team will form a statewide
network for community colleges and an industry leadership team for developing
public-private partnerships. Third, the principal investigators will develop an
outreach and recruitment strategy that community colleges can utilize to
increase the number of students entering advanced manufacturing career pathways.
The online platform will allow educators to form a community of practice for
work-based learning to determine the best-practice models that align with their
institutions and obtain advice from peers on adapting and launching work-based
programs. Students will be able to use the platform to explore these programs
and learn how to prepare for these experiences. Companies will also be able to
participate on the platform to learn about benefits of various work-based
learning models, how to become involved, and specific opportunities and contacts
at local community colleges. The project will incorporate wide dissemination of
results and sharing of best practices to recruit and retain under-served
populations, focusing on students in economically disadvantaged high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.