* 1800825
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Storm Surge Deposition on Salt Marshes: Impacts of Hurricane Irma from Florida to South Carolina
* GEO,EAR
* 11/15/2017,04/30/2018
* Christopher Hein, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Marguerite Toscano
* 04/30/2018
* USD 4,502.00

Scientists continue to weigh the net impact of hurricanes on wetlands. These
events may be considered beneficial because of net sedimentation that occurs
during surge inundation, or detrimental due to erosion of the marsh edge and
surface excavation by storm waves. This study will exploit the new
sedimentologic record left by Hurricane Irma to examine these paradigms in the
salt marshes of the South Atlantic Bight. Sites range from Florida to South
Carolina along a latitudinal gradient of increasing spring tidal range (1.7-2.4
m), backbarrier marsh width (5?7 km), and flow-weighted average suspended
sediment concentrations in nearby rivers (13?27 mg/l). They exhibit variations
in physical characteristics, proximity to fluvial source, and sediment
availability that will help constrain the relative role of these factors in
contributing sediment to marshes during storms. Understanding marsh
sedimentation is of interest to all stewards of low-lying vegetated coastal
zones. Quantifying how coastal wetlands accrete in response to relative sea-
level rise, and the contributions that storms may play, is paramount to modeling
future wetland evolution and long-term resilience to storm impacts. This study
has broad societal implications given the recognized importance of the ecosystem
services provided by salt marshes, including reducing storm surge height and
related socioeconomic costs, and providing nurseries for fish stocks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While Hurricane Irma tracked over the west coast of
Florida, the wind patterns and size of the storm created strong onshore winds
along the southeast coast, producing a large storm&lt;br/&gt;surge up into South
Carolina. Tide gauge data indicate that marshes from northern FL to central SC
were flooded to a depth of 1 m, and remained so for ~7 to &gt; 17 hrs.
Associated storm surge deposits are likely to be significant; their source may
be local (marshes or lagoon floor) or from the inner shelf. The project will
investigate the nature (lateral extent, thickness, and provenance) of Irma storm
deposits (compared to ?background? sedimentation) through the analysis of (1)
shallow trenches (~20 cm); (2) surface samples (of identified Irma deposits);
and (3) double short cores (each 50-cm long, 8 cm in diameter) collected along
two transects at each site from the backbarrier to mainland (5?6 cores/transect;
~45 sampling stations total). We will also map new erosional features, wrack
lines, and vegetation damage or burial, related to Irma. Two cores from each
transect containing a clear, representative Irma deposit will be sampled for
short-lived radioisotope (210Pb, 137Cs) to provide multi-decadal accretion rates
for comparison with event-sedimentation thicknesses. Surface (Irma) deposits and
?background? samples from depth in the two accretion cores, will also be used to
examine event-sediment provenance signatures through analysis of bulk
biogeochemical characteristics (%TOC, C:N, ä13CTOC, ä15NTN), and assemblages of
diatoms and organic biomarkers adsorbed to/co-deposited with these sediments to
determine source differences (marine, marsh/lagoon, fluvial) between storm and
non-storm periods.&lt;br/&gt;