* 1800356
* Reductive cross-coupling reactions of unsaturated compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Gojko Lalic, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jin K. Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 0.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Gojko Lalic and his group at the Department of Chemistry, University
of Washington. Professor Lalic is developing a new type of reactions for organic
synthesis. The goal of this research is to provide a more efficient alternative
to traditional methods for making molecules by the coupling of two or more
molecular fragments (reactions referred to as cross-coupling reactions). Cross-
coupling reactions improve the efficiency of synthetic efforts relative to
building molecules one step at a time. Cross-coupling reactions are commonly
used in the preparation of fine chemicals and pharmaceuticals and thus, are
relevant to advanced manufacturing. The new type of cross-coupling reactions
enables the use of readily available compounds as starting materials. The new
reaction provides economic and environmental advantages over the existing state-
of-the-art. Dr. Lalic and his group have established an outreach program with
elementary and high school schools that promote science and technology. A wide
range of activities, including regular participation in science classes at local
high schools, are designed to reach students underrepresented in science and
promote careers in science, technology, engineering and mathematics disciplines.

In this project, two types of reductive cross-coupling reactions of unsaturated
compounds are being developed. Syn-selective hydrofunctionalization of alkynes
are being used to enable the hydroarylation, hydroalkenylation, and
hydroalkylation of alkynes. All three transformations involve hydrocupration of
alkynes followed by palladium-catalyzed functionalization of the alkenyl copper
intermediate. The key for the cooperative action of copper and palladium
catalysts is a phase-separation of two incompatible components; one from a
catalytic cycle of a copper catalyst and one from the catalytic cycle of a
palladium catalyst. The phase separation prevents a series of side reactions
that otherwise dominate the outcome of the reaction. This strategy is general
and can be used to develop other processes that require cooperative catalysis of
two incompatible catalytic cycles. The Lalic group is also developing methods
for anti-selective hydrofunctionalization of terminal alkynes. These
transformations are based on an initial cross coupling followed by the selective
semireduction of the alkyne intermediate. Another important aspect of the work
this project is the continued commitment of Professor Lalic and his group to
promoting science in a broader community. A major focus of these efforts is a
collaboration with local programs and institutions that specialize in supporting
participation of underrepresented minority students and women in STEM fields.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.