* 1800123
* RUI: Opportunities in Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Stephan Garcia, Pomona College
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 179,998.00

This project involves several interrelated threads that have all born fruit in
recent years. The most novel and dynamic aspect of the project is the exciting
interplay between the geometric properties of certain discrete objects and the
study of continuous transformations between the type of infinite-dimensional
spaces that form the natural setting for quantum mechanics. The project will
also study the properties and ramifications of certain transformations that
enjoy special symmetries. Potential applications are to signal processing,
control engineering, and quantum mechanics. The proposed research will build
bridges between different areas of the mathematical sciences. To do this, the
principal investigator will collaborate with colleagues old and new, as well as
sponsor undergraduate research. Indeed, many questions stemming from this
project are suitable for undergraduate research and the principal investigator
will recruit a diverse array of students to work on them. These students will be
equipped with the skills, expertise, confidence, and passion necessary to pursue
careers in the mathematical sciences. This project will create not only new
mathematics, but also the new mathematicians necessary to enhance and enrich the
nation's infrastructure for research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
promising aspect of recent research concerns new links between discrete geometry
(properties of lattices) and the asymptotic properties of structured matrices
(such as Toeplitz matrices). In the other direction, the principal investigator
and his collaborators have developed frame-theoretic constructions and operator-
related methods to prove new results about lattices. Together with
collaborators, the principal investigator will also study complex symmetric
operators and truncated Toeplitz operators. Complex symmetric operators are a
broad class of operators that has not been adequately studied in generality
until recently. The study of truncated Toeplitz operators, a rapidly growing
branch of function-theoretic operator theory, has undergone spirited development
stemming from a seminal 2007 paper of Sarason. A recent series of articles by
the principal investigator and his growing list of collaborators have unearthed
surprising links between these two classes. Research on this subject has the
potential to be transformative, having relevance to a number of fields. For
instance, connections to function theory and matrix analysis have already
engaged researchers from both large institutions and small colleges. Moreover,
the study of complex symmetric and truncated Toeplitz operators has already
proven to be fertile ground for undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.