* 1800137
* RUI: Collaborative Research: Intrinsic Gas-phase Properties of Peptides: Thermochemistry, Fragmentation Mechanisms, H/D exchange and IRMPD Spectroscopy.
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* John Poutsma, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 160,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms program is
supporting the collaborative research of Professor John C. Poutsma at the
College of William and Mary and Professor Jennifer Poutsma at Old Dominion
University. Professor John Poutsma employs mass spectrometry-based experiments
to study the subtle interplay between the structure of peptides and their gas-
phase energetic properties. He studies peptides containing non-protein amino
acids (NPAA), which are found naturally in plants and fungi, but are not used in
natural protein synthesis. Many NPAAs are toxic to humans and other animals in
part due to structural similarity to one or more of the twenty common protein
amino acids (PAA). NPAAs can compete with PAAs in a variety of biological
pathways including being mis-incorporated into proteins and peptides. Studying
the behavior of peptides into which NPAAs have been systematically substituted
helps to understand the relationship between a peptide's structure and its
behavior in the mass spectrometer. Ultimately this enhanced understanding may
lead to improved automated peptide sequencing algorithms for proteomics
experiments. Professor Jennifer Poutsma performs density functional theory
calculations to predict structure and energetics that support and guide the
experimental studies. Both research programs integrate research and educational
components through the training of undergraduate researchers. This research is
carried out by undergraduates at William and Mary and Old Dominion University.
Performing independent research helps to teach these students not only the joy
of discovery but also how to handle and work through the inevitable failures
that accompany real-world science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research,
intrinsic gas-phase properties of peptides and their fragments are determined
using 1) the extended kinetic method, 2) hydrogen deuterium exchange, 3)
infrared multiphoton dissociation spectroscopy, 4) peptide fragmentation studies
and 5) density functional computations. The ultimate goals of these studies are
to establish the relationship between amino acid structure and thermochemical
properties, to better understand the effects of intramolecular hydrogen bonding
on the gas-phase chemistry of amino acids and peptides, and to explain the
mechanisms for selective fragmentations in low-energy tandem mass spectrometry
experiments. This detailed knowledge may be integrated into peptide sequencing
methods so that they can better account for the presence of unusual amino acids,
and for selective fragmentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.