* 1800197
* Controlling the energy flow in multi-component plasmonic structures for selective catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 446,773.00

Catalysts are materials that can activate a chemical transformation. The ability
of catalysts to select a desired chemical product while avoiding undesired side
reactions is a critical, but difficult objective. Making meaningful
contributions in this direction would have a large impact on the field of
chemical catalysis and across the field of chemistry generally. It was suggested
recently that when illuminated with low intensity ultraviolet-visible light
(i.e., from the Sun), small particles of silver and gold known as plasmonic
metal nanoparticles can efficiently deposit energy into specific chemical
transformations. This is in contrast to conventional, thermally-driven chemical
reactions on metals where energy is indiscriminately distributed among every
available reaction. In this project, Dr. Suljo Linic of the University of
Michigan is developing an understanding of which physical properties govern the
energy flow in plasmonic catalysts and how to control these properties.
Developing these insights is critical for a targeted design of selective
catalysts for specific chemical transformations. Dr. Linic is also engaged in a
wide range of educational activities that build upon his research to promote
engagement of students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. These activities include reaching out to high school and
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, as well as less
conventional strategies aimed at improving the utilization of the World Wide Web
in reaching students and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding
from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Linic is
developing a fundamental understanding of how electromagnetic energy flows
through multicomponent plasmonic metal nanostructures. He is working on
realizing the concept that light energy can be used to selectively activate
specific chemical transformations by designing and controlling optical and
electronic properties of multimetallic plasmonic nanostructures. He is testing
the hypothesis that this objective can be accomplished by multicomponent
plasmonic nanostructures with a relatively large plasmonic (Ag or Au) core (10s
of nm), designed to harvest the resonant light energy, surrounded by a thin
shell (~1 nm range) of a different material designed to drive specific chemical
transformations using the harvested energy. He postulates that these structures
would allow for complete control over the resonant energy flow at the nanoscale,
funneling it efficiently into desired chemical transformations. He is employing
a slate of characterization techniques including atomistic characterization of
the geometric structure of the nanostructures, analysis of electronic and
optical properties of the multicomponent plasmonic materials as well as
vibrational and reaction spectroscopies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.