* 1800405
* SusChEM: Harnessing Stable Peroxides for Selective Nitrogen Atom and Fluoroalkyl Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Hao Xu, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 04/30/2022
* USD 439,800.00

This award from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division
supports the research of Professor Hao Xu in Chemistry Department at Georgia
State University. Professor Xu is developing new, more sustainable methods for
converting readily available hydrocarbons into more valuable molecules that
contain one or more nitrogen atoms. A large number of small-molecule
pharmaceuticals and functional materials contain nitrogen atoms, a situation
that makes the chemistry being developed both timely and important for
addressing modern synthetic needs. The chemistry is also more sustainable that
the current state-of-the-art methods because the reagents used by Professor Xu
and his students are derived from iron - the second most abundant metal in the
Earth's crust - and stable, common peroxides. These simple reagents replace the
much more rare and expensive reagents typically used for the current methods.
The research program lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, and
mechanistic chemistry; therefore, it provides a unique education opportunity for
all levels of young scientists. This opportunity is especially important because
of the large number of minority students who attend Georgia State University and
Professor Xu's strong commitment to working with those students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This research program aims to develop and study novel synthetic
approaches that harness stable peroxides to selectively functionalize a broad
range of olefins with non-oxygen-based groups. In the first phase of this
project, Professor Xu and his students are exploring the reactivity of unique
iron complexes with stable peroxides and developing an iron-catalyzed method for
selective olefin diazidation/diamination reactions. The work is expanding the
development of iron-catalyzed process for a broad range of olefins and
N-heterocycles. In the second phase of this project, the group is exploring new
iron-catalyzed activation approaches for fluoroalkyl transfer reactions. The
work is providing a general and selective approach for olefin functionalization
that will likely become a useful tool for organic chemists. In terms of Broader
Impact, this project is integrating the effort to develop more sustainable
methods for constructing value added molecules with educational activities that
include i) transforming teaching with undergraduate mentoring and research and
(ii) providing summer research experiences for local high school students and
visiting students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.