* 1800601
* Understanding the restructuring of model metal catalysts in reactant gases
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Philippe Sautet, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2022
* USD 320,190.00

Transition metals play key roles as catalysts in applications ranging from
chemical and energy production to environmental remediation. Ample evidence
indicates that catalyst structures do not remain unchanged during use. Instead,
substantial and important restructuring occurs due to rearrangement of the metal
atoms to make new structures. This restructuring has major consequences on
catalytic properties, sometimes beneficial and sometimes not. Currently,
scientists do not understand how the restructuring occurs at the atomic scale or
under conditions similar to those used during catalysis. With funding from the
NSF Chemical Catalysis Program, this research is providing a fundamental
understanding of this chemistry under relevant gas pressures and reaction
temperatures. It is being performed with a combination of cutting edge
experiments by Dr. Franklin Tao from University of Kansas and computational
modeling by Dr. Philippe Sautet from University of California Los Angeles. Drs.
Tao and Sautet are incorporating this theoretical modeling and experimental work
into the education and training of high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students. Summer research internships for public high school students in their
laboratories are also being provided.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;With funding from
the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Tao of the
University of Kansas and Dr. Sautet from UCLA are combining advanced in
situ/operando characterization and first principle based modelling to develop a
fundamental understanding of the metal catalyst restructuring process. The
research compares several metals (Pt, Pd, Ni, Co, Cu) under a pressure of carbon
monoxide and other reactants. The experimental methods include high pressure
scanning tunneling microscopy (HP-STM) and operando Ambient Pressure X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy. These surface-sensitive surface techniques allow for
uncovering surface chemistry and structure of metals under a pressure of gas and
provide an initial global view of the mechanism and determine global kinetic
rates. Theoretical modelling brings an understanding of the atomistic elementary
steps and of their energies. It also provides kinetic results that are compared
with experimental measurement, hence validating the approach. Since large
systems are required for the calculation, energies are obtained by using an
accurate high dimensional neural network potential, previously trained from a
density functional theory database. The influence of restructuring on catalytic
reaction is being explored with the example of the water-gas shift reaction on
Pt and Cu surfaces. Drs. Tao and Sautet are developing an outreach program
focused on introducing high-school students to model catalysis research and on
undergraduate student training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.