* 1800781
* Research Initiation Award: Using Zebrafish (Danio rerio) as a model to assess the role of insulin receptor signaling in renal epithelial transport function.
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2023
* Tracy Bell, University of Maryland Eastern Shore
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 03/31/2023
* USD 299,996.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing programs. It is expected that
the award helps to further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home institution, and
involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The award to the
University of Maryland Eastern Shore will develop a novel methodology to assess
the water and sodium regulation in vertebrates and will advance our knowledge of
basic mechanism of vertebrate kidney transport and fluid
balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to investigate the role
of insulin in regulating sodium and water transport in the kidney. Epithelial
cells that line the renal proximal tubule (PT)reabsorb a significant fraction of
filtered sodium and water, and therefore, play a key role in regulating body
fluid osmotic homeostasis. The sodium proton exchanger 3 (NHE3) is expressed in
the PT and accounts for the majority of total Na+ and water epithelial
transport. Insulin has been shown to stimulate Na+ and water epithelial
transport in this segment via increased NHE3 activity. Zebrafish (Danio rerio)
will be used as a model to further elucidate the signaling mechanisms that link
insulin to an increase in proximal tubule specific sodium hydrogen proton
exchanger 3 (NHE3) activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.