* 1800011
* Metal Catalyzed Methods for the Preparation of Organosilanes and Related Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Donald Watson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 479,676.00

This award from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry
supports the work of Professor Donald A. Watson of the University of Delaware.
Professor Watson is developing methods that allow for the synthesis of new
organic molecules that contain silicon atoms. These types of molecules have
broad application to both chemical synthesis and the development of consumer
products such as plastics, non-stick coatings, and personal care products. The
methodology being pursued by Professor Watson and his students is enabling the
synthesis of these important products from simple, cheap, and readily available
starting materials. Professor Watson is also developing an integrated
undergraduate research program that provides students from underrepresented
groups the opportunity to pursue cutting-edge chemical research. This program is
allowing students to better connect with their field of study, offering them
increased opportunities for mentorship, and developing their research skills so
that they can excel in either graduate school or their future employment. In
addition, Professor Watson and his research group are engaging in outreach
activities that introduce preschool and early school age children to the
chemical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Donald A Watson
and his research group are examining the use of electrophilic silicon reagents
(silyl halides and triflates) with carbon nucleophiles using nickel and
palladium catalysis. The Watson group is seeking improved methods for the
synthesis of hindered alkyl-, allyl-, and vinyl-silanes using straightforward
cross-coupling approaches. The goal of this effort is to increase the scope of
these transformations compared to known processes, increase reactivity though
the design of new catalytic systems, and to explore the mechanisms of the
transformations we develop. Professor Watson and his group are also exploring
stereocontrol in these reactions using asymmetric catalysts. In total, this
program is leading to new, powerful, and useful methods for organosilane
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.