* 1800529
* Next-Generation Fluorescent Nucleosides and Structure-Photophysics Relationships
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Byron Purse, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 414,249.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Byron Purse of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at San Diego State University (SDSU) is developing
fluorescent nucleoside analogues as molecular probes with new capabilities for
biophysical studies of nucleic acids. In addition to storing the genetic code,
nucleic acids can undergo chemical modification, adopt folded structures, and
interact with proteins and enzymes for the regulation of gene expression and
metabolism. Fluorescent nucleoside analogues are powerful probes for studying
these processes, but existing analogues have limited capabilities. Insufficient
knowledge of the factors controlling their fluorescence hinders the rational
design of better probes. This project seeks to overcome these limitations and
expand the toolkit of fluorescent nucleoside analogue probes with significant,
novel capabilities. The design of the new analogues is aided by detailed
mechanistic studies of how the local environment in DNA/RNA influences the
fluorescence of the probes. This cross-disciplinary research provides excellent
training opportunities for students at multiple levels. In addition to graduate
student and undergraduate involvement, a Course-based Undergraduate Research
Experience (CURE) in the SDSU Physical Chemistry teaching lab and an outreach
program involving computational work with community college and high school
students will broaden participation in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Probably the greatest challenge in designing
fluorescent probes that mimic the structure of biomolecules is that limited
ability to predict photophysical properties currently necessitates a trial-and-
error approach. In this project, photophysical measurements, computation, NMR,
and x-ray structure determination are combined to develop a detailed, predictive
understanding of the relationships between nucleoside analogue structure and
photophysics, especially in the base stack of DNA and RNA. By harnessing these
trends and synthesizing new fluorescent nucleoside analogue designs, novel
probes with (a) brightness matching conventional fluorophores, (b) absorption
and emission at the red end of the visible spectrum, (c) strong fluorescence
turn-on responses to specific biomolecular recognition events, and (d) the
ability to report on chemical modifications to nucleobases, e.g. from
methylation or DNA damage are being developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.