* 1800101
* Spectroscopy of Two Dimensional Molecular Carbon
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2021
* Eric Heller, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 01/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Eric Heller of Harvard University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the NSF Division of
Chemistry, to better understand the amazing potential of carbon materials,
especially graphene. Graphene is an extended honeycomb sheet of carbon atoms
only a single atom thick. It has both solid state and molecular characteristics.
The list of useful devices and applications involving graphene as an essential
component is already very long, for example transistors, photodetectors, solar
cells, and electrodes. Two layers can be stacked to give a superconductor, i.e.
a material with no electrical resistance. Graphene sheets are impervious to all
atoms and molecules. The Heller group develops new theoretical understanding of
what the graphene carbon lattice and the conductive electrons surrounding it are
doing before, during, and after interaction with light, including bright pulses
only femtoseconds in duration. Probing graphene with light is the most powerful
experimental tool for revealing its secrets, but the experiments must be
properly interpreted. The Heller group seeks to reveal the fundamental quantum
properties of graphene using new theoretical and computational methods that it
has developed. The Heller group is revising the understanding of fast electron
relaxation following light absorption in graphene This new understanding is
relevant for developing practical devices based on graphene and related carbon-
based materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Heller group is developing a strongly
revised understanding of fast electron processes in graphene and related carbon
materials, based on properly incorporating certain important but previously
neglected indirect (phonon producing or destroying) electronic light induced
transitions. The key has been to restore the full physics of condensed matter
spectroscopy, including the phonon coordinate dependence of the electronic
transition moments. The transition moments had previously universally been taken
to be constant, independent of phonon coordinate, but Heller and coworkers has
shown that neglecting this coordinate dependence sacrifices the correct physical
understanding. After importing the full Kramers-Heisenberg-Dirac Raman theory to
graphene spectroscopy for the first time, many opportunities open up because of
a fuller and more correct understanding. The Heller group is exploring these new
implications including those which have experimental relevance and suggesting
experiments to test their theoretical predictions. They are also probing the
role of the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in these key indirect transitions.
The group is exploring wide implications of this new understanding of indirect
transitions, which are key to many devices including silicon solar cells,
throughout condensed matter spectroscopy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.