* 1800681
* Bijective Approach to Discrete Geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Olivier Bernardi, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 149,988.00

Combinatorics is a central branch of mathematics concerned with the description
and analysis of discrete data structures. Combinatorialists try to uncover
patterns and building blocks in such structures, in order to explain their
global behavior. Combinatorial tools are therefore of central importance in many
other fields of science, such as computer science, statistical mechanics,
statistics, and probability. This project focuses on the encoding of several
discrete geometrical structures (planar graphs, polytopal decompositions of
space, etc.) by simpler mathematical structures. Such an encoding, which
provides a genuinely different description of the same structures, can greatly
simplify the analysis of the objects under consideration. Indeed, certain
patterns and probabilistic behavior which were hidden in the original
description, may appear more clearly in the alternative
description.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This projects aims to develop bijective tools
in order to solve several fundamental open problems in combinatorics, with
motivations coming from probability, theoretical physics, and computer science.
One of the major goals is to set the foundation for a multi-authored proof of a
deep relation between three very important probabilistic constructions: random
planar graphs, the Gaussian free field, and SLE curves. The proof will be built
upon a bijective encoding of percolation-endowed planar triangulations by some
two-dimensional lattice walks. Other goals of this project are related to proper
coloring of graphs (explaining bijectively a counting formula for properly
colored planar graphs), integrable system approach to the symmetric group
("diagonalizing" the KP differential equations governing the factorizations in
the symmetric group), hyperplane arrangements (bijections for the faces of the
deformations of the Coxeter arrangement), and graph drawing algorithms
(simultaneous generalization of Schnyder woods and transversal
structures).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.