* 1800262
* RUI: Electroactive Composites of Biosourced Polymers, and Conducting Polymers Polymerized in a Confined Environment
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Nicholas Pinto, University of Puerto Rico at Humacao
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 12/31/2022
* USD 223,392.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plastics that are derived
from petroleum typically do not degrade with time and eventually end up in
landfills. The proposed work will use specific biosourced and biodegradable
plastics and process them to obtain conducting composites, thereby extending
their use to electronic applications. By confining the synthesis to two
dimensions, the principal investigator (PI) will also explore synthesis of
conducting plastic materials with fewer defects that may possess higher
intrinsic conductivity. Using these materials, the PI plans to fabricate fibers
having diameters roughly one-thousandth that of a human hair using an
electrospinning technique. Devices and sensors fabricated from these fibers may
then have superior operating properties compared to those prepared from thicker
films of the same material. For example, sensors may be able to detect toxic
gases at low concentrations and higher speeds. The planned research is
interdisciplinary involving materials science, physics, chemistry, nanoscience,
and electronics. Students will be trained in multiple disciplines thereby
preparing them to enter the workforce with a diverse set of skills. This project
will also focus on educating and mentoring undergraduates, recruiting students,
and conducting outreach in science and engineering. It will thus increase the
number of research-experienced undergraduates from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator (PI) will work with
sustainable polymers that are biosourced and biodegradable and render them
usable for electroactive applications via fabrication of composites with
conducting polymers. In addition, he plans to synthesize conducting polymers in
a confined environment, where in-situ confinement during polymerization may lead
to fewer chain defects and ultimately higher intrinsic conductivity. Besides
thin films, nanofibers of the electro-active polymers will also be fabricated
and characterized via temperature-dependent charge transport and dielectric
relaxation studies. Nanofibers naturally possess a confined environment for
charge flow, and studies on such fibers may lead to reduced defects. The results
from the fundamental research on charge transport and charge relaxation will be
used to prepare devices and sensors with superior operating characteristics. The
planned research includes an interdisciplinary combination of materials science,
physics, chemistry, nanoscience and electronics. It will provide undergraduates
with a sound research experience thereby preparing them to enter the workforce
with a diverse set of skills. This project will also focus on educating and
mentoring undergraduates, recruiting students, and conducting outreach in
science and engineering. It will thus increase the number of research-
experienced undergraduates from underrepresented groups in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.