* 1800723
* AF: Medium: Algorithms for Scalable Phylogenetic Network Inference
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2024
* Luay Nakhleh, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2024
* USD 989,147.00

Species phylogenies model how species split and diverge and provide important
insight into fundamental biological phenomena and processes, including
biodiversity, and trait evolution, while gene trees provide insight into protein
structure and function as well as systems biology. Advances in sequencing
technologies and assembly methods and the availability of whole-genome datasets
have opened up the possibility of transformative improvements in accuracy for
estimating species phylogenies and gene trees. Phylogenetic networks extend
phylogenetic trees to provide an appropriate model of reticulate evolutionary
histories. Reticulate evolution describes the origination of a lineage through
partial merging of two ancestor lineages. Recently developed methods allow for
statistical inference of phylogenetic networks in order to account for other
processes that could be at play during the evolution of the genomes. However,
these methods can handle fewer than a handful of genomes. This award will
develop methods for estimating large-scale phylogenetic networks from sequence
data as well as gene tree estimates. The award will stimulate research in
computer science and statistics and will have a major impact on evolutionary
biology. The award will contribute open-source code to the PhyloNet software
package. Lectures and tutorials will be given to the community on the
developments made in the award and on the use of PhyloNet. The award will
provide ample opportunities for training students and post-doctoral fellows in
cutting-edge, interdisciplinary algorithmic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will be carried out through five activities that are intertwined
throughout the lifetime of the award. (1) Development of novel algorithmic
techniques for scalable inference of phylogenetic networks that allow for
analyzing data sets with tens and even hundreds of genomes. (2) Implementation
and of all methods in the PhyloNet software package. (3) Thorough evaluation of
the methods in terms of accuracy and computational requirements. (4) Mentoring
and training of students and post-doctoral fellows. (5) Dissemination of the
results through an open-source software package, publications in peer-reviewed
journals and conference proceedings, lectures and tutorials, and course
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.