* 1800605
* RUI:  Evaluation of Ligand Effects in Molybdenum Catalyzed Deoxydehydration Reaction
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alex John, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 240,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Alex John of the California State Polytechnic University Pomona (Cal Poly
Pomona) is studying the use of metal catalysts that are capable of removing two
adjacent OH (i.e., hydroxyl) groups from an organic substrate, and replacing
them with a carbon-carbon double bond. Carbon-carbon double bonds are useful as
they can be converted to a variety of other organic functional groups. Current
catalysts capable of performing this transformation are based on expensive
metals and are not suitable for large-scale industrial processes, while the
catalysts that Dr. John is developing are based on molybdenum and are relatively
inexpensive. Using a combination of experimental and computational methods, Dr.
John is developing a comprehensive understanding of factors that affect
catalytic activity and thereby developing superior catalysts for this
transformation. The ultimate goal of this work is to convert cellulosic biomass-
derived materials, which have an abundance of hydroxyl groups, including
adjacent hydroxyl groups, into molecules that can be used as chemical feedstocks
in order to reduce our dependence on fossil resources. This research is
primarily being carried out by undergraduate students in Dr. John's laboratory,
including underrepresented minorities in STEM areas. Students involved in this
research gain a better understanding of the issues plaguing the global chemical
industry, and they are better prepared as they enter the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge plaguing the potential
utilization of biomass as a sustainable chemical feedstock is its highly
functionalized nature, and hence methods for efficient and selective
defunctionalization of this sustainable resource are needed. The
deoxydehydration reaction is ideal in this regard, as it converts glycols into
olefins that are platform chemicals. Dr. John is exploring the utility of well-
defined oxo-molybdenum complexes supported over modular ligands in the
deoxydehydration (DODH) reaction. Oxomolybdenum complexes utilizing an array of
ligands that are known to exhibit differential coordination to the oxo-
molybdenum core are being synthesized and tested in this reaction to optimize
catalytic activity. Viable oxo-molybdenum complexes are probed further by
evaluating DODH activity as a function of ligand structure
(sterics/electronics/flexibility). Mechanistic insights are gained by a
combination of experimental (kinetic studies) and computational (Density
Functional Theory, DFT) investigations to understand the origin of ligand
effects on reactivity. Data generated and mechanistic insights gained from this
study are of general interest to the broader inorganic, organometallic, and
catalytic communities. The proposal is inclusive for students, especially
undergraduates and minority students, with diverse backgrounds/skill levels.
Students engaged in this research are developing technical skills in a variety
of synthetic, characterization, and analytical techniques, and are better
prepared to enter the future workforce in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.