* 1800554
* Chemical Triggers for Spin-State Switching: Discovery and Control of Switching Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2019
* Matthew Shores, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2019
* USD 140,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Matthew Shores of the Department of
Chemistry at Colorado State University (CSU) is exploring new classes of
transition metal complexes that can serve as molecular switches. The goal of the
research is to understand how host-guest interactions alter the structure of
coordination complexes and change their magnetic properties. These results will
inform design principles for the development of chemical sensors, switchable
molecular magnets, and magnetic resonance contrast agents. The project combines
several synthetic, measurement and computational techniques to provide diverse
training for the research students involved. Interactions with the CSU Chemistry
Research Experiences for Undergraduates program and collaborations with
researchers at CSU-Pueblo aim to broaden participation from underrepresented
groups. The group's expertise in magnetic measurements and data interpretation
will promote discovery via several ongoing and new magnetic collaborations with
inorganic and materials chemistry research groups around the
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complexes that can exist in and reliably switch
between two well-defined magnetic states offer the possibility for functional
materials development at the nano- and molecular length scales. The proposed
research aims to enhance magnetic property switching in transition metal
complexes by controlling local geometry and ligand field effects via outer
sphere, non-covalent interactions with guest molecules. Specific research goals
for this project are: (1) computational understanding of thermodynamics and
distortion pathways in magnetic-state switching, toward predictive models; (2)
exploration of new chemical triggers and new ions for guest-dependent spin-state
switching complexes; and (3) external control of axial magnetic anisotropy in
Co(II) single-molecule magnet complexes. The ultimate aim is to gain new
understanding in the design of novel mechanisms for magnetic property switching,
and contribute new sensing architectures relevant to chemical sensing and
molecular imaging applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.