* 1800237
* D3SC: In Silico Design of Molecular Catalysts for C-H Functionalization via Machine Learning Algorithms
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Konstantinos Vogiatzis, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2022
* USD 390,000.00

Can we teach a machine chemical intuition so that the machine can help us
discover new molecules and materials with useful properties? Can doing so
accelerate these discoveries? These are questions that Dr. Vogiatzis of the
University of Tennessee is addressing. To achieve these goals, he is applying
statistical models that can learn new complex mathematical functions. These
functions have the power to connect meaningful chemical information with
molecular structure by looking for patterns that contribute to important and
desirable properties. This chemically-driven machine learning (CDML)
computational approach is a promising technique for a large variety of
environmental, biological, and energy-related problems. To demonstrate the
strength and applicability of CDML, Dr. Vogiatzis and his research group are
examining the chemical properties of iron species that mimic the action of iron-
containing enzymes. Dr. Vogiatzis is providing interdisciplinary research
opportunities to students, including those from underrepresented groups. In
turn, they are learning about data science and machine learning methodologies,
an important tool for the development of tomorrow's technologies. The
computational tools developed in Dr. Vogiatizis' research group are being
provided free to other researchers interested in machine learning and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
and the D3SC (Data Driven Discovery Science in Chemistry) initiative of the
Chemistry Division, Dr. Vogiatzis of the University of Tennessee is developing
computational tools for efficient high-throughput computational screening of
large libraries of molecular complexes. The long-term target is the design of
the next generation of catalysts for efficient C-H functionalization via quantum
chemistry and machine learning. His research group is currently working on an
integrated computational protocol that examines one class of reactive sites for
C-H activation, but the proposed methodology is transferable to other chemical
procedures as well. The biomimetic catalytic site that is currently examined is
the Fe(IV)-oxo intermediate, active site of heme and non-heme enzymes, and is
chosen due to the vast literature that can guide the development of the
computational model. Dr. Vogiatzis is engaging undergraduate and graduate
students from underrepresented groups in his research. He is also engaging
students from East and Central Tennessee about his scientific interests. In
addition, the development of free, open-source software is of high importance
for the scientific community and the advance of the science. The computational
tools that are developed with funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program are
being provided free-of-charge to other researchers interested in machine
learning and chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.