* 1800122
* Ionic and Molecular Materials of High Thermal Stability: Design, Structure, and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2021
* James Davis, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor James Davis and his students of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of South Alabama are exploring the
synthesis, characterization, and properties of a new type of ionic liquid salts.
The salts being investigated are expected are highly resistant to heat and
retain their liquid character, without evaporation, decomposition, or
flammability, for long periods of time. Salts of this type can be used as
substitutes for more traditional liquids in applications ranging from heat
transfer fluids and high-performance lubricants to biomass processing and the
synthesis of important electronic materials such as semiconductors. The project
brings together elements of chemical synthesis as well as material science and
engineering, and offers engaged students a broad opportunity for gaining
experience from a spectrum of activities. Since the institution at which the
research is taking place serves a high proportion of individuals from groups
underrepresented in the sciences and engineering, the project provides important
opportunities to engage in the professional training of individuals from these
communities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquid salts are materials of
considerable fundamental interest and growing practical utility. Because of
their non-volatility, ionic liquids can be used in applications requiring high
temperatures, such as in heat transfer, lubrication, or high-temperature
materials synthesis. Although typical ionic liquid salts have relatively high
degrees of thermal stability, many of them are still incapable of being used for
long durations at temperatures above 200 degrees Celsius. By exploiting
tetraarylphosphonium and triarylsulfonium salts, ionic liquid salts capable of
remaining stable at temperatures of 300 degrees Celsius for periods over three
months have been achieved by Professor Davis' group. New strategies are being
pursued to improve their thermal stability profile. These strategies include the
use of thermally stable anions, cross-linking of the molecules, the
incorporation of graphene, and blending with oligophenylene
ethers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.