* 1800194
* RUI: Isotopically Different Tunneling-Ready-State Structures in Hydride Transfer Reactions in Solution
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Yun Lu, Southern Illinois University at Edwardsville
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2022
* USD 320,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professors Yun Lu, James E. Eilers, and Kevin
R. Tucker of the Department of Chemistry at Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville are investigating how reactions in the human body work. Hydrogen
transfer reactions are common in chemistry and biology. About 50% of the
biological reactions in the body involve hydrogen transfer. This project may
help scientists understand these biological processes. The project involves
expertise in three different areas of chemistry (organic, analytical and
computational). The chemistry department at Southern Illinois University
Edwardsville (SIUE) holds workshops that target high school teachers in the St.
Louis Metro-East area, which has a large African-American population living
below the poverty line. This program provides an opportunity for the research
teams to involve the high school teachers and their students in the project,
preparing them for college and a STEM career. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
investigates a new concept in the contemporary models for hydrogen (H)-wave
transfer, i.e., H-tunneling. The new concept is that H-tunneling and its heavier
isotope (deuterium (D) or tritium (T))-tunneling have different donor-acceptor
distance (DAD) at the tunneling-ready-state (TRS) structures due to different
masses thus different wave properties. Since a heavier isotope possesses shorter
wavelength, its transfer requires a shorter donor-acceptor distance (DAD). The
confirmation of the concept could change the traditional views about the
H-transfer chemistry and the theory of the kinetic isotope effects (KIE). The
investigators use physical organic mechanistic analysis methods to distinguish
the isotopically different TRS structures for various hydride- vs. deuteride-
transfer reactions in solution. They plan to study the primary isotope
dependence of the secondary KIEs to distinguish the isotopically different TRS
conformations. They also investigate the primary isotope dependence of Hammett
correlations to differentiate the isotopically different TRS electronic
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.