* 1800200
* HSI Conference:  URBANO-INCREASING ACCESS AND SUCCESS IN URBAN STEM PROGRAMS
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Gilda Barabino, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 10/31/2019
* USD 100,000.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
calls for projects to support conferences that will identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices. In keeping
with this call, the principal investigators of this project will study issues in
STEM education at urban HSIs, focusing on the needs and circumstances of urban
Hispanic students, who may face a different set of issues compared to students
at suburban or rural institutions. These challenges include: limited
opportunities for experiential learning, particularly research experiences; and
relatively weak academic preparation at the secondary school level. Moreover,
these urban Hispanic students are disproportionately represented in groups with
lower socioeconomic status. Such circumstances may require commuting long
distances to school and holding jobs outside of campus, both of which can impact
student success and prospects for degree attainment. The conference will address
questions unique to urban institutions, with an emphasis on the use of
technology and experiential learning approaches to assist retention and success
in STEM education. A conference report, including recommendations for designing
an HSI program at NSF, will be produced and shared widely with the higher
education enterprise. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The City College of New York will
convene students, faculty, and administrators from institutions in the greater
New York/New Jersey area, along with representatives from industry and
government for this two-day conference. In addition, there will be participants
from leading urban-based HSIs drawn from other regions around the country. The
conference will be organized around three key questions: What issues contribute
to the Hispanic student STEM Gap that are particular to urban, as opposed to
rural or suburban colleges? What are the aspects of technology and experiential
learning that can be brought to bear on addressing this Gap? What types of
interventions in these solution sets appear to address the Gap and the needs and
challenges posed by industry, academia, and students in an urban college
setting? Seeking answers to these questions will also open the door to exploring
issues that are relevant to Hispanic students across the nation, and more
broadly, to other groups of underrepresented students who face significant
challenges in pursuing their higher education goals. The conference will
emphasize opportunities for participants to engage with each other actively.
Session themes include: 1) Academia: the Gap into Preparation, 2) Industry: the
Gap into Employment, and 3) Students: the Gap into Performance. Additional
themes include Using Social Media to Build Community and Experiential Learning
in MakerSpaces. A poster session will also be conducted to maximize
opportunities for networking among the conference attendees.