* 1800323
* Descriptive Dynamics and Borel Combinatorics of Group Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Stephen Jackson, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

The fields of descriptive set theory, dynamics, and combinatorics are
established areas of mathematics. In recent years there has been increasing
interest in the relatively new field of descriptive dynamics in which tools from
these areas combine to study problems of common interest to these subjects. A
particular focus is to study the structure of certain natural mathematical
objects which occur as definable equivalence relations on the reals. These
objects greatly generalize the objects of traditional study in descriptive set
theory, and also extend naturally the objects, dynamical systems, studied in
dynamics. The focus of this project is to use recently developed, cross-
disciplinary techniques to study some of the fundamental properties of these
objects. There are several important open questions for which the new techniques
seem promising, and with which we can benchmark progress. Further progress in
this area will lead to a better understanding of these areas of mathematics and
their connections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major focus of the proposal concerns
the combinatorics of countable Borel equivalence relations. These are the
relations generated by the Borel actions of countable groups. A natural plan of
study is to proceed by increasing complexity of the group generating the
relation. Even for relatively simple groups, the combinatorics of their group
actions is interesting. As an example, recent methods allow for a computation of
both the continuous and Borel chromatic numbers of free Bernoulli shifts by
finitely generated abelian groups. There have also been recent developments to
extend the proposers' result that all actions of countable abelian groups are
hyperfinite to countable nilpotent groups (Schneider and Seward) and to some
solvable, non-nilpotent groups (Conley, Jackson, Marks, Seward, and Tucker-
Drob). The proofs show an interesting interplay between the properties of the
equivalence relations and the combinatorial structure of complete sections in
the relation. The project seeks to explore this interplay and to extend the
current methods and results to actions of more general
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.