* 1800302
* RAPID: Non-State Action and Public-Private Coordination During Times of Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,10/31/2018
* Herschel Thomas, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 10/31/2018
* USD 71,473.00

Natural disasters place immense stress on governments and public resources.
Following such crises, private and non-profit organizations?including the
American Red Cross, food banks, businesses, and religious groups?play a crucial
role in filling gaps in the ability of government to provide services.
Understanding the actions of such organizations during crisis situations and
recovery efforts is critical to preparing for future natural disasters.
Nonetheless, there is only limited research into their role and their
coordination with federal, state, and local governments. Focusing on the
aftermath of hurricanes Harvey and Irma, this project will address important
questions in the field of political science. In particular, it will illuminate
how organizations identify gaps in government services, how they coordinate
their efforts with government, and why these efforts prove effective or
ineffective. The conclusions drawn from this research will contribute to
improved coordination between government and private/non-profit organizations
during future natural disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The supplementation of
state capacity by non-state actors is a recurring, although understudied,
phenomenon within the United States. While scholars such as Jacob Hacker have
explored the role of non-state entities in providing social welfare benefits,
most research on the non-state provision of services has focused on
underdeveloped states in the Global South. In this project, we redirect
scholarly attention to the role of private providers by addressing two key
questions: 1) During times of crisis, how do non-state entities identify and
react to gaps in government capacity to respond? 2) How do non-state entities
work to coordinate their efforts with those of government, and why do these
efforts prove effective or ineffective? We address these questions by conducting
three waves of semi- structured, elite interviews in affected areas of both
Texas and Florida. Grounded in established political science methods and
approaches, our analysis will rely on the coding and computational examination
of interview data and the mapping of coordination
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.