* 1800586
* Synthetic Methods to Access Aromatic Molecular Belts
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Ramesh Jasti, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Ramesh Jasti. Professor Jasti is a faculty member in the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oregon. The research being
pursued is developing new synthetic methods and strategies to access a wide
array of aromatic molecular ?belts?, structures that have eluded synthesis for
decades. These targets are of fundamental interest for their structural,
photophysical and electronic properties, supramolecular chemistry, as well as
their potential to lead to the uniform synthesis of carbon nanotubes (CNTs).
This research program, deeply rooted in organic synthesis and new synthetic
methods, is also relevant to the fields of materials science, biology, and
physics. The PI?s choice of challenging synthetic targets provides graduate and
undergraduate students with a thorough background in synthetic organic strategy,
methodology development, and reaction mechanism. In addition, these targets
provide students with opportunities to collaborate with physicists, engineers,
and theorists to measure, utilize, and understand the physical properties of the
newly created nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecules with radially
oriented pi-systems have been appreciated by chemists for decades, but have
recently undergone a renaissance in that new developments in synthetic
methodology have rendered what were previously mostly theoretical curiosities
into now accessible structures. In this project, the Jasti research group aims
to push the synthetic boundaries to the next logical class of structures in this
intriguing field ? aromatic molecular belts. These structures are also molecules
with radially oriented pi systems, but they are distinguished from their
predecessors by the presence of upper and lower edges that are conjugated but
never coincide. As opposed to the rotational freedom associated with previous
structures in this class, these molecules are rigid and conformationally locked,
features that are anticipated to lead to new optoelectronic and host-guest
properties. In addition, these aromatic belt compounds are envisioned as
suitable templates for chemical vapor deposition or Diels-Alder growth of carbon
nanotubes, thus potentially leading to single chirality CNTs. The PI also
partners with the UO Summer Science program to provide educational experiences
that highlight interdisciplinary research and hands-on science to groups of
students that are traditionally underserved in the state of
Oregon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.