* 1800755
* Enhancing Associate Degrees for Information Technology Technicians and Professionals
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Kyle Jones, Sinclair Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 596,341.00

A high demand for information technology (IT) technicians and professionals,
coupled with the expected retirements in the field over the next five years,
requires a new approach to identify and train the IT workforce. To ensure
sufficient numbers of highly qualified IT technicians are available, Sinclair
College will collaborate with industry to modify computer information systems
(CIS) curriculum to reduce content redundancies, a frequent problem in courses
built around industry certifications. The CIS programs will expand the depth of
associate degree and certificate curricula, to make graduates more competitive.
This project will also investigate the impact of competency-based, flex-paced
curriculum and the role of a Navigator to assist students through credential
completion. (A Navigator is a person who assists students across multiple areas,
including enrollment issues, financial planning, academic advising, and career
planning.) Information about how the project identified and remediated content
redundancies, along with evidence-based practices related to accelerated
coursework and student supports, will be disseminated to IT/CIS faculty at
secondary and post-secondary institutions. The project aims to address the need
for a strong and diverse IT workforce in southwest
Ohio.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has three primary objectives: (1) to
increase the success of postsecondary students pursuing one of five enhanced IT
degrees; (2) to increase educational opportunities for rehabilitating prisoners
to meet technician demand; and (3) to determine the efficacy of educational
material dissemination for regional high schools. The project will enhance IT
curricula to meet current and emerging workforce needs in network engineering,
secure system administration, user support, cyber investigation, and data
analytics. Seven core CIS courses based on industry certifications will be
enhanced to reduce content redundancies. Faculty will employ the principles of
spiral curriculum pedagogy and Bloom's Taxonomy to develop technician
preparation pathways. Course modules will use competency-based, flex-paced
modalities, allowing students to complete coursework at their own pace. It will
also integrate content from industry certifications, modules developed by the
Center for Occupational Research and Development and the NSF Center for Systems
Security and Information Assurance, and Necessary Skills Now content to
complement IT fundamentals with employability skills. The project will reach
high school students, with emphasis on female high school students through Women
in STEM events. To further meet technician demand and increase educational
opportunities for rehabilitating inmates nearing reentry, the project will
deliver two IT Certificates, IT Fundamentals and User Support, to inmates in
seven correctional facilities. These Certificates are aligned with in-demand
entry-level positions. Inmates will access online CIS coursework through secure
JPay's Lantern tablet computers. A strong dissemination plan through the Miami
Valley Tech Prep Consortium will ensure the communication of project
deliverables and outcomes to others, including secondary school faculty for use
with high school students pursuing a dual enrollment IT career pathway. New CIS
curriculum will impact over 1,400 postsecondary students in five IT degree
programs. This number includes 400 inmates in the Advanced Job Training prison
program. Inclusion of this relatively untapped inmate population will contribute
to reduced recidivism as well as promote diversity in the IT workforce.
Additionally, 300 high school students will be exposed to new curriculum through
established dual-enrollment programs, providing these students a pathway to
college careers in this in-demand field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.