* 1800574
* New Approaches to Catalyst Screening and Development
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* David Hage, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 522,208.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. David Berkowitz of the University of Nebraska-Lincoln is developing new
reactions to help chemists in the industrial and pharmaceutical sectors and in
academia. The target molecules have applications in drug discovery and the
synthesis of new materials. The reactions that he and his team explore
incorporate aspects of biology to get information on how fast reactions are
going. These reactions also incorporate biology to make a large array of
specific products. Dr. Berkowitz is actively engaged in outreach activities that
promote the engagement of students in science, technology, engineering and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include undergraduate
research internships in Dr. Berkowitz's laboratory, and open house presentations
to high school students and their parents from a four-state area, are exposing
students to STEM research early in their educational
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Berkowitz and co-workers develop a
catalyst screening process, termed In Situ Enzymatic Screening (ISES). The
method utilizes "reporting enzymes" to provide real time information on relative
rate, stereoselectivity and substrate scope for a set of parallel
organic/organometallic reactions of interest. Dr. Berkowitz is studying the
first catalytic asymmetric allylic amination reaction with Ni and promising new
chiral salen ligands that derive from beta-pinene- and
beta-D-(carba)fructopyranose-derived-1,2-diamines. A promising new formal
thiocyanopalladation/carbocyclization transformation has been discovered and is
being applied to the construction of densely functionalized and polycyclic
libraries for diversity-oriented synthesis (DOS). Throughput is addressed with
the development of alternative spectroscopic read-outs and screening arrays.
Temperature variation is being expanded via the development of "thermal-ISES"
through the introduction of thermophilic "reporting enzymes." New transition
metal-ligand combinations are explored toward the stereocontrolled construction
of quaternary, beta,gamma-unsaturated amino acid targets of interest to
synthetic chemists, medicinal chemists, and chemical biologists. In support of
the broader impacts of the project, Dr. Berkowitz mentors female students and
members of traditionally underreperesented groups in his laboratory. The
interdisciplinary training that students receive at the chemistry/biology
interface includes significant exposure to spectroscopy and kinetics. These
skills is equiping these students for careers in both modern industrial and
academic chemistry settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.