* 1800602
* Mechanistic Studies of Dipole Effects on Electronic Coupling in Charge Transfer Implemented as Photoinduced Dynamics of Intramolecular Hole Hopping
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Valentine Vullev, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 614,230.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Valentine Vullev at the University
of California, Riverside is developing new classes of synthetic systems to study
the influence of dipoles on charge transfer. Charge transfer is among the most
fundamental processes, essential for managing energy flow and sustaining life on
Earth. Respiration, photosynthesis, batteries, electronic devices and many other
intricate components of lives heavily rely on efficient charge-transfer
processes. Concurrently, electric dipoles are everywhere, and the localized
fields around them can have a profound effect on how charges move. Therefore, it
is important to understand how dipoles affect charge transfer, in order to
enhance desired forward electron transduction while suppressing undesired
processes. Professor Vullev's group is well positioned to provide the highest
level of education and training for students, including those underrepresented
in science. Outreach activities involving K-12 students are planned. Summer
research training, which includes writing scientific papers and producing
scientific videos, will be provided for high school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the goal of this project is to explore
how dipoles affect electronic coupling in charge-transfer systems in bioinspired
molecular electrets, which are systems with ordered electric dipole moments. The
research is based on Professor Vullev's discovery that the dipoles of molecular
electrets can modulate the delocalization of frontier orbitals and alter donor-
acceptor electronic coupling, leading to orders of magnitude changes in the
charge-transfer rates. It has three specific aims: (1) determining parameters
that govern dipole-modulated electronic coupling; (2) determining the dipole
effects on charge transfer occurring via hole-hopping vs. tunneling mechanisms;
and (3) determining the effect of radical delocalization on the dynamics of hole
hopping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.