* 1800269
* RUI: Deep Eutectic Solvents for Chiroptical Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Todd Hopkins, Butler University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 242,301.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Todd A. Hopkins of the Department
of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Butler University is developing unique solvents
called deep eutectic solvents as circularly polarized light emitting materials.
Deep eutectic solvents are well suited to the task, because of the ability to
control their properties. This project explores how to design deep eutectic
solvents that improve the efficiency of emitted circularly polarized light.
Circularly polarized light emitting materials, such as circularly polarized
organic light emitting diodes, have potential application in quantum computing,
for generating holographic images, and as security labels. This project engages
undergraduate students in research at the interface of physical, inorganic, and
materials chemistry, and involves collaboration between undergraduate research
students and students enrolled in a physical chemistry laboratory course.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the goal of this project is to develop
circularly polarized light emitting materials based on luminescent lanthanide
complexes dissolved in deep eutectic solvents. Deep eutectic solvents are formed
from combinations of hydrogen bond acceptor and donors, whose properties can be
controlled through choice of components. Therefore, the selection of hydrogen
bond acceptor with chiral hydrogen bond donor can generate a deep eutectic
solvent that provides both chiral selection and charge carrier properties to
enhance electroluminescence of the dissolved lanthanide complexes. This project
involves 1) screening chiral hydrogen bond donors for low melting point deep
eutectic solvent formation; 2) characterizing the physical properties of the
deep eutectic solvents; 3) characterizing the chiroptical properties of
lanthanide complexes in the successful deep eutectic solvents; and 4) developing
circularly polarized organic light emitting diodes out of the successful deep
eutectic solvent/lanthanide systems. The high-throughput approach to screening
deep eutectic solvent properties in this project yields a large amount of data
on deep eutectic solvent-structure property relationships that will be shared in
a public database to help the research community develop better predictive
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.