* 1800563
* Research Data Centers: Wasatch Front Research Data Center
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Thomas Cova, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 06/30/2024
* USD 298,625.00

This award will support the establishment of the Wasatch Front Research Data
Center (WFRDC), which will be based at the University of Utah in Salt Lake City.
The WFRDC will provide social and medical scientists a cost-effective, secure
research facility where they will have greater access to restricted statistical
data collected by the federal government. The organizations that will support
and benefit from the WFRDC include the University of Utah, Utah State
University, Brigham Young University, Huntsman Cancer Institute (a National
Cancer Institute Comprehensive Cancer Center), departments within the Utah state
government, and the University of Utah Health Sciences Center. The WFRDC will
facilitate collaborations between scientists in Utah and the Intermountain
region. It will allow researchers to explore novel questions in areas such as
health, medical care, work force trends, population dynamics, and environmental
issues. The insights created from these investigations will advance scientific
knowledge and provide benefits to residents in the Intermountain West, local
government agencies, and the federal statistical system. The long-term effects
of the WFRDC will include enhanced educational and employment development,
collaborations between institutions and disciplines, and better informed
government agencies. Researchers and students receiving training through the
WFRDC will promote workforce development and provide opportunities for students
to gain expertise in data science and other novel methods. This will create a
large pool of technically trained individuals who will make contributions to the
academic, public, and private sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WFRDC will
provide more cost-effective access to restricted data that will be of value to
scientists from fields that include demography, sociology, economics, human
development, geography, public health, and epidemiology. The WFRDC plans to link
the data contained within the Utah Population Database (UPDB) to other federal
statistical records. The UPDB holds one of the largest research databases in the
world linking genealogies with medical records. WFRDC scientists will address
fundamental questions about the role of early life factors (socioeconomic,
geographic, biomedical) and their influence on health later in life as well as
socioeconomic differentials in adult health. Using data from the Agency for
Healthcare Research and Quality along with population estimates derived from the
decennial census and the American Community Survey, researchers will address
questions related to the interaction between the economy and the health of its
members. Geographers and spatial scientists will use restricted U.S. Census data
that provide counts of small geographic areas to study social vulnerability to
hazards such as air pollution and its role in promoting health disparities.
WFRDC scientists also will examine how economic forces affect individual and
family outcomes and social and economic mobility using various datasets from the
U.S. Census Bureau.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.