* 1800361
* Pyrrole-modified Porphyrins - Chromophores of Basic and Applied Interests
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Christian Brueckner, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2024
* USD 462,909.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Brueckner, a faculty member in the Department of Chemistry at the
University of Connecticut. Blood is red and grass is green because of a
particular class of compounds - so called porphyrins, that fulfill diverse roles
throughout the living world. In addition to these natural roles, these highly
colored compounds can potentially be used for a variety of "non-natural"
applications that range from their use as contrast agents to improve the imaging
of biological tissue for better disease detection to their use for the
electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide and in chemosensing efforts. With
this in mind, Professor Brueckner is developing strategies to convert naturally
occurring porphyrins to derivatives that possess properties the original
compounds do not have. This allows them to be optimized for new applications. In
addition, the derivatives being synthesized are well-suited for answering
fundamental questions about the properties of the porphyrins and how those
properties can be systematically altered by changes in structure. The project
teaches graduate and undergraduate students in the techniques and methodologies
that are used in the pharmaceutical and other industries. In this way, students
are prepared to enter the workplace. Professor Brueckner's has traditionally
been active in chemical education and in attracting students underrepresented in
science to this most colorful research work. The multidisciplinary and very
visual nature of the research make it ideal for outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of
this proposal is the development of strategies to convert porphyrins into
pyrrole-modified porphyrins (PMPs). PMPs are macrocycles derived from porphyrins
by formally replacing at least one pyrrolic building block with a different
heterocycle. Starting from synthetic porphyrins, a relatively little explored
strategy will be pursued: activation of the beta-position of porphyrins,
followed by ring cleavage and subsequent ring-fusion. Focus in this study is the
generation of PMPs containing multiple modified pyrroles, medium-size rings, or
multiple annulated ring systems. The guiding hypothesis is that these
modifications result in altered electronic properties when compared to their
parent compounds. The suitability of the PMPs in several biological (i.e.,
contrast agents in photoacoustic tissue imaging) and technical (i.e.
electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, chemosensing) applications will be evaluated.
The proposed work relies on collaborations with intramural and extramural
(international) specialty groups in a number of biological, physical sciences
and engineering disciplines. The program offers a multidisciplinary and
collaborative training ground for graduate students in diverse areas ranging
from organic and inorganic synthesis, physical organic chemistry, photophysics,
to a number of biomedical and engineering applications. This prepares them for
future careers in industry or academia. The proposal also includes year-round
undergraduate research projects, and it will be part of the departmental REU
program. The multidisciplinary porphyrin-related research activities are ideal
for dissemination in non-technical journals and make colorful subjects of
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.