* 1800435
* D3SC: CDS&amp;E: Conformer Toolkit: Generating Accurate Small Molecule Conformer Ensembles
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Geoffrey Hutchison, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 12/31/2021
* USD 411,333.00

Geoffrey Hutchison and David Koes of the University of Pittsburgh are supported
by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods Program in the Division
of Chemistry, to develop and apply novel statistical machine learning or
"artificial intelligence" techniques to analyze the structure and flexibility of
molecules. Most molecules are flexible, and at room temperature can exist in
multiple interconverting geometries called conformers. As molecules increase in
size, complexity, and flexibility, the number of possible stable conformers
increases exponentially. To accurately predict molecular properties, it is
important to take into account all geometries---even those lower-probability
conformers---if they have some probability of spontaneously forming at a given
temperature. Thus, a challenge is to efficiently identify these conformers
despite an extremely complex, multi-dimensional geometric search spaces.
Professors Hutchison and Koes implement a unique grid-based neural network
approach to predict conformers, trained on databases of high-quality
calculations generated using NSF XSEDE supercomputing resources. The machine
learning techniques are validated against experimental and computational
benchmarks. They are also applied to developing improved methods for identifying
drug targets, and for optimizing the design of plastic electronic materials. The
databases and software developed for this project are publicly disseminated. New
tutorial resources are developed for Avogadro and 3DMol.js software tools, and
new educational components on programming, visualization, and statistical
machine learning areincorporated into the "Mathematics for Chemists" course
taught by Professor Hutchison. Both investigators give open lectures on data
science and chemistry to the public and to local high school students. They are
also actively engaged in outreach to underrepresented groups through the
American Chemical Society Project Seed, Pittsburgh Public Schools Science and
Technology Academy, and the Drug Discovery, Systems, and Computational Biology
Summer Academy for high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of
this project draws upon a connection between statistical thermodynamics and
Bayesian statistics. Using experimental and computational data, one can estimate
distributions of dihedral angles for most molecules. From such probabilities,
Bayesian optimization can be used to accurately explore and sample Boltzmann-
weighted ensembles of the potential energy surface. The second aim takes
advantage of recent improvements in quantum chemical methods for predicting
thermochemistry for organic molecules. Using these accurate energies in tandem
with experimental and other computational databases, recurrent neural-network
thermochemical models are produced for molecules of different sizes and
containing a wide range of elements. The resulting large data repositories and
open source software tools are disseminated to the community, and used as the
foundation for educational materials in a new curriculum for chemistry. They are
providing the basis for ongoing outreach and broadening participation activities
to high school and undergraduate students, involving a state-of-the-art,
interdisciplinary mix of data science, machine learning, and computational
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.