* 1800110
* Configuring first-row metal-metal bonded complexes to boost redox flexibility and N2 reduction activity
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Connie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2021
* USD 420,000.00

Nitrogen is essential to life and has many important uses including fertilizers,
components of plastics, and ingredients of pharmaceuticals. Actually, nitrogen
is abundant and easily accessible as it makes up 78% of the Earth's atmosphere.
However, atmospheric nitrogen gas is very difficult to convert into forms that
can be used for practical applications. In fact, the industrial conversion of
atmospheric nitrogen into ammonia (the basic component of agricultural
fertilizer and many industrial processes) utilizes extreme amounts of energy and
the conversion of atmospheric nitrogen directly to a number of other industrial
chemicals is not developed. In this project funded by the Chemical Synthesis
program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Connie Lu of the University of
Minnesota, Twin Cities is addressing these problems by developing ways to
convert atmospheric nitrogen into chemicals other than ammonia. The methods
utilize cobalt and iron compounds to transfer electrons to nitrogen. This
activates the nitrogen and permits it be converted to a class of compounds know
as amines, which are the basic building blocks for many industrially important
chemicals. The project contains a strong educational component in which
undergraduate and graduate students are trained for future careers in science
and technology. Additionally, an outreach component provides experimental
modules for middle and high-school students to teach topics of sustainability
and catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The redox processes available to first-row
metal-metal bonded complexes can be more flexible than those of individual
metals. This effect is seen in multi-metallic compounds, which are versatile
catalysts for a broad range of organic and inorganic transformation. This
property is utilized to prepare catalysts for the conversion of dinitrogen to
amines. A series of bimetallic Co-M and Fe-M (M = Al, Ti, V, Cr, and Co)
complexes are prepared and their redox flexibility characterized by synchrotron
and theoretical methods. The ability of these species to catalyze the silylation
of dinitrogen is investigated and the mechanism of this process is determined by
chemical and theoretical studies. The goal is to devise catalytic N&amp;#8722;C
bond formation directly from dinitrogen. Throught these activities undergraduate
and graduate students become skilled in syntheis, catalyst development, and
mechanistic studies. A further outreach component targets middle and high school
girls through experimentally based catalysis
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.