* 1800453
* Inverse Boundary Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Gunther Uhlmann, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2021
* USD 269,999.00

In inverse boundary problems one attempts to determine the internal properties
of a medium by making measurements at the boundary of the medium. In other
words, can one "see" what is inside by making measurements on the outside? An
example are CT scans, a commonly used medical imaging technique. One measures
the response of the body to X-rays and makes an image of what is inside from
this information. The principal investigator will investigate ultrasound
transmission and reflection tomography which uses high frequency sound waves
instead of X-rays. Also several inverse problems in cosmology will be
considered. The main questions is whether one can determine the structure of the
Universe billions of years ago from measurements made near the Earth.

The principal investigator will address the mathematical theory of several
fundamental inverse problems arising in many areas of science and technology
including medical imaging, geophysics, cosmology, and nondestructive testing.
Three major topics of research will be investigated. The first one is Travel
Time Tomography in anisotropic media. In mathematical terms this involves the
determination of a Riemannian metric or Finsler metric (anisotropic sound speed)
in the interior of a domain from the lengths of geodesics joining points of the
boundary (travel times) and from other kinematic information. The second is
inverse problems for non-linear equations arising in many applications including
general relativity, elasticity, fluids etc. The main idea is to use the
nonlinear interaction of waves to produce new waves that will help solve the
inverse problems. The third is Electric Impedance Tomography (EIT), also called
Calderon's problem. In this inverse method one attempts to determine the
conductivity of a medium by making voltage and current measurements at the
boundary. In the project the quasilinear case will be considered as well as an
analog problem for the fractional Laplacian.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.