* 1800619
* RUI: Asymmetric Membranes for High Capacity Lithium Ion Battery Anodes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Ji Wu, Georgia Southern University Research and Service Foundation, Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2022
* USD 126,427.00

The increased use of sustainable but intermittent power sources (solar, wind,
tidal, etc.) depends on the availability of robust energy storage capability.
The wider adoption of electric vehicles also demands the development of
efficient energy storage technology. Presently it is the lithium ion battery
(LIB) that best satisfies these needs but with limitations, including energy
capacity, performance, safety, and cost. In this regard, high capacity LIB
anodes like silicon and tin dioxide can play an important role. However, these
high capacity electrodes can undergo dramatic structural changes during battery
charging/discharging and thus lose capacity rapidly. This project's goal is to
address these limitations by the use of readily available materials (silicon and
tin dioxide) in novel structural forms called asymmetric membranes. These
membranes are designed to account for the volume changes during cycling while
maintaining structural integrity. The asymmetric membranes can be fabricated
using a scalable and low-cost method that has been successfully commercialized
for water purification. For educational broader impacts, existing successful
programs at Georgia Southern University (GSU) will be utilized to broaden the
educational impact and provide research experiences for both undergraduate and
graduate students. The PI will leverage existing resources at GSU to help
broaden participation of underrepresented minorities and women in undergraduate
research experiences that benefit the project. The PI will also collaborate with
local chapters of The National Organization for the Professional Advancement of
Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) and McNair Scholars at GSU to
encourage participation of student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major
goal of this research program is to test the hypothesis that the electrochemical
performance of high-capacity lithium ion battery (LIB) alloying anodes such as
Si and SnO2 can be significantly enhanced using novel asymmetric membrane
structures. Another goal is to investigate the physiochemical evolution of these
asymmetric membrane electrodes during repeated charging/discharging processes.
Commercial LIBs use relatively low-capacity graphite for anodes. In contrast,
the theoretical capacities of alloying anodes such as Si and Sn for LIBs are
several to ten folds higher. The drawback to using Si and Sn in anode
construction is the roughly 300% volume change during the cycling process, which
can lead to pulverization, unstable solid-electrolyte interphase, and rapid
capacity loss. The PI will investigate whether using carbonized asymmetric
membrane electrodes that contain silicon and tin dioxide can significantly
increase LIB anode capacity while maintaining a long cycling life and an
excellent rate performance. The material synthesis and membrane fabrication use
proven scalable methods of self-assembling phase-inversion method and then roll
to roll fabrication. In situ Raman spectroscopy and in situ powder X-ray
diffractometry will be used to characterize the anodes during operation. The
gained knowledge will enhance the fundamental understanding of the structural
and electrochemical evolution of silicon and tin dioxide asymmetric membrane
electrodes that experience large volume variation, thus potentially transforming
the design of high capacity LIB electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.