* 1800446
* CDS&E: Collaborative Research: Machine Learning on Dynamical Systems via Topological Features
* MPS,DMS
* 08/16/2017,08/31/2019
* Elizabeth Munch, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2019
* USD 101,672.00

Objects whose state changes over time, known as dynamical systems, describe a
large number of natural and engineered processes; therefore, developing a deeper
understanding of their behavior is of great importance. While sometimes it is
possible to derive mathematical models that describe the evolution of a
dynamical system, these models are almost always an abstraction of the physical
system and, therefore, have a limited ability to predict how the system will
change in time. Further, when the system under investigation is large or too
complicated with several factors influencing its behavior, it may simply be
impossible to describe the system with the corresponding descriptive equations.
Consequently, in the absence of adequate analytical models it becomes necessary
to instrument the dynamical system with sensors and use the resulting data to
understand its characteristics. Specifically, the change in the state of a
dynamic system is often governed by an underlying skeleton that gives the
overall behavior a shape, and thus the shape of the skeleton directly governs
the system behavior. Most of the time, this shape of the underlying skeleton is
unknown and can be easily masked by the complicated and rich system signals. The
emergent field of topological data analysis (TDA), a branch of mathematics that
quantifies the shape of data, is capable of revealing information that is
invisible to other existing methods by providing a high level X-ray of the
skeleton governing the dynamics. However, the information-rich structures
provided by TDA still need to be interpreted in order to classify the dynamics
and predict future outcomes. To accomplish this, the principal investigators
will leverage ideas from machine learning, a field of study that investigates
algorithms that can learn from the data and use the acquired knowledge for
classification and prediction. However, the mathematical theory that elucidates
how machine learning can operate on the features extracted using TDA currently
does not exist. Hence, this work will develop the necessary, novel mathematical
and computational tools at the intersection of topological data analysis (TDA),
dynamical systems, and machine learning.

The principal investigators seek to understand and formulate the foundations of
machine learning when the important features of a dynamical system are
summarized by descriptors generated with topological data analysis (TDA).
Although these signatures provide an information-rich structure for the
evolution of the dynamics, current literature has only been utilizing a fraction
of the available information in order to identify, predict, and classify
different dynamic behavior. One of the current impediments to further exploring
the relationship between TDA and dynamical systems is the lack of machine
learning theory that can operate on these structures. Therefore, the success of
our effort will lead to (1) the establishment of a novel, general, and robust
machine learning framework for studying dynamic signals via topological
signatures, (2) better understanding of the relationship between TDA and
dynamical systems via the use of these methods on real and synthetic data, and
(3) the integration of the new knowledge into the investigators' educational
programs, which will provide timely training of well-equipped next generation
scientists and engineers.