* 1800906
* Fundamental Physical Understanding of Matrix-stabilized Combustion in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Matthias Ihme, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 05/31/2021
* USD 370,000.00

The objective of the proposed research is to develop computational and
experimental methods to improve the fundamental understanding of matrix-
stabilized combustion in porous media. Matrix-stabilized combustion is an
advanced combustion concept in which combustion is sustained within a porous
heat-conducting matrix. The internal heat recirculation within the porous matrix
facilitates preheating of the unburned gas mixture, thereby enabling high-
efficiency and low-pollution operations. However, the limited understanding
about the combustion and heat transfer processes represents a major challenge
toward the successful implementation as low-emission combustion technology for
transportation and power generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining
computational modeling with experimental investigations, this research seeks to
enable the quantitative prediction and detailed analysis of matrix-stabilized
combustion in porous media. Specifically, the goal of the computational research
is to develop a high-fidelity simulation capability to enable detailed pore-
resolved simulations of heterogeneous combustion processes and gas-solid
interaction inside the porous structure. The experimental effort will focus on
the development of advanced non-intrusive X-ray diagnostics to obtain
quantitative measurements of the temperature field and combustion processes
inside the porous matrix. By combining detailed simulations and experimental
diagnostics, systematic investigations will be performed to obtain fundamental
understanding of heterogeneous combustion processes, identify flame structure,
and assess effects of operating conditions, material properties and pore
topology on the flame stabilization, emissions, and combustion
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.