* 1800279
* Chemoenzymatic Synthesis and Biochemical Studies of Glycosphingolipids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Zhongwu Guo, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Dr. Zhongwu Guo of the University of Florida is developing a new,
efficient, and widely applicable strategy for the synthesis of molecules called
"glycosphingolipids" (GSLs). GSLs are components of the cell membrane and play a
vital role in biological processes such as the regulation cell division,
recognition, and adhesion, as well as nerve system development and drug
resistance. Abnormal GSLs were demonstrated to be closely associated with
diseases such as cancer, bacterial and viral infections, diabetes, Alzheimer?s
disease, and Fabry disease. Detailed investigations of GSLs are critical for
understanding their fundamental functions and for the development of new
biotechnologies. To this end, a major hurdle in understanding GSLs is obtaining
pure and well-defined samples. In the current project, Dr. Guo is developing new
strategies to make GSLs, as well as making GSL derivatives for use as tools to
study their biochemical properties. This project explores the fundamental
reactivity of GSLs in biology, especially diseases related to the human brain.
Other activities supported by this award include undergraduate student
engagement in scientific research. New curriculum development targeted at
improving chemical education, and interest in carbohydrate chemistry and
glycobiology is also a focus of Dr. Guo's outreach and educational activities.
This project advances human health while supporting education at the interface
of chemistry and biology.

Dr. Guo's strategy for the synthesis of glycosphingolipids (GSLs) consists of
enzymatic carbohydrate assembly of a substrate bearing a truncated lipid
followed by chemoselective lipid elongation via olefin cross-metathesis and
other reactions. This approach is addressing issues with the limited water
solubility of the fully elongated GSLs and allowing for access to these
compounds in pure and structurally defined forms. Dr. Guo is also applying this
synthetic strategy to preparing GSL libraries that contain different glycans,
lipids, and functional groups. He is employing the functionalized GSLs,
especially those with fluorescent labels, to probe their distribution in the
cell membrane. This project has a significant and broad impact on many
scientific areas including GSL-related biology and biomedical sciences through
the use of GSLs as molecular tools. The application of these tools is providing
insights into the functions, functional mechanisms, and structure-activity
relationships of GSLs. In addition, Dr. Guo is also actively engaged in
establishing and enriching the Chemical Biology program at the University of
Florida. He train graduate and undergraduate students at the interface of
chemistry and biology.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.