* 1800273
* Reactive Intermediates in Gold(I) Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ross Widenhoefer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 08/31/2021
* USD 450,001.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics and Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ross A. Widenhoefer in the
Department of Chemistry at Duke University investigates the mechanisms of gold-
catalyzed chemical reactions, especially those in which a divalent carbon atom
is transferred to a carbon-carbon double bond to form a cyclopropane. This is a
synthetic transformation of growing importance. Studies include experiments to
determine the scope and mechanisms of gold-catalyzed processes and the structure
of gold complexes. This research provides mechanistic insight that will serve
the ever growing global community of researchers working toward the development
of new and more efficient gold(I) catalyzed transformations. Research activities
are fully integrated into the scientific education and training of graduate and
undergraduate student researchers, including students from groups traditionally
underrepresented in the sciences. Graduate students augment their research
experience through participation in educational activities offered through the
Duke University Graduate School. Graduate students also participate in community
outreach activities in collaboration with Dr. Ben Bobay of the Duke Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) center which provide local high school students with
hands-on exposure to modern high-field NMR spectroscopy and one-on-one
instruction in the processing and interpretation of NMR data.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the structure and reactivity of gold
carbenoid complexes and cationic gold carbene complexes, including those
relevant to gold-to-alkene carbene transfer (cyclopropanation), gold alpha-oxo
carbene and carbenoid complexes, and cationic beta, gamma-unsaturated gold
carbene complexes. Despite a growing body of work in this area, limited
experimental information is available regarding mechanisms which involve these
gold complexes. Research activities fill important gaps in this field and
develop an experimentally-grounded understanding of the nature of the complexes
generated either through carbene transfer from stabilized diazo compounds or
through the oxidation of alkenes in the presence of gold. The research addresses
three main areas of inquiry: (1) elucidation of the mechanisms of gold to alkene
carbene transfer by modeling the transition state for carbene transfer,
independent synthesis of gold metallacyclobutane complexes, and kinetic analysis
of gold to alkene carbene transfer under stoichiometric conditions; (2)
evaluation of the nature and reactivity of cationic gold alpha-oxo carbene and
carbenoid complexes by studying the reactions of gold complexes with stabilized
N- and S-ylides and the reactions of pyridine N-oxides and with cationic gold
complexes; and (3) interrogation of the structure and reactivity of unsaturated
gold carbene complexes through the synthesis and characterization of cationic
gold allenylidene and vinyl carbene complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.