* 1800855
* Topics in Harmonic Analysis and Probabilistic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Yen Do, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2022
* USD 153,505.00

Many physical systems can be described using nonlinear equations, however it is
often difficult to solve these equations explicitly and therefore challenging to
locate and analyze the solutions. For example, in mathematical physics there are
equations describing important phenomenon (such as propagation of light in
nonlinear medium, propagation of waves in shallow water) where one would like to
understand the long-time behavior of the solutions. Another example is from
statistical physics, where one would like to understand the statistics of the
solutions of random polynomial equations (often of very large degree), in
particular it is of special interest to estimate and determine the typical
locations of the solutions that are real. The purpose of this project is to
further develop and employ tools in harmonic analysis to investigate various
open questions related to these topics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The underlying
theme of the project is the use of real variable techniques to study behavior of
nonlinear equations (both deterministic and random) in the presence of a large
parameter. The proposed research branches into two directions: (1) analysis of
nonlinear Fourier transforms arising in inverse scattering theory and related
nonlinear oscillatory integrals, and (2) analysis of the roots of random
algebraic polynomials. For (1) the problems to be investigated are related to
uniform boundedness of truncated nonlinear Fourier transforms and long-time
asymptotics for nonlinear oscillatory integrals. For (2) the problems to be
investigated are related to the estimation of several key statistics for the
distribution of the real roots when the degree of the polynomial is large. The
main tools developed and employed in the principal investigator's previous work
(solo and joint with co-authors) continue to be refined and sharpened in this
project: a novel outer-measure framework designed to treat delicate iterated
Fourier integrals in the multilinear expansion of nonlinear Fourier transforms,
a real variable approach to study long time asymptotics of oscillatory Riemann-
Hilbert problems, and improved methods to study the distribution of the real
roots of random polynomials with varying coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.