* 1800050
* Intersystem Crossing Dynamics in Thio-Substituted Pyrimidine Nucleobases Studied by Time-resolved Photoionization Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Susanne Ullrich, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2023
* USD 464,303.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A)
program of the Chemistry Division, Prof. Ullrich of the University of Georgia is
using laser spectroscopy to study the response of modified nucleobases to
ultraviolet (UV) irradiation. Nucleobases are molecular components of DNA, and
thus form the building blocks of our genetic coding material. Naturally
occurring nucleobases are known to protect themselves against UV radiation
through processes within the nucleobase molecule that dissipate potentially
harmful UV energy into heat. However, the details of these processes are not
well understood. Prof. Ullrich is uncovering these details by making slight
changes to the nucleobase structure, and observing changes in how UV light is
dissipated. In some cases, for example when an oxygen atom is replaced by a
sulfur atom, the nucleobase has difficulty dissipating the energy from the UV
light. This is to say it remains "excited", and therefore vulnerable to damage.
While such a condition may not be desirable for normal strand of DNA, it may be
beneficial in cancer treatments, where UV or other light energy may be used to
specifically attack cancer cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project time-
resolved photoelectron spectroscopy is applied to the study of pyrimidine
thiobases to unravel the mechanistic details governing their unique ultrafast
intersystem crossing dynamics. Supplemented by ab-initio calculations and
dynamics simulations intricate specifics of the excited state potential energy
surfaces such as couplings between the lowest excited states, potential energy
barriers, and accessibility of conical intersections are revealed. Particular
focus is on the role of low-lying singlet states of n-pi character, given their
widespread emergence as the key doorway for accessing the triplet manifold. The
project trains undergraduate and graduate students as well as summer interns who
participate in the research activities and outcomes of the research are broadly
disseminated to the public through science show
performances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.