* 1800749
* Structural Invariants for Higher-Rank Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Elizabeth Gillaspy, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2024
* USD 269,994.00

The theory of C*-algebras was invented in the 1930s and 1940s as a mathematical
model for quantum mechanics. In addition to their connections with physics,
C*-algebras provide a useful framework for studying a variety of mathematical
objects. Applications of C*-algebras beyond physics are also beginning to arise;
for example, one can use C*-algebras to study both quantum information theory,
and directed graphs, or networks. Conversely, the C*-algebras associated to
directed graphs have proved to be key examples which have enhanced our
understanding of the class of C*-algebras as a whole. This project focuses on a
generalization of directed graphs -- higher-rank graphs -- and their associated
C*-algebras. A better understanding of the C*-algebras associated to higher-rank
graphs will strengthen our understanding of C*-algebras as a whole, and also
their applicability to other areas of mathematics. In addition to involving
graduate and undergraduate students in research about higher-rank graph
C*-algebras, this project will also enhance the intellectual opportunities
available to mathematicians at the University of Montana and at nearby
universities, in two ways. First, it initiates an exchange program for research-
level graduate students at the University of Montana, to enable them to spend a
semester studying at a university which is offering an advanced graduate course
or seminar that complements the student's research interests. Second, the
principal investigator will host national and international research scholars at
the University of Montana, and will facilitate these scholars' visits to other
regional institutions during their stay in Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher-
rank graphs were introduced by Kumjian and Pask in 2000, in the hopes that their
associated C*-algebras, like graph C*-algebras, would provide important insights
about C*-algebras more generally. However, the structure of higher-rank graph
C*-algebras is much more intricate than that of graph C*-algebras, and this
complexity has limited the applicability of higher-rank graph C*-algebras to
other areas of mathematics up to now. To reverse this trend, this project will
(1) improve our ability to recognize higher-rank graph C*-algebras in other
contexts; and (2) develop new, stronger tools for analyzing higher-rank graph
C*-algebras. Towards the first goal, the principal investigator will clarify the
relationship between higher-rank graph C*-algebras and their twisted
counterparts, as well as investigate connections between higher-rank graph
C*-algebras and other branches of mathematics (such as Lie algebras and
lattices, and wavelets and multiresolution analyses). The second goal will be
achieved by studying invariants of higher-rank graph C*-algebras such as their
K-theory, groupoid structure, KMS states, and Cartan
subalgebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.