* 1800598
* Experimental and Computational Studies of Bifunctional Organometallic Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,10/31/2022
* Douglas Grotjahn, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 10/31/2022
* USD 540,000.00

Catalysis (substances that accelerate chemical reactions) are involved in the
production of a majority of chemical products and make many chemical processes
possible. Thus, the discovery of new or improved catalysts has great practical
importance, contributes to the economic viability of the chemical and
pharmaceutical industries, and provides new ways of efficiently using scarce
resources. In biological systems enzymes are exceedingly efficient at carrying
out chemical reactions that are important to life. In fact, enzymes are often
much more efficient than laboratory or industrial catalysts. Because of this
they can be very useful guides in the design of new catalysts. Dr. Douglas B.
Grotjahn and Dr. Andrew L. Cooksy, San Diego State University, supported by the
Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, use enzyme inspired design
principles to prepare and improve catalysts for industrial processes. A focus of
their work is on new catalysts to convert components found in natural gas to
more complex, valuable chemicals by routes that do not generate waste. This
grant also supports the training of young investigators in the field of
catalysis. The PIs and the students involved in the project maintain an outreach
program to local high schools in order to encourage students to continue their
study of science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses enzyme design
principlse, particularly hydrogen bonding and proton transfer, to accelerate
organometallic catalysis and reactions by new mechanisms. Ligands containing
proton-donating or hydrogen-bonding groups are synthesized and combined with a
variety of metal precursors to form metal complexes. Interactions with nonpolar
and polar reactants, intermediates, or transition states create faster
catalysts. The focus is mostly on waste-free addition or isomerization
reactions, with several goals: (1) apply computer-based molecular predictions
before and after catalyst discovery; (2) build and apply a toolbox of alkene
isomerization catalysts; (3) use ligands to enable X-H activation; (4) develop
catalysts for addition reactions; (5) create catalysts from cheaper metals of
the first row of the periodic table. The project includes significant one-on-one
training in modern techniques of organic and organometallic chemistry, including
NMR spectroscopy, catalysis screening, and computation. The proposed research
adds new mechanistic insight to our picture of bifunctional catalysis, using
complementary experimental and computational studies to allow the design of
better catalysts and chemical processes. To broaden public understanding of the
computational chemistry an outreach program provides 8-12th graders an
individualized introduction to 3D molecular visualization. The lesson plans are
developed in partnership with teachers to reflectlearning objectives articulated
by the State. Graduate students contribute to developing visualizations of
catalytic reactions and participatd as discussion leaders and mentors during the
visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.