* 1800920
* Skilled Workers Get Jobs: High School Engagement To Increase Perception of Technology and Engineering Careers
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Pamela Silvers, Asheville-Buncombe Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 331,650.00

A recent study by Randstad US found that interest in STEM education declines as
students get older. Additionally, eleven- to seventeen-year-old students were
unclear about what jobs related to STEM subjects: 49% did not know what kind of
math jobs exist and 76% did not know what engineers do. Only 22% of girls in
comparison to 465 of boys named technology as a favorite subject and girls were
34% more likely to say STEM jobs are hard to understand. Students' perceptions
about technology and engineering start early. This project aims to change
perceptions through targeted activities for students and families, together with
professional development for educators. The overall goal is to increase the
number of skilled individuals, especially women, in targeted technology and
engineering fields.

This project will engage students, parents/guardians, and high school teachers
and staff to accomplish two principal goals: (1) to improve understanding and
perception of technology and engineering careers, and the educational pathways
involved in those careers; and (2) to increase the number and diversity of
technicians available for the workforce. The motivating rationale for this
project comes from four main sources: 1) feedback from area high schools; 2) a
literature review of perceptions on STEM fields and why students pursue careers
in these fields; 3) industry and workforce needs; and 4) results of integrating
Problem Based Learning and Gender Equity at Ashville-Buncombe Technical
Community College over the past five years. Industry partners will offer
mentorships, speakers, advisory board members, and tours. Recruitment and
relationship building with females will be supported by the Ambassador's
program. High school personnel will receive "intrusive engagement" related to
gender equity, ensuring marketing and classroom engagement is inviting to all
students, including women and minorities. Events will be held both on the
Ashville-Buncombe Technical Community College campus and at high schools (e.g.,
early-release day presentations; in-service day presentations; and departmental
meetings).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.