* 1800975
* An Experimental Investigation of the Synthesis of Complex Organic Molecules in Interstellar Analog Ices
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 401,068.00

This research project will investigate the formation of complex organic
molecules (COMs) containing carbon, hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen atoms on
interstellar ice analog samples that are held at ultra-high vacuum, low
temperatures, and exposure to ionizing radiation --- laboratory conditions that
simulate the environment of interstellar space. Results from the study will
allow astronomers to understand how COMs are formed in interstellar clouds and
the level of chemical complexity that can be built under the extreme conditions
of interstellar space. This project will train graduate and undergraduate
students, including ones from groups that are underrepresented in science, in
advanced techniques of laboratory astrophysics research. The research team will
also participate in training workshops for local high school teachers to help
incorporate research activities into high school
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will explore the synthesis of
six key classes of COMs --- aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, esters,
amides, and isocyanates --- on interstellar ice analogs. They will do so by
exposing interstellar ice analog samples to Lyman alpha radiation in an ultra-
high vacuum space simulation chamber. The radiation energies and low
temperatures in the chamber will approach those found in interstellar clouds,
and the molecules produced in the experiment will be characterized in a highly
complementary manner using mass spectrometry as well as infrared, Raman, and
ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy. The project will support graduate and
undergraduate students, and it will help expose high school classrooms to
advanced research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.