* 1800889
* Creating Precision Agriculture and Crop Protection Career Pathways via Industry Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Erin Krier, Allan Hancock College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,220.00

This project aims to expand agricultural career training in a region with a
continual shortage of skilled labor. The program is designed to produce
graduates with the skills and knowledge to keep up with rapidly-changing
technological advances and requirements in modern agriculture. It has the
potential to advance knowledge and understanding within the field of
Agricultural Education by creating an industry-driven, hands-on model for
developing an Agricultural Sciences degree and certificate program that includes
guided pathways from high school to four-year institutions. As an Hispanic
Serving Institution and an Hispanic-Serving Agricultural Colleges and
University, the College will work closely with high school districts to create
pathways for low-income, underrepresented students to develop their skills and
increase their earnings, encouraging future generations of agricultural
technicians to remain in the region and address the skilled labor
shortage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to create precision agriculture
and crop protection career pathways for students in a rural, agricultural
region. The project also aims to create a robust transfer degree in Agricultural
Science and two certificate programs, develop high school to secondary education
pathways, and establish field experiences and internships. Industry partnerships
will drive curriculum development and students will be connected to regional
agricultural businesses. The project projects that at least 75 students will be
enrolled in the degree and certificate programs by the end of the project
period, with an 80 percent persistence rate. It also projects that more than 400
high school and college students annually will be engaged in field experiences,
internships, and other industry and college outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.