* 1800996
* Cooperative Local Internships as a Novel Innovation in Cybersecurity
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Wayne Machuca, Mount Hood Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 02/28/2022
* USD 224,983.00

There are more than 28 million small businesses in the US, and while an
individual business may not be concerned with cybersecurity, the data suggests
that alarmingly few are adequately protecting data, including customer data like
billing addresses and credit card numbers. Improving the cybersecurity
environment for small businesses benefits businesses directly through costs
savings that result when threats, and corresponding downtime are avoided, and
earnings realized with uninterrupted business operations. The public benefits
more broadly since it is most often their data, and their bank accounts, that
are compromised when a system is hacked or breached. To address these
challenges, this project at Mt Hood Community College (MHCC) in Oregon is
designed to advance efforts to support the statewide small business
cybersecurity environment through Cooperative Local Internships as a Novel
Innovation in Cybersecurity (CLINIC). CLINIC will create the infrastructure for
ongoing efforts at the college to produce highly qualified technicians in
response to local and regional workforce demands, and further support work in
the field by creating a cybersecurity toolbox geared towards the needs of small
businesses. The CLINIC project aims to begin the process to answer the following
long-term research question: How, and in what ways, does providing the small
business community with access to a better trained cybersecurity workforce, in
conjunction with cybersecurity resources, impact the small business
cybersecurity environment? Within the scope of this capacity building project,
the Co-PIs will examine two smaller sub-questions: (1) How, and in what ways,
does the CLINIC internship model improve alignment between the cybersecurity
program and workforce demand? and (2) Does providing support and technical
assistance to small businesses increase the efficacy of cybersecurity toolbox
resources?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CLINIC internship will provide students the
opportunity to use the tools and resources, particularly a self-assessment tool,
in a guided, real-life environment. The existing cybersecurity program offerings
and career pathway will be refined to include a small business cybersecurity
option, featuring stackable cybersecurity credentials for small business
environments that double as both cybersecurity associate degree program
requirements and stand-alone certifications. An expanded survey of Oregon small
businesses will result in continued alignment of project and program components
and allow feedback to inform project activities continually refined through the
external evaluation process. This project will utilize the evidence-based
approaches of career pathways and internships to contribute to, and underpin, a
broader effort to transform the regional small business cybersecurity
environment through a multi-pronged approach that increases technicians in the
workforce, and connects the workforce with stackable small business
cybersecurity certifications. The project will examine how and in what ways
self-assessment tools are utilized by small businesses to prevent and respond to
cybersecurity threats, how having access to these tools in combination with a
cybersecurity literate workforce impacts the business environment with respect
to cybersecurity, and how this project may be best replicated in other settings
through an evaluation of the utility of the
deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.