* 1800187
* 2D Encapsulation of Molecular Crystals for Close-contact Measurement of Exciton Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Christopher Bardeen, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 06/30/2022
* USD 426,000.00

Molecular crystals made from conjugated molecules are oftentimes called organic
semiconductors. These materials can absorb light and efficiently transport the
energy or excitation (called excitons), making them attractive for solar energy
conversion applications. In addition, they support unique phenomena, such as the
splitting of a single exciton into two lower-energy excitons, called singlet
fission. In this project funded by the Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism
(CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Chris Bardeen of the
University of California, Riverside is combining novel sample preparation with
time-resolved optical microscopy to study excitons in organic crystals. The
characterization of excitons in organic solids is challenging, since the fragile
nature of the crystals makes it difficult to perform measurements. Professor
Bardeen and his students overcome this challenge by encapsulating these crystals
beneath two-dimensional sheets of graphene or hexagonal boron nitride. These
atomically thin layers form an optically transparent and chemically-resistant
coating for the crystal. The encapsulated crystals are then studied using high-
resolution microscopy techniques that can follow the excitons as they move
through the crystal and undergo singlet fission . Insights from the work could
advance our understanding of light-emitting diodes and organic photovoltaic
cells. The project is also exploring implications for fields such as quantum
computing. The project is providing the graduate and undergraduate students
involved in this research with advanced training in spectroscopy, materials
characterization, microscopy, and data analysis, as well as supporting outreach
efforts to Taft Elementary School. Ongoing projects include science
demonstrations for various grades, science fair tutorials, a day-long visit to
UCR by the fourth-grade, and classroom visits by undergraduate volunteers. A
hands-on experiment for third graders has been developed in which each student
builds a customized solar-powered car.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses
on prototypical molecular crystal semiconductors like perylene, tetracene ,and
diphenylhexatriene. Plate-like molecular crystals with variable thicknesses are
grown and then covered with graphene and hexagonal boron nitride. With this
enabling technology in place, two categories of experiments are pursued. The
first involves measuring the properties of the encapsulated crystal and its
interaction with the environment using microscopy and photoluminescence methods.
Questions that can be addressed include whether the exciton behavior in
molecular crystals heterogeneous on length-scales down to 20 nm and whether it
is possible to transfer energy and charge across the atomically thin membranes.
The second category of experiments focuses on new space and time-resolved
experiments to determine whether spin-entangled states of triplet pairs produced
by singlet fission can extend over mesoscopic
distances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.