* 1800501
* New Reaction Chemistry with Transition Metal Complexes for Conversion of Oxygenated
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,03/31/2023
* Theodor Agapie, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 03/31/2023
* USD 508,067.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Theodor Agapie of the California Institute of Technology is synthesizing
molecular compounds to study the production of liquid fuels from carbon monoxide
(CO) as a starting material. Liquid fuels (such as methanol and ethanol) are
particularly desirable as they allow the U.S. economy to maintain its current
energy infrastructure. While catalysts for the conversion of CO to fuels
containing carbon-carbon bonds are known, their reactions are chemically
challenging and poorly understood. Dr. Agapie's catalysts are capable of forming
products containing the desirable carbon-carbon bonds using CO as a starting
material. He is also using these compounds to systematically study the
relationship between their structure and reactivity in order to develop a
fundamental understanding of the principles controlling their behavior. Such
advances help the US stay at the forefront of the energy economy. The Agapie
group is involved in outreach activities with high school students in Pasadena,
CA. They support the Caltech Classroom Connection, developing relationships with
teachers as Marshall Fundamental High School. The visits by high school students
and workshops on careers in science have engage students in STEM careers.
Undergraduate students participate in the projects under Caltech programs Amgen
and WAVE which have the goal of providing research opportunities to facilitate
careers in science by students who are underrepresented in science. In addition
to technical training, graduate students develop their mentorship skills by
working with undergraduates, contributing to the education of a talented
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Agapie is systematically studying
structure-reactivity relations of a family of molybdenum complexes in order to
develop a fundamental understanding of the design principles controlling the
selectivity of reductive coupling and deoxygenation of CO and CO2. Ligand
architectures that display the ability to store electrons and change
coordination modes are being prepared. Mechanistic and ligand design hypotheses
are tested to determine the effect of the nature of donors, ligand lability,
reduction potential, and electrophiles on the outcome of CO cleavage and
coupling reactions. The use of mild reagents, which is necessary for practical
applications, is targeted. Specific challenges that are being addressed include:
1) Determination of ligand effects on the cleavage of CO, to generate a metal
carbide; 2) Determination of structural features controlling the extent of CO
homologation (C2 vs C3, etc); 3) Determination of pathways for Cn (n greater
than or equal to 2) product generation from observed intermediates using mild
conditions (H+, H-, H2); 4) Evaluation of reagents that are relevant to
practical applications such as protons as electrophiles, and hydride and H2 as
sources of protons and electrons. These studies may provide the fundamental
knowledge necessary for the design of inexpensive and practical catalysts for
upgrading of carbon feedstocks to higher value chemicals and fuels. This project
is being conducted by undergraduate and graduate students and is exposing them
to several technical areas, including synthesis, spectroscopy, and mechanistic
studies, all of which facilitate the development of a well-trained
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.