* 1800992
* Critical Environments Engineering Technology Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Barbara Wenger, Manhattan Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2022
* USD 511,599.00

Critical environments include laboratories that can keep harmful substances or
organisms from escaping and clean rooms that can maintain contaminant-free
conditions for manufacturing. To work properly, critical environments need
special air handling, mechanical systems, security features, waste treatment,
decontamination systems, and programmable controls. Many facility technicians
are not trained to work with critical environment applications and other common
mechanical or automation systems. The region surrounding Manhattan Area
Technical College in Kansas has an increasing demand for technicians to maintain
critical environments. This local demand is driven by the biotechnology, life
science, and animal health laboratories in the area, as well as the new
Department of Homeland Security?s National Bio- and Agro-Defense Facility. To
meet this need, the college will develop certificate and associate degree
programs focused on teaching students the skills and knowledge they need to
operate and maintain critical environments. The program will be the first of its
kind, and thus has the potential to serve as a model for other institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop courses for a certificate and an
associate of applied science degree in critical environments engineering
technology. The curriculum will incorporate industrial safety and maintenance
engineering topics in combination with biosafety principles. The instructional
design of the program will offer two pathways to meet the specific needs of
different students. Students could take individual modules to fill specific
training needs, or complete a curriculum to obtain a certificate or degree. The
individual modules will be stackable to encourage students to work toward
completion of their education. The program will emphasize a hands-on approach to
integrate behavioral-based training methods in a simulated biosafety laboratory
environment. This laboratory environment includes building automation systems
technology with core mechanical applications such as air handling, welding,
hydronics, and construction. The program will directly support workforce needs
in regional industries. It can also provide professional development
opportunities to incumbent employees, so they can add the skills needed to work
in critical environments. The project also aims to strengthen the safety,
compliance, and operations of the growing number of industries and companies
that use critical environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.