* 1800296
* Microcredentialing for the Unmanned Aerial Systems Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* William Judycki, Mohawk Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 04/30/2021
* USD 557,487.00

Unmanned aerial systems, sometimes referred to as drone technologies, are
becoming a major economic sector nationally and worldwide. A highly-skilled,
diverse workforce is needed to support this emerging sector. To meet this need,
Mohawk Valley Community College will develop an educational model using
microcredentials. These microcredentials will document mastery of specific
knowledge and skills related to the unmanned aerial systems industry, and
"stack" to enable flexible training pathways. This strategy has the potential to
help students develop initial competencies, while motivating them to persist
toward a certificate or degree. The project will develop curricula for one-
semester microcredentials, two-year degrees, and adapt these materials to
support noncredit education in technician fields. Close collaborations with the
local unmanned aerial systems industry cluster will help ensure that the
curriculum meets industry needs. The project team will also work with the
industry partners to develop hands-on lab and field exercises, and to foster
student internship opportunities. The curriculum and materials developed in this
project will be openly available for adaptation or replication at other
institutions. The project has the potential to create resources that support
education of the unmanned aerial systems workforce across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will aim to develop curriculum for six
microcredentials; develop curriculum for two new associate degrees; refine the
existing associate degree to align with categories of the microcredentials; and
leverage these materials to support courses in unmanned aerial systems
applications for emergency services, inspection, and agriculture. The curriculum
will focus on preparing students to manufacture and repair unmanned aerial
systems as well as analyze data collected on missions. The new associate degrees
will be offered in Unmanned Aerial Systems Fabrication and in Unmanned Aerial
Systems Electronics. In the new program structure, the microcredentials will be
transferable between the degree tracks and accumulation of four microcredentials
will be sufficient for students to earn the relevant associate degree. Project-
based learning will be integrated through hands-on, industry-relevant student
capstone and other projects. The courses will be designed to serve as pathways
for current workers toward microcredentials or employment in the unmanned aerial
systems sector. The project will conduct extensive outreach and recruitment of
underrepresented populations to increase diversity in this technician field. The
effectiveness of using microcredentials to address specific workforce skills and
gaps will also be evaluated to determine if it can rapidly produce a skilled and
diverse technical workforce. The results of the project will be broadly
disseminated to assist other colleges in replicating and adapting the use of
microcredentials for the unmanned aerial systems sector as well as other high-
technology academic and workforce sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.