* 1800017
* 2018 Ocean Mixing Gordon Research Conference
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Jonathan Nash, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2019
* USD 30,000.00

This award will help initiate a new Gordon Research conference on Ocean Mixing.
Turbulent mixing results from complex and chaotic motions that span a large
range of spatial and temporal scales. As such, it is particularly challenging to
measure and model, with vast and important consequences. In the ocean, turbulent
mixing controls transport of heat, freshwater, dissolved gasses, and pollutants.
It is crucial for ocean biology because it both determines the flow field for
the smallest plankton, and it sets large-scale gradients of nutrient
availability. It is also central to understanding the energetics of the ocean
and reducing the uncertainties in global circulation and climate models: recent
work has shown that the spatial and temporal non-homogeneity in deep-ocean
mixing may play a critical role in climate. This biennial Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on Ocean Mixing will provide a unique setting to discuss and
improve our current understanding of turbulent mixing in the ocean, and with it
a variety of implications for everything from climate change to global nutrient
patterns that underlie our fisheries. The GRC format encourages the sort of
interdisciplinary thinking and collaboration that is so vital to addressing
these societal issues and will help our scientific community be the most vibrant
&amp; inclusive it can be. The ocean mixing community has historically suffered
from poor diversity, which, while improved in recent years, still needs an
influx of new people, a broadening of ties amongst domestic and international
collaborators, and increased interdisciplinary interactions. The support from
the National Science Foundation will explicitly be used to expand the
demographic, professional and geographic diversity of participants by supporting
attendance of underrepresented and under-resourced groups who stand to benefit
from the intellectual environment and networking opportunities of the GRC
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose and scope of this Gordon Research
Conference is to provide an open forum for discussion of the rapidly evolving
field of ocean mixing. Emphasis is threefold: observations of mixing in the
world, new insights into dynamics that control mixing rates, and impacts of
mixing on regional and global circulation and budgets. The latter two include
development of parameterizations to turn dynamical insights into useful things
to include in regional models and global numerical climate models. Understanding
the physics that drives the distribution of deep-ocean mixing intensity is
critical. Yet even after a half a century of efforts to understand its global
distribution, observations are still sparse; a variety of direct and indirect
methods are still needed to characterize the dynamical processes that lead to
turbulence, and inferences of mixing from larger scale budgets. As such, the
physics of ocean mixing is actively studied using a variety of observational
techniques (direct measure of velocity and temperature fluctuations at the
smallest scales, inferences from large-scale turbulent overturns, observations
of net mixing by purposeful dye release) numerical and theoretical approaches,
as well as laboratory experiments. Finally, the consequences of mixing for
larger scale climate models (which do not directly resolve mixing) are addressed
by turning dynamical insights of the previously mentioned work into practical
parameterizations. As a concrete example, using different mixing schemes in
numerical climate models changes predicted tropical ocean temperatures by more
than a degree and predicted sea level rise by more than 30 cm. Mixing is one of
the greatest sources of uncertainty plaguing today's models with impact of great
societal relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.