* 1800826
* Advanced Fabrication and Joining Technician Project
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Gary Gardner, Central Arizona College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 11/30/2021
* USD 224,571.00

Many industries use new alloys and components that operate at high temperatures,
stresses, and pressures. Computerized mechanized welding and cutting machines
weld and cut 300 percent faster than manual methods. Automated electronics
enable the welding and cutting processes to be more precise, as well as offering
the potential to control and document the entire process. The fabrication and
joining industry is rapidly adopting these new computerized technologies and
advanced processes. As a result, a growing need exists for welding technicians
who have more extensive knowledge of metallurgy, nondestructive examination,
quality control, computerized data acquisition, and technical writing and
reporting. In collaboration with industry partners, this project at Central
Arizona College aims to develop curricula and associated materials for an
advanced fabrication and joining program to prepare Advanced Welding Processes
Technicians. It will include higher-level education and training not offered by
most community college welding programs. Since the college is a both an Hispanic
Serving Institution and a rural community college, this project will strive to
encourage students from minority backgrounds to pursue science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) credentials. The curriculum, STEM content,
and project-based learning exercises will be shared with the National Center for
Welding Education and Training, the seven Hispanic Serving Institutions
participating in the Science Foundation of Arizona Kick Starter project, and
other community colleges. The welding programs at community colleges involved in
the Science Foundation of Arizona will provide feedback on the effectiveness of
the new curriculum and associated materials. This feedback will support the
effort of the college to create quality learning products that foster student
learning and help meet the country?s need for personnel with advanced
fabrication and joining skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing curriculum and
associated materials in advanced fabrication and joining processes is the first
step in meeting the need for fabricators and welders with additional knowledge
of data acquisition, metallurgy, and quality control land welding codes to
ensure quality welds. Six new courses will be developed that will form a core
advanced certificate, and four additional courses will be developed for the
advanced processes technician specialization. The ten courses will be field-
tested in the classroom during the second half of the three-year project, with
at least ten students in the first cohort. Feedback from the students, their
instructors, and industry partners will guide subsequent improvements to the
curriculum. Students in the college certificate and associate degree welding
programs, incumbent workers who need advanced skills, and students from other
community college welding programs will be recruited to the program. The project
will create project-based learning exercises and contextualized STEM content for
the program. These practices are research-validated best practices for teaching
technical and science-based skills to learners, especially those from
traditionally under-represented and disadvantaged backgrounds,. Project-based
learning provides contextualized, authentic experiences (i.e. experiences that
mimic what workers do in their jobs) that help students master challenging STEM
concepts and processes. This approach makes the science more understandable for
students because it places the material in a real-world context (such as a
welding shop) and often builds on content students have already mastered. In
this way, students can discover meaningful relationships between academic theory
and practical, real world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.