* 1800561
* Phosphines Supported on Sulfated Zirconia
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Matthew Conley, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 04/30/2021
* USD 426,000.00

A vast majority of chemicals are prepared using solid catalysts in at least one
step of the manufacturing process. However, these reactions are often less
efficient than theoretically possible. One strategy to achieve more efficient
catalytic reactions would be to generate materials with higher amounts of
reaction sites on the solid surface. In this project, Dr. Matthew P. Conley of
the University of California, Riverside is researching methods to realize this
long-standing challenge. A key to solving this problem is a better understanding
of the chemical interactions between the solid surface and these catalytically-
reactive sites. Dr. Conley is involved in outreach activities related to this
research to promote the engagement of underrepresented minorities in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. Dr. Conley is
hosting students from local high schools and community colleges in his
laboratory for summer internships to introduce them to the university research
environment, which encourages them to enter STEM career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis
Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Matthew P. Conley of the University of
California, Riverside is researching new material platforms to generate well-
defined heterogeneous catalysts. This work focuses on the reaction of phosphines
(R3P) with Brønsted acidic oxides, such as sulfated zirconium oxide, to generate
well-defined phosphonium sites on the oxide surface. The substituents in R3P
impact how strongly the phosphine binds to the sulfated zirconium oxide surface,
which relates to the Brønsted acidity of surface sites on this material. The
phosphonium sites react with organometallic complexes to form well-defined
catalytic sites that polymerize or oligomerize ethylene, depending on the nature
of the organometallic complex in the grafting reaction and the substituents on
the phosphonium site. The above reactions are monitored using spectroscopic
techniques, such as Fourier Transformed Infrared (FT-IR) and solid-state Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR). Dr. Conley is involved in promoting STEM fields though
outreach activities by bringing underrepresented minority students into the lab,
in support of the broader impacts of this project. Funding from this Chemical
Catalysis program enables Dr. Conley to provide summer internships to local high
school students and local community college students from institutions serving
predominately Hispanic populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.