* 1800452
* I-Corps: Intelligent Traffic Management System
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Anuj Sharma, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Pamela McCauley
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will be
significant reductions in traffic congestion, vehicle crash risk, and fuel
consumption. This will potentially have large economic benefits as traffic
congestion causes significant costs to the economy. It is anticipated that
intelligent traffic incident management system will be used by state departments
of transportation (DOTs) to reduce the duration and impacts of incidents and
improve the safety of motorists, crash victims, and emergency responders.
Additional benefits to the DOTs will be: reduced personnel training needs,
improved workload conditions, and increased worker retention rates. State,
municipal and city agencies managing traffic will use this solution as a smart
and reliable decision-assist system to monitor traffic conditions in real time,
proactively control risk using advisory control, quickly detect traffic
incidents, identify the location and potential cause of incidents, suggest
traffic control alternatives, and minimize cognitive bottlenecks for traffic
incident management operators.

This I-Corps project is focused on understanding the product-market fit for
intelligent traffic management systems. The proposed system uses novel machine
learning techniques and graph-based trend filtering approaches for anomaly
detection and state estimation for massive, spatially correlated, multi-
dimensional time series data obtained from sensors that monitor the traffic
networks. These approaches have been shown to be superior to the state-of-the-
art approaches for detecting faulty sensors and quickly reporting traffic
incidents. An advanced human-machine interface will also be provided for the
Intelligent Traffic Management system with the aim to reduce the Visual,
Auditory, Cognitive and Psychomotor (VACP) workload of the Traffic Incident
Managers. The system data architecture uses state-of-the-art data pipelines for
data ingestion, massively parallel methods for stream and batch analytics,
distributed databases for scalable data storage, and GPU-augmented methods for
fast data visualization of large volumes of data.