* 1800188
* Collaboration Of Midwest Professionals for Logistics Engineering Technology Education Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Jeremy Banta, Columbus State Community College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 09/30/2022
* USD 268,000.00

The supply chain, or logistics, industry continues to grow in the Midwest region
of the United States. Jobs in this industry are also becoming more dependent on
technologies such as predictive analytics, artificial intelligence, and
robotics. Nearly 15,000 transportation and warehousing businesses are located
across the cities of Columbus, Ohio; Dayton, Ohio; and Chicago, Illinois. The
ongoing growth helps support and strengthen the logistics industry in this
regional economy. As a result, there is an increasing need for logistics
engineering technicians in the region. In this project, a grouping of community
colleges who are leaders in the logistics field in this Midwest region will be
formed. The project will be led by Columbus State Community College, Oakton
Community College, and Sinclair Community College. It will seek to build career
pathways in logistics engineering technology for students, encourage more
students to complete degrees in this field, develop faculty experience on the
latest technologies, and improve the technical skills of graduates. The goal
will be to provide highly-skilled logistics engineering technicians to support
the regional and national needs of the supply chain sector.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will aim to improve technician education to
support the increasingly complex technology needs of the supply chain sector
while connecting graduates to employment opportunities in a variety of logistics
industries. This project will work with employers, industry experts, and
colleges to establish an innovation network. The network of partners will
identify and create educational resources for emerging skills and technologies
within the sector. The existing logistics curriculum at Columbus State Community
College combines technology applications with engineering systems and integrates
them with supply chain operations. This curriculum will be enhanced to integrate
new topics in data-driven analytics and networking systems. The adapted
curriculum will also be implemented and tested at the partnering institutions.
The network infrastructure will inform and regularly evaluate efforts in
curriculum and career pathway development; in providing professional development
material and trainings for high school and college faculty; and on the use of
prior learning assessments for adult and returning learners, particularly
veterans and recent graduates in need of new skills for the ever-changing
logistics job market. Results will be widely disseminated through an interactive
project website, through publications, and at regional and national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.