* 1800922
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Augmented Reality Agents with Pervasive Awareness, Appearance and Abilities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jeremy Bailenson, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2022
* USD 262,727.00

Voice-based assistants that respond to commands of people can be thought of as
virtual companions that are always standing by to play music, tell us the
weather, turn the lights off, etc. While their powers to respond and act on our
behalf are increasing, unlike real companions they are largely unaware of our
presence, take little initiative, look like appliances rather than interaction
partners, and have limited abilities to both respond to queries and to sense and
control real objects around us. This project will develop Augmented Reality
Agents (ARAs) to embody these voice-based assistants, making them more are aware
of our appearance, emotions, and behaviors, giving dynamic visual
representations that make us aware of their state and behaviors; and leveraging
the growth in "Internet of Things" (IoT) infrastructure and devices to increase
the breadth and depth of their awareness. Together, these advances will lead to
more effective and accepted voice-based assistants, both in the home and beyond.
Such ARAs have a number of potential applications, including healthcare (by
increasing the realism of clinical simulation and training, or providing support
for caregiving through remote communication and virtual companionship) and
education (by being more engaging tutors or representing historically important
individuals). &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To develop embodied Augmented Reality
Agents (ARAs) with pervasive contextual awareness, appearance, and abilities the
researchers will undertake a program of research aimed at the nexus of concepts
and technologies associated with Augmented Reality (AR), Intelligent Virtual
Agents (IVA), and the Internet of Things (IoT). To maximize the expected
knowledge outcomes the researchers have organized their plans into three
categories. First, they will develop new understanding of and priorities for ARA
awareness, appearance, and abilities in a manner that does not require, nor
depend on, a specific technological realization of automated behaviors. Second,
they will use off-the-shelf and custom components to realize pervasive ARA
functionality, to facilitate formative experiments related to basic ARA
behaviors, and develop domain-specific applications and experiments. Third, the
researchers will use application-specific realizations to assess the potential
usefulness related to companionship and two areas of healthcare training:
pediatric patient simulators and wide-area team-based medical training. The
healthcare-focused work will leverage relevant courses at UF and UCF, and UCF's
NSF REU center on the Internet of Things to engage students beyond their core
team, in meaningful research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.