* 1800352
* Theoretical methods in chemistry and biophysics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Frank Brown, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2024
* USD 561,000.00

Frank Brown of the University of California at Santa Barbara is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry to develop theoretical and computational tools for
modeling cell membranes and enzymes. The Molecular Biophysics Cluster of the
Division of Cellular and Molecular Biosciences also contributes to this award.
Both membranes and enzymes are essential to biological function in the cells
throughout the body. Membranes protect cells from their environment, provide a
means to compartmentalize subcellular function, and act as a versatile scaffold
for biochemical reactions involving membrane-associated proteins. Enzymes are
biological catalysts that serve to accelerate chemical reactions and the
metabolic processes dependent on these chemical reactions, thus making life
possible. Professor Brown is studying the fundamental physics and chemistry
underlying these biological systems using new mathematical and computational
models to assist in the interpretation and understanding of the experimental
measurements. This research serves the broad scientific community (chemistry,
biochemistry, biophysics, biology, materials science and biomedicine) that
relies upon the interpretation these experiments and advances understanding of
human health. The work is having a further impact through the training of the
next generation of scientists and the free distribution of software modules for
simulation and analysis. The research is integrated with outreach and training
through Professor Brown's ongoing involvement in the UC Chemistry Outreach and
From Soccer to Science programs for grade-school children and their parents.
Professor Brown also organizes conferences on biophysical dynamics and
scientific simulation to widely disseminate his research
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators are developing theoretical
models, numerical tools and simulation algorithms for the study of lipid bilayer
mechanics and dynamics and enzyme kinetics. Techniques to extract membrane
viscosity from equilibrium molecular simulations are being developed. The
interfacial regularized stokeslets methodology is being extended to allow
calculation of the full hydrodynamic mobility matrix for membrane proteins. An
algorithm to implicitly capture the hydrodynamic effects of water surrounding
membranes in molecular simulations is being formulated. Continuum models for
membrane structure and thermodynamics at two different levels of resolution are
being refined and a general theoretical framework for modeling enzyme kinetics
is being extended to allow the study of fluctuations about the mean (bulk)
behavior. Several problems at the interface between chemistry and biophysics are
being studied using these newly-developed tools. These applications include:
lateral diffusion in protein-laden membranes; understanding and reconciling
membrane bending moduli as measured via different experimental techniques; and
single-molecule enzymology and the relation of lipid orientation fluctuations to
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) order parameters and neutron scattering
measurements. In addition to training of the next generation of scientists on
state-of-the-art analytic modeling and simulation techniques, the research is
contributing to advanced software that is being disseminated as open-source
modules for CHARMM and VMD, to help researchers bridge the gap between the fine-
grained predictions of atomistic modeling and experimental observables. The
project is integrated with outreach to grade-school students and their parents,
to inspire the pursuit of careers in STEM and aspirations to college-level
study, and with the organization of conferences on scientific simulation and
biophysical dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.