* 1800450
* CSEDI Collaborative Research: Understanding the origins of MORB geochemical heterogeneity using constraints from seismic tomography and geodynamic modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Sujoy Mukhopadhyay, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 04/30/2023
* USD 381,401.00

The chemical composition of lavas erupted under the water at mid ocean ridges,
where new seafloor is created as tectonic plates spread apart, is influenced by
the temperature and composition of the underlying mantle from which these melts
are generated. The proposed work examines correlations between mid ocean ridge
basalt (MORB) chemistry and images of Earth's interior produced using seismic
tomography. It uses large-scale numerical models of mantle flow to connect
surface observations with past and present mantle structure. The proposed work
has three components. First, it examines the distributions of helium isotopes
and other geochemical indicators of mantle temperature at spreading centers and
how these are related to temperature and compositional variations in the sub-
oceanic mantle. Second, it explores the flow history of mantle material that is
sampled at spreading centers. Third, it addresses how the mid ocean ridges in
different ocean basins have sampled the mantle since the breakup of the
supercontinent Pangea. The project will provide new information about how
variations in seismic velocity beneath the ocean basins are related to the
variations in chemical composition of MORB, and how upper mantle variations in
composition and temperature are related to deeper mantle
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different disciplines make distinct
contributions to our understanding of the dynamics of Earth's mantle. In
particular, relating the distribution of geochemical and seismological
heterogeneity at the global scale has been a challenge because of the different
wavelengths sampled in these two types of approaches: local, for geochemistry,
long wavelength, for seismology. Recently, progress has been made in both
fields, with resolution reaching sub-1000 km scale in global seismic tomography,
and a more complete geochemical sampling along mid-ocean ridges, allowing the
investigation of patterns at wavelengths commensurate with the seismic imaging.
Concurrently, progress has been made in developing methodologies for realistic
geodynamic modeling of mantle circulation in 3D, incorporating constraints from
seismology and surface observables (e.g. plate motions, topography, and the
geoid). Tying these elements together to better constrain the flow history of
material sampled at ridges is becoming feasible at the present time. The
proposed work will produce new geochemical datasets, tomographic models, and
results from geodynamic models that will be distributed to the broader
geoscience community for further analysis and in a format that permits immersive
3D visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.