* 1800915
* Norco College Apprenticeship Program
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Charles Henkels, Riverside Community College District/Norco Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 06/30/2022
* USD 595,695.00

Automation is affecting many sectors of the world economy, from transportation
to manufacturing. Such automation can result in loss of lower skill jobs, as
well as create opportunities for new, often higher skill jobs. Some studies
suggest that more than 60% of the jobs in the inland region of southern
California are automatable and, therefore at risk. To buffer this potential job
loss, the Riverside Community College District/Norco Campus will develop a work-
based learning program in the field of advanced manufacturing automation. This
program will include accredited apprenticeships, coursework, certificates, and
degree pathways. Apprenticeships are a potential solution for employers seeking
to build their workforce and for students pursuing greater career opportunities.
Norco College will establish and expand partnerships with employers and develop
curriculum related to work-based learning and apprenticeship. This
apprenticeship project aims to provide students with a foundation of technical
knowledge in automation and manufacturing, as well as hands-on experiences in
the industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to respond to the need for
highly-qualified technicians in automation by: (1) developing a comprehensive
apprenticeship program to train technicians to fill emerging automation-related
technical occupations; (2) building partnerships with industry to ensure
industry needs are being met, and to increase employer engagement; (3)
implementing new strategies to support student recruitment, retention, and
completion targeting underrepresented student populations (including women); (4)
supporting existing apprenticeship programs; and (5) encouraging the
implementation of accredited apprenticeship programs nationwide. These efforts
will be coordinated with the state and federal apprenticeship agencies, the
local Workforce Development Boards, and the California Community College system,
with the goal of developing a systematic approach to apprenticeship
opportunities in the region. The project has the potential to draw new talent
into industries that are struggling to overcome the skills-gap, while increasing
participation of populations underrepresented in the automation manufacturing
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.