* 1800937
* Aligning Students into Accelerated Pathways in Engineering, Technology, and Building Science
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2023
* Alison Pugh, Seattle Community College District Office
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 02/28/2023
* USD 492,026.00

Developing accessible, flexible, and engaging STEM educational pathways is
crucial to meeting the needs of the 21st century workforce. The STEM student
demographic is shifting to include an increasing number of adult learners,
including veterans, who come to college with a myriad of experiences and
responsibilities well beyond those of recent high school graduates. Such adult
students face multiple barriers to entry, retention, and completion of
traditional STEM programs, yet they have existing STEM skills from prior work or
military experience. In this project, South Seattle College, a two-year minority
serving institution, will work with the Council for Adult and Experiential
Learning, the Washington Department of Veterans Affairs, and industries to
create a seamless transition from an Associate of Arts degree to a bachelor's
program in Sustainable Building Science Technology. The project aims to
establish an accelerated workforce development pathway for veterans and
incumbent workers in the emerging field of building tune-up specialists.
Building tune up is a process for increasing energy performance of building, by
analyzing and adjusting the building?s electrical, mechanical, and other
systems. This project will offer students authentic field experiences in
building tune-up and will align existing STEM-related skills of veterans and
incumbent workers to degree requirements by giving credit for work experiences
in the field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses common barriers to
STEM recruitment and completion by 1) researching, developing, and implementing
a STEM associate's degree that articulates into bachelor's degrees by aligning
existing skills in engineering/technology/building science; 2) designing and
offering STEM field experiences that expose undergraduates to retrofitting and
tune-ups of commercial buildings; and 3) creating a network of community,
industry, and educational partners to advance accelerated STEM degree programs.
This project seeks to generate knowledge of how experiential learning projects
that include real-life application can support the persistence and retention of
students in the STEM fields. The methodology developed in this project for
degree acceleration might be applied across multiple STEM disciplines. Graduates
of the industry-relevant programs will work directly with facilities management,
building science, and energy efficiency and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.