* 1800386
* Exploring Hydrogen-Atom- and Hydride-Transfer Non-Innocent Ligands
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Alan Heyduk, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 556,303.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division of NSF, Professor Alan F. Heyduk of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of California, Irvine is developing a
new class of ligand for use in the development of catalytic reactions. The
principal goal of this research program is to understand the fundamental ligand
properties that enable hydrogen-atom and hydride transfer reactivity so new
coordination complexes can be designed to serve as catalysts in reduction
reactions of importance in fine and commodity chemical synthesis and in the
recycling of abundant chemical feedstocks such as carbon monoxide and carbon
dioxide. The fundamental nature of the project, which lies at the interface of
organic, organometallic and inorganic chemistry, is broadly appealing to
chemists at all education levels and is particularly well-suited to advanced
levels of chemical education. Towards this end, the project includes a strong
component that encourages underrepresented groups to pursue advanced degrees in
STEM research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Redox-active or redox non-innocent
ligand platforms are well established in inorganic and organometallic chemistry
for their ability to engender adventitious electronic properties in simple
coordination complexes. Such properties have been exploited in catalysts for
multi-electron reactivity, in photosensitizers for charge-transfer applications,
and in the synthesis of materials with advanced electrical and magnetic
properties. The work proposed herein will develop a new type of ligand non-
innocence that leverages both electron- and proton-transfer abilities of
catecholate-type ligands to achieve ligand-centered hydrogen-atom transfer (HAT)
and hydride transfer (HT) reactivity. In this project, two related pincer-type
ligands will be examined to answer several fundamental question of broad
applicability: (a) What are the thermodynamic limits of ligand-based HAT and HT
reactivity? (b) What is (are) the molecular-level mechanism(s) of ligand-based
HAT and HT reactivity? (c) Can ligand architecture and metal ion selection be
used to tailor this ligand-based reactivity to favor selectively HAT or HT
reactivity through the manipulation of thermodynamic or kinetic
factors?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.