* 1800742
* Topics in Low Dimensional Geometric Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Vladimir Markovic, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2020
* USD 115,193.00

Numerous advances in topology have arisen from applications of ideas from
geometry and dynamics. This project aims to continue this line of investigation.
More specifically, we aim to study 3-manifolds, harmonic maps, and Riemann
surfaces. The study of 3-manifolds is in essence the study of the possible
shapes of the universe and as such sits naturally at the intersection of
mathematics and theoretical physics. Surfaces are two-dimensional spaces like
the surface of a ball or a doughnut. Their topological and geometric properties
have been extensively studied and this research lies at the intersection of all
fields of mathematics. The parameter space of all geometric structures on a
given surface is called the moduli space. We study moduli spaces because to
understand one particular structure on a space we must understand the structure
of the space of all structures. Theory of harmonic maps originates in the theory
of minimal surfaces. It aims to establish important properties of harmonic maps
which in turn provide useful information about minimal surfaces like the
physical description of a soap film spanning a wire
boundary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will study
geometry of Teichmueller spaces, existence of equivariant harmonic maps for
surface group representations, maps from surfaces into 3-manifolds, and the
solutions of the 2D-Euler equation for incompressible fluids. The main goals are
to: Classify Teichmueller discs where the Caratheodory and Teichmueller metrics
agree; To build on the proof of the Schoen conjecture and establish results
about the existence of equivariant harmonic maps corresponding to
representations of the fundamental groups of compact surfaces with boundary and
of surfaces of infinite rank; To investigate the simple loop conjecture for
hyperbolic 3-manifolds; To consider whether the gradient of the vorticity in the
2D-Euler equation can achieve the double exponential
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.