* 1800322
* Banach Spaces and Graphs: Geometric Interactions and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Florent Baudier, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2022
* USD 112,771.00

It can arguably be said that the world one lives in is geometric in nature.
Numerous practical everyday-life issues, as well as fundamental scientific
mysteries, can be expressed in geometric terms. For instance, networks are
ubiquitous in our modern society. From the World Wide Web and its powerful
search engines to social networks, from telecommunication networks to economic
systems, networks represent a wide range of real world systems. They can
naturally be seen as geometric objects by considering the number of edges of the
shortest path connecting two nodes as a quantity measuring their proximity. The
study of physical laws has led as well to the development of a refined
mathematical framework where elaborate geometric structures are able to depict
and model the interactions of elementary particles and the symmetries underlying
quantum physics. The notion of a metric space is a central concept that is
pivotal in mathematical models of optimization problems in networks, and in a
vast range of application areas, including computer vision, computational
biology, machine learning, statistics, and mathematical psychology, to name a
few. This extremely useful abstract concept generalizes the classical notion of
an Euclidean space, where the distance from point A to point B is computed as
the length of an imaginary straight line connecting them. The heart of the
matter usually boils down to understanding whether a given metric space, in
particular a graph equipped with its shortest path distance, can be faithfully
represented in a more structured space, typically a Banach space with some
desirable properties. Our ability to do so usually has tremendous
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problems investigated in this project are
motivated by their potential applications in theoretical physics and theoretical
computer science. Most of the problems considered find their origins either in
practical issues (e.g. the design of efficient approximation algorithms), or in
fundamental mathematical problems in topology or noncommutative geometry (e.g.
the Novikov conjecture(s), the Baum-Connes conjecture(s)). Embedding problems
that arise in connection to these problems have been considered independently by
several groups of mathematicians (Banach space geometers, geometric group
theorists, computer scientists...). An underlined aspect of this proposal is to
consider these embeddings problems from a unified and global standpoint.
Fundamental and long-standing open problems in quantitative metric geometry
(e.g. Enflo's problem, a metric reformulation of uniform smoothability, the
coarse embeddability of groups and expander graphs into super-reflexive Banach
spaces...) will be tackled from a different angle with new and innovative
techniques. In particular, the project will develop a certain asymptotic theory
of Banach spaces and explore its connections to the geometry of infinite graphs.
The approach here to solve the local problems above, is to study asymptotic
counterparts of the local properties involved, in order to gain new insights and
to devise new approaches. This approach is motivated by the fact that the
asymptotic setting usually provides a finer picture, is on some occasion better
understood, and requires completely different techniques. A general outline of
the research methodology of this project is to utilize powerful tools from
surrounding fields (graph theory, probability theory, Ramsey theory...), and
cross-over techniques (e.g. techniques from theoretical computer science to
solve geometric group theoretic problems).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.