* 1800181
* RUI: CDS&amp;E: Fast Treecode Methods for Particle-Particle Multipolar Electrostatic Interactions in Molecular Simulations
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2020
* Henry Boateng, Bates College
* Standard Grant
* Evelyn Goldfield
* 07/31/2020
* USD 132,345.00

Henry Boateng from Bates College is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop algorithms for speeding up atomic and molecular simulations. The award
is also supported by the Division of Mathematical Sciences and the NSF
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Scientists
simulate physical systems and validate their models by comparing the simulation
results to experimental results. Once the models have been validated, they are
then used to make predictions for regimes inaccessible by experiments or to
focus the direction of experiments. These models can range from the subatomic
scale of atoms and molecules to global scale, for example weather prediction.
The focus of this proposal is at the atomic and molecular scale. A typical use
for molecular simulation is in the determination of the structure of proteins.
The ideal for practitioners of molecular simulation will be to simulate systems
at experimental spatial scale, about a trillion trillion atoms, and at
experimental times, for seconds. The most powerful computers today (upwards of
100000 processors) only allow for simulations on the order of a billion atoms
and one-ten thousandth of a second. The overarching goal of this work is to
develop methods that help shrink and ultimately eliminate this
bottleneck.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate molecular simulations of biochemical
systems require accurate computations of the electrostatic interactions. The
predominant approach of modeling an atom as a sphere and thus the electron
density as a point charge fails to capture the anisotropy inherent in
electrostatic interaction. Multipolar electrostatics provides a much more
refined description of the electronic environment and hence the promise of more
accurate simulations of biochemical systems. In multipolar electrostatic
interactions the charge densities of chemical species are described by higher
order multipoles instead of only fixed-point charges. The fixed-point charge is
the zero order or monopole term of a multipolar electrostatic model. The
accuracy attained by the model increases with increasing multipole order with a
related increase in computational cost. The prohibitive cost of multipolar
interactions has been a barrier to the model being widely adopted. Interactions
with multipoles up to second order are typically an order of magnitude more
expensive than corresponding fixed-point charges. Boateng and coworkers develop
three related but different parallel treecode methods to accelerate multipolar
electrostatics for molecular simulations. The methods are based on similar
methods developed and studied by Professor Boateng for fixed point charge
models. The methods split particle-particle interactions into near and far field
interactions. The near-field interactions are evaluated exactly and the far-
field interactions are approximated using a Cartesian Taylor expansion. The
algorithms are developed for both free space and periodic boundary conditions to
ensure they are useful for a broad range of molecular simulation applications.
The advantages of the treecode, aside from the speedup it offers, includes good
parallel scalability, low memory requirement, suitability for complex geometries
and relative ease of implementation. The methods developed will be tested on
several practical examples in chemistry, biochemistry and
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.