* 1800505
* Rydberg states in molecular aggregates as a route to new optoelectronic materials
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Lyudmila Slipchenko, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Lyudmila V. Slipchenko of Purdue University is supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop methods to describe systems that harness light energy for
useful applications. One example of a mechanism of this type is photosynthesis
in plants, but there are a host of artificial systems that attempt to mimic
plants. Usually systems of this type have compact charge distributions, but
recent work has shown that states with diffuse charge distributions may also be
capable of capturing and using light energy. These states have been shown to
exist in a variety of nanomaterials, including graphene sheets, nanotubes and
fullerenes, and these states holds promise to develop a new class of materials
with superior properties for electronics applications. Dr. Slipchenko and her
group are developing theoretical and computational methods for the accurate
description of such diffuse states in molecular crystals. Armed with these
methods, Dr. Slipchenko is also exploring possibilities for energy and electron
transport through these diffuse states in molecular clusters. New methods and
algorithms developed in this project are broadly distributed and serve as robust
tools to predict the behavior of light-induced phenomena in chemistry, biology,
and materials. Dr. Slipchenko serves as a role model for female students and
postdocs and provides support and advice in career-life balancing challenges.
She also organizes national and international conferences and works to increase
the participation and visibility of young female scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Slipchenko and her group develop theoretical and
computational methodologies that can be applied for rigorous description of
diffuse Rydberg and Rydberg-like states in extended systems such as molecular
crystals of relevance to optoelectronic materials and natural organic aggregates
motivated by photosynthetic complexes. The methodology is based on a fully
embedded quantum mechanics / molecular mechanics (QM/MM) approach, in which the
environment (MM part) is described by the sophisticated ab initio-based
Effective Fragment Potential (EFP), and the interaction between QM and MM
subsystems includes electrostatic, polarization, dispersion and exchange-
repulsion terms, all of which are described at a quantum-mechanical level. In
this project, Dr. Slipchenko and her group are exploring possibilities for
energy and electron transport through utilization of Rydberg states in molecular
materials by development of full embedding QM/EFP methods for electronic excited
states and development of vibronic coupling models that describe exciton
interactions and transport in molecular crystals and other multi-chromophore
systems. The project contributes to the research infrastructure by integrating
new computer codes in the open-source, freely available libefp library and in
the open-source PSI4, GAMESS, NWChem and MOLCAS electronic structure packages,
as well as open-source modules in the Q-Chem quantum chemistry software. Web-
based interactive software for predicting vibronic interactions and
energy/electron transport in molecular aggregates is being developed and is
available at the Purdue University NanoHUB. The software can be adapted as a
teaching tool in quantum mechanics, spectroscopy and nanotechnology
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.