* 1800578
* Design and Characterization of Late Transition Metal Complexes and Single-Molecule Magnets
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Stephen Holmes, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Continuing Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2022
* USD 524,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Division of Chemistry ,
Dr. Stephen M. Holmes of the University of Missouri-St. Louis is developing
magnetic molecules to gain a better understanding of how to control magnetism
within small particles. Magnetic materials find widespread use in
technologically-important devices such as speakers, electrical motors, noise
filters, transformers, and information storage media such as magnetic hard
drives. In the case of information storage, there is an increasing emphasis on
creating smaller magnetic particles to increase data storage density.
Unfortunately, smaller magnetic particles often give faster data loss, limiting
the usefulness of traditional hard drives. Dr. Holmes is making magnetic
molecules to understand how small magnets behave under various conditions. By
studying molecular models, he is establishing relationships between temperature,
energy changes in the molecule, and motions, with a goal of relating these to
their magnetic properties. Dr. Holmes is also actively engaged in outreach
activities that encourage elementary, high school, and undergraduate students to
be active participants in research and teaching. Dr. Holmes also promotes STEM
outreach involving minority, female, and financially disadvantaged students. He
currently supports female and minority high school and undergraduate interns and
is developing laboratory experiments and STEM activities for the undergraduate
laboratories at his university. These research and training activities advance
national competitiveness in high tech sectors such as computing and electronics
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Holmes is developing a better
understanding of how small molecules can behave as magnets (single-molecule
magnets). He is working to design late transition metal single-molecule magnetic
complexes whose vibrational and electronic properties may be systematically
tuned. He is working towards establishing relationships between chemical
bonding, intermolecular contacts, and molecular and electronic structures. These
changes are being probed using various spectroscopic and magnetic measurement
techniques to deduce which structural and electronic features are most important
in magnetic relaxation. He is devising synthetic approaches for slowing magnetic
relaxation, leading to the preparation of materials that perform better at
higher temperatures. Dr. Holmes is also developing high school and undergraduate
laboratory experiments that are aimed at improving the education. He is
partnering with local and national educational outreach programs to engage
students from financially disadvantaged, minority-serving, and underperforming
school districts in research activities, fostering their continuing interest in
STEM-related fields of study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.