* 1800812
* Optimal Power Flow Formulation Based on Equivalent Circuit Methods
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lawrence Pileggi, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Donald Wunsch
* 07/31/2022
* USD 340,000.00

The power grid represents critical infrastructure for our society, and
generating electricity cleanly and cost efficiently is a world-wide priority.
Tomorrow's smart grid relies on effective algorithms and software tools for
optimizing the AC (alternating current) power flow. The Federal Energy
Regulatory Commission (FERC) has reported that "approximate-solution techniques
may unnecessarily cost tens of billions of dollars per year" and "result in
environmental harm from unnecessary emissions and wasted energy." Carnegie
Mellon researchers have recently introduced a new formulation approach for
modeling and simulating the grid's power flow based on a novel equivalent
circuit representation. The new power flow algorithms are shown to benefit from
the formalism of circuit methods and the research legacy of circuit simulation
techniques that have advanced the electronics industries so effectively.
Specifically, this work proposes to formulate the optimal power flow problem
using the new equivalent circuit approach, and use the corresponding circuit
solution algorithms to efficiently solve it. Preliminary results indicate that
this formulation more accurately represents the true physics of the grid, and
results in an optimization problem that is significantly easier to solve. This
work will develop a prototype implementation that will be used to optimize the
eastern interconnection grid that comprises roughly 50% of the power
transmission in the U.S. The proposed research is poised to make a dramatic
impact on the methods used for operation of electric power grids and the
corresponding markets that determine the cost of electrical power generation and
distribution. This work will further impact the integration of renewable
energies into the future smart grid, and make power systems more compatible with
the mainstream circuits curriculum in Electrical and Computer Engineering
departments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.