* 1800933
* A microstructural study of deformation in currently-inactive fault rocks from the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth pertinent to aseismic creep in central California
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Jafar Hadizadeh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Margaret Benoit
* 01/31/2023
* USD 290,478.00

Based on historic records, surficial geological evidence, and numerous published
studies, approximately 150km (90 mile) of the San Andreas Fault in central
California, from Hollister to Parkfield, has been recognized as a creeping
segment (segment along an active fault that is unlikely to produce damaging
tremors). However, cumulative seismological evidence and impressive advances in
monitoring technology have lead some scientists to question if the segment will
remain creeping for the foreseeable future. Potential hazards from damaging
earthquakes in this section of the fault would directly affect 3.5 million
people. Since 2006, the San Andreas Fault Observatory at Depth (SAFOD) has
provided material evidence including a large suite of rocks drilled from inside
the creeping fault zone down to a vertical depth of about 2.7km (1.6 miles).
Direct access to rocks that are being actively sheared off has revealed much
about how the fault moves by tectonic forces without causing major tremors. But
it is uncertain that the same mechanics apply at depths and higher temperatures
below the observatory. This project will use drill core samples from the
currently inactive rocks in the observatory for conducting basic-science
research into the processes that ultimately determine the fault?s tendency to
produce damaging earthquakes along the creeping segment. This expectation is
realistic because the inactive rocks of the observatory are believed to hold
information about the fault movement at greater depths and higher temperatures.
The proposal employs traditional tools of information gathering such as x-ray
probes and electron microscopes while applying new and innovative techniques of
information analysis and processing (the Geographic Information Science) to
accomplish the stated objectives of the project. The use of GIS software also
makes it possible to provide the results more readily to the public online
through web-based mapping applications and visualizations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed research
is to probe the information content of the less studied SAFOD damage zone rocks
in order to construct a microstructural-compositional model of the development
of aseismic creep in central San Andreas Fault Zone (CSAF). The research will be
carried out by combining the traditional methods of data collection including a
scanning electron microscope, scanning/transmission electron microscope,
electron backscatter diffraction, and x-ray diffraction with non-traditional use
of techniques of Geographic Information Science (GIS) to produce results that
are easier to visualize and analyze, store, and disseminate. A majority of
studies based on the SAFOD samples indicate that shear localization on weak clay
mineral phases (coefficient of friction 1-0.01) is responsible for the aseismic
creep in the upper sections of CSAF. The current models also point to the
presence of serpentinite-derived clay minerals at depths &gt;3km below the
SAFOD. However, in view of the presence of deep low velocity zones near SAFOD
site, the repeating microearthquakes in CSAF, and evidence from the damage zone
gouge bordering the active creep zones, we believe the following questions are
worth answering: 1. What cumulative and reactivated deformation processes and
patterns define the SAF damage zone and what could we learn about the
deformation processes at depths below the SAFOD? 2. What is the spatial extent
of possible interactions between damage zone and the actively creeping core of
the SAF, and what processes (e.g. deformation mechanisms) drive such
interactions? 3. What is the potential for such interactions to affect the
aseismic behavior of CSAF? The proposed research provides a material basis for
current discussion of whether the creeping section of the San Andreas Fault in
central California will remain in a stable aseismic mode as the historical
records indicate, or strong seismic events are probable in the future. A
directly evidence-based model of aseismic creep in CSAF also contributes to
better understanding of similar creeping fault segments in the West Coast plate
boundary system. The results of this research are of interest not only to
structural geologists, but also serve to provide physical constraints for
research in tectonophysics, seismology, and geotechnical engineering. The
project contributes to interdisciplinary science by introducing methods of GIS
into solid earth and microstructural geology. Graduate and undergraduate
students will be trained to use methods and concepts of the two disciplines.
Working with analytical equipment and datasets help undergraduate students, in
particular, to experience the practice of scientific research and applications
of the scientific method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.