* 1800768
* Research Initiation Award: Remote Sensing for Flood Modeling and Management
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Leila Hashemi Beni, North Carolina Agricultural & Technical State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 04/30/2024
* USD 359,752.00

Research Initiation Awards provide support for junior and mid-career faculty at
Historically Black Colleges and Universities who are building new research
programs or redirecting and rebuilding existing research programs. It is
expected that the award helps to further the faculty member's research
capability and effectiveness, improves research and teaching at the home
institution, and involves undergraduate students in research experiences. The
award to North Carolina A&amp;T State University has potential broader impacts
in a number of areas. The goal of the project is to gain fundamental
understanding of unarmed aerial vehicle (UAV) data processing and to develop a
research program on remote sensing data processing for environmental management
at the university. Undergraduate students and high school students will gain
research experiences and the research will be integrated in a number of
undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Remote sensing data
have increasingly been used to develop flood modeling; however, traditional
satellite-based techniques are challenging due to the presence of cloud cover,
satellite revisit time, viewing angle limitations, and the complexity of urban
landscapes. The recent development of UAVs has created a new tool for collecting
data to use in geospatial research. Applying UAVs to collect data with an
appropriate flight mode and optimized sensors offers the possibility of
overcoming issues associated with using satellite-based sensor data. This
project aims to investigate and evaluate the application of UAV data for flood
modeling and management. More generally, this will improve GIS and remote
sensing capabilities for UAV-based simulation and modeling of 3D dynamic
phenomena such as floods, forest fires, and air pollution. The proposed project
will contribute to the scientific literature by developing a novel method for 3D
water surface reconstruction and delineation of flood boundary and water level
measurements using UAV data. These measurements can be integrated with flood
models to identify areas vulnerable to future
flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.