* 1800140
* Photoresponsive Vinyl Azide Crystals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Anna Gudmundsdottir, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 510,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Anna D. Gudmundsdottir of the
Department of Chemistry at the University of Cincinnati is studying the
fundamental science behind "photodynamic" crystals. These are unusual substances
which move as they are exposed to light. When illuminated, photodynamic crystals
can twist, bend, leap, crawl or shatter. This behavior holds the potential for
development of new devices in which light is converted into motion, such as
actuators and sensors. The interdisciplinary nature of this project, which
connects photochemistry and materials science, provides diverse educational
training opportunities for students. Through this research, students are
prepared as future scientists who can address the technical challenges facing
society. Both high school and college undergraduate students will be recruited
from groups underrepresented in science to carry out research in the
Gudmundsdottir laboratory. Students will also be provided with educational
activities that focus on their professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Gudmundsdottir research group investigates
photodynamic behavior of crystalline vinyl azide derivatives which, upon light
exposure, dissociate to triplet vinylnitrenes and molecular N2. The mode of
nitrogen release within the crystal lattice is distinctive for each vinyl azide
derivative. Some crystals tolerate a build-up of large N2 bubbles within the
lattice before cracking, whereas others release N2 immediately with light
exposure. In this research, structural factors which control the release of N2
molecules within the crystal are identified. As part of this research, solid-
state photoreactivity of these compounds is investigated by performing laser
flash photolysis of nanocrystals. These studies are designed to characterize the
transients formed within the crystals and determine the solid-state kinetics of
these transients. X-ray crystallography and photoproduct identification are
critical elements of this study. Solid-state reaction mechanisms are supported
by quantum chemical calculations. Collectively, these data make it possible to
elucidate detailed solid-state reaction mechanisms and explain how the crystal
lattice controls both the reactivity and the photodynamic behavior of vinyl
azide derivatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.