* 1800171
* Quantum chemical methods for studying photon and electron driven processes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Spiridoula Matsika, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 533,698.00

Professor Spiridoula Matsika of Temple University is supported by an award from
the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Chemistry
Division to develop and apply theoretical methods to better understand electron-
driven processes. Heat, light (photons), and electrons provide different routes
to initiate chemical reactions. While heat- and photon-driven chemical processes
are well studied, electron-driven processes are not well understood, even though
electrons are ubiquitous in nature. Electrons are generated by radiation, and
their collisions with atoms and molecules are essential in biology and
chemistry, as well as in technology. Examples of electron-driven phenomena can
be found in interstellar chemistry, radiation chemistry, environmental
chemistry, stability of waste repositories, plasma processing of materials for
microelectronic devices, and other applications. A major complication in
electron-driven processes is that the states that are involved are metastable.
Matsika and her research group develop computational and theoretical approaches
to treat metastable states and their chemical reactivity. They specifically
apply these methods to better understand DNA damage by radiation as well as
formation of prebiotic molecules in interstellar medium. The research is
expected to provide valuable insights into the understanding of important
electron-driven phenomena in many areas of chemistry, specifically biological
systems and formation of prebiotic molecules. This research is carried out by a
research team involving collaboration of undergraduate and graduate students
with postdoctoral associates. The involvement of high school students in
research activities inspires students to be involved in science. This
involvement has a very positive effect in their education and future career
prospects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional quantum chemical methods
cannot be applied to study metastable states (or resonances), and several
approaches have been developed to treat this problem. The Matsika group is
developing appropriate methods that can treat metastable states and their
chemical reactivity taking advantage of the knowledge of excited state
reactivity. Specific goals of this work are to develop and test of efficient
multireference methods for resonances. The complex absorbing potential approach
is used in combination with multireference configuration interaction (MRCI) to
obtain both the energies and lifetimes of these states. The performance of the
complex absorbing potential method (CAP) is compared with that of orbital
stabilization methods for medium sized molecules in combination with various
electronic structure methods. Gradients and nonadiabatic couplings for CAP/MRCI
are developed. These methods are used to explore complex potential energy
surfaces and conical intersections between complex surfaces. The developed
methods are used to study electron-driven processes related to radiation damage
in nucleobases and the formation of organic molecules in the interstellar
medium. The methodology is being implemented in publicly available computational
software. Students with a range of backgrounds and levels of academic
preparation contribute to this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.