* 1800864
* Research Initiation Award: Characterization and development of young leaves of Glyphosate Susceptible Amaranthus palmeri  vs Glyphosate Resistant Amaranthus palmeri after exposure
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Yolander Youngblood, Prairie View A & M University
* Standard Grant
* Carleitta Paige-Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 344,668.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at their home institution, and
to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from the
National Science Foundation, Prairie View A &amp; M University (PVAMU) seeks to
conduct a research project that bridges the academic units of biology, ecology,
agriculture, bioinformatics and imaging. This study assesses the impact of
acetic acid on the two forms of Amaranthus palmeri and creates a baseline of
genomic data. This project is a collaboration with the PVAMU Computational
Center and provides funds for two undergraduates to engage in research each
semester. Students involved with the project will be closely mentored. This will
include teaching them new scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and computational
skills, preparing then to make poster presentations at local/national research
symposia and/or conferences and discussing long term career goals. Project
results will inform scientists and the agricultural community about which
varying concentrations of acetic acid can best be used as a sustainable method
of organic weed control. The idea for any growth control agent is to use the
least amount of chemical and cause the least amount of change to the
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional herbicides and growth control
agents contain glyphosate based compounds and were initially thought to cause
minimal change to the environment. After continued use of these compounds,
scientists noticed that some weeds, including A. palmeri, became resistant to
the glyphosate based herbicides, thus debunking the idea of minimal harm to the
environment. The information gained from the study will provide significant
information to evolutionary science because the two versions of A. palmeri
evolved in a relatively short time frame. Changes in the genome from year to
year and region to region will be assessed and related to acetic acid
treatments. The genomic data will provide insight into the evolutionary changes
at the genome level. When plants are stressed, they often exhibit changes in the
leaf structures, microbiota and genome. Scanning Electron Microscopy will be
used to determine the most vulnerable stages of plant development impacted by
acetic acid and show changes in leaf surface structures and genetic profile. The
study also analyzes the impact that timing of the application of acetic acid has
on growth control. The results will have implications for other weeds. The
project is expected to show that when acetic acid is applied early and before
the desired crop emerges, there will be less change/damage to the environment.
Applying acetic acid at the right time and using it as an organic weed control
will serve as a model technique/practice for producers and will lower their cost
while increasing productivity. This project is novel because it uses genomic
data to assess the effects of acetic acid treatments at each stage of
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.