* 1800014
* RUI: Characterizing Pyrolysis and Combustion Pathways for Asphaltene Model Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Carol Parish, University of Richmond
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2023
* USD 310,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Carol Parish of the Chemistry
Department at the University of Richmond is exploring the high temperature
decomposition mechanisms of the molecules found in oil shale, an alternative
fuel source. The project lies at the interface of physical chemistry, organic
chemistry, physics and computer science, and is well suited to the education of
scientists at all levels. The Parish laboratory is particularly well-positioned
to provide the highest level of education and training for students
underrepresented in science. Undergraduate and post-baccalaureate students will
learn to apply rigorous quantum chemical methods to the characterization of
important energy-related chemical reactions. The results from these studies will
provide fundamental information to support an energy-based economy and directly
address important problems in the oil shale industry; namely, the underlying
molecular mechanisms for high temperature decomposition and oxidation of the
molecular constituents of oil shale and oil sands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, this project supports computational investigations of the high
temperature decomposition and combustion pathways for molecules found in
asphaltenes, as well as to characterize the polyradical intermediates that are
produced. Asphaltenes represent an untapped source of hydrocarbon fuel in North
America; however, information about the molecular nature of these deposits has
only recently become available and very little is known about the reaction
pathways, combustion efficiency and reactivity of these species. In this
project, single reference methods are being used to study reaction pathways for
1) combustion and pyrolysis of naphthalenic compounds, 2) electrocyclizations of
electron-rich acetylenic moieties that may lead to asphaltene fused aromatic
cores and 3) hydrogen transfer processes in octylbenzyne. Multi-reference
methods are being used to study 1) polyradical intermediates produced along
those reaction pathways such as naphthalene and alkyl naphthalene radicals and
the anthracene diradicals, 2) electron coupling and electronic excitation
spectra for heteroaromatic diradicals that will aid in the experimental
characterization of these species, 3) linear and divinylsulfane diradicals known
to be produced in the pyrolysis of thiophene and 4) reactions involving
tetraradicals and the role that through-bond coupling plays in radical electron
interaction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.