* 1800068
* Catalyst and Methodology Development for the Synthesis of Highly Tunable Polyolefins
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Damien Guironnet, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 422,861.00

Polymers are among the most important building materials in the modern world.
One class of polymer, polyolefins, comprises the largest fraction of industrial
polymers. Despite their importance, polyolefins have some limitations that
prevent even broader use. One of these limitations is the difficulty in
expanding their physical and chemical properties beyond what is now known. For
example, the introduction of chemical functionality will improve compatibility
with other materials. In this project, Dr. Damien Guironnet of the University of
Illinois is developing new catalytic strategies to enable the introduction of
tunable, functional chemical groups within the polyolefin structure. Dr.
Guironnet is actively engaging in outreach activities that build upon his
research to promote student engagement in the science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) disciplines. In particular, Dr. Guironnet is leading
Chemical Engineering Department interactions with the St. Elmo Brady STEM
Academy in Champaign, IL. This activity is improving the education of
underrepresented primary school students and encouraging their interest in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program
of the Chemistry Division, Dr. Guironnet of the University of Illinois at Urbana
- Champaign is developing a synthetic strategy to enhance the chemical
tunability of polyolefins. The technical approach being investigated consists of
performing a chain transfer polymerization technique using late transition metal
catalysts and silane as chain transfer agents. The transformative aspect of this
research is the ability to incorporate almost any molecule at the end of any
polyolefin. The establishment of this strategy is paired with in-depth
mechanistic studies of the chain transfer polymerization mechanisms. The
undergraduate and graduate students involved with the project are gaining
expertise in polymer science, catalysis and inorganic chemistry. This broad set
of skills provides a unique training with great career opportunities. Dr.
Guironnet is actively engaged in STEM outreach programs focused on the
recruitment of African American boys in regional rural primary schools into the
STEM fields in support of the broader impacts of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.