* 1800935
* Developing Photonics Education in Iowa's Rural Secondary Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Gregory Kepner, Indian Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2022
* USD 643,073.00

Photonics is a rapidly growing field that encompasses the science and
technologies related to lasers and optics. Photonics applications are important
in many industries, ranging from defense to manufacturing to healthcare. This
broad application base creates a continued high demand for photonics technicians
in the United States. In this project, Indian Hills Community College will seek
to increase the number of photonics technicians by encouraging secondary school
students to enter a pathway that leads to photonics technician careers. The
project will emphasize rural high school students who rarely have learning
opportunities in state-of-the-art technologies. The project will enable rural
high school students to earn college credit that transfers directly to a two-
year photonics degree. This dual credit opportunity will position the students
to enroll in, complete a degree program, and obtain a job in the high-demand
photonics field. The project will also test the potential of hybrid online
instruction to bring advanced technical education into the classrooms of rural
school districts, which often have limited budgets. Rural high school teachers
will also receive photonics-related professional
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to
increase the number of rural Iowa high school students in photonics technician
career pathways. Methods used will include: 1) developing and offering dual
credit, hybrid online photonics courses that articulate directly to a two-year
photonics degree; 2) providing professional development symposiums and follow-up
assistance to Iowa high school teachers to help them incorporate more photonics
concepts in their classes; and 3) hosting a photonics summer institute to
provide rural Iowa high school students and teachers with more in-depth
knowledge of the field. The hybrid online format for the photonics courses will
combine traditional online learning with online collaborative learning for labs
and other activities. The project will build on work completed by the Midwest
Photonics Education Center, an ATE Regional Center at Indian Hills Community
College that focused on educating photonics technicians in the Midwest. Portable
photonics kits developed by the Midwest Photonics Education Center will be used
for lab activities in the hybrid online courses that will be developed in this
project. These kits help student learn photonics concepts through hands-on
activities, without the need to equip an entire lab. Industry partnerships will
also be leveraged to enhance the project activities. The project materials,
results, and best practices will be widely disseminated to facilitate the
adoption or adaptation of the approach by other community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.