* 1800942
* The Associate of Applied Science in Dynamic Reality Technologies Program: Training Technicians to Use Extended Reality to Develop Workforce Training Simulations
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Mary Cornell, The Coastal Alabama Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 578,819.00

This project addresses a growing need to educate technicians for the emerging
field of simulated environments. Advances in dynamic reality tools have enabled
simulated environments to become a valuable tool for efficient, cost-effective
corporate training across all sectors of industry. These simulated learning
environments create learning experiences that are safe for employees and the
public, and that offer new ways to engage and educate incumbent employees. The
proliferation of simulated learning environments has created a demand for
technicians who are trained in using extended reality tools, including virtual
reality, augmented reality, and mixed reality, to develop simulations and
industry-based learner experiences. This project will address this need by
developing and implementing an Associate of Applied Science in Dynamic Reality
Technologies program. Industry, faculty, and a U.S.-based international
association (Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry) will
collaborate to develop the curriculum. Community college professional
development workshops will prepare faculty to teach in the new curriculum.
Students in the Dynamic Reality Technologies program will extend their learning
and develop workplace experience by participating in industry internships.
Results from the project will contribute to the formation of national standards
for virtual reality and augmented reality education. This project has the
potential to contribute to the development of the future advanced technician
workforce, as well as improve industrial training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this project is to develop an industry-responsive technician education
program with an aligned, comprehensive curriculum, prototype training
simulations, and industry-based student experiences to support instruction
directed by knowledgeable and experienced faculty. The project plans to engage
corporate partners in providing input about the curriculum, as well as
internship and research experiences for the students. The project will develop,
pilot, implement, and evaluate the curriculum, and create an open educational
resource system to disseminate curriculum and related resources. A Dynamic
Reality Technologies Training Center with virtual-, augmented-, and mixed-
reality training capabilities will provide students with additional educational
opportunities. Symposia will be organized to promote adoption of the curriculum
among community college faculty. The knowledge gained during this collaboration
between Coastal Alabama Community College and industry will inform the
development of curriculum standards for virtual reality and augmented reality
curricula. The technician education program will initially focus on the pulp and
paper and the elevator industries, and expand to other industries over the
course of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.