* 1800301
* Stochastic Path Integral Formalism and Applications to Coherent Energy Transfer
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Jianshu Cao, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 06/30/2024
* USD 420,000.00

Jianshu Cao from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the
Division of Chemistry. Cao and coworkers develop new theoretical and
computational methods to analyze coherent energy transfer in photosynthetic
systems. Photosynthesis is the biological process that converts solar energy
into biomass. The first step of this process involves the capture of photons
(particles of light) by arrays of light-harvesting complexes. These photons
excite electrons in the complexes. This excitation energy is transferred to the
reaction center for subsequent conversion to chemical energy. The energy
transfer process in photosynthesis exhibits remarkable efficiency. There is
extensive basic research to understand the basis of this efficiency. This
research provides useful insight into the optimal design of artificial light-
harvesting devices. In the past, these design efforts attempted to mimic
photosynthesis based on the idea that the excitation energy is transferred from
pigment molecules to the reaction center by hopping down the molecular energy
ladder, one molecule at a time. However, recent experimental evidence reveals a
crucial role for quantum coherence and for cooperative effects. These new
findings raise fundamental questions that inspire the proposed theoretical and
computational developments. While addressing these questions, Prof. Cao devotes
significant efforts to training students and postdoctoral associates in his
group, compiling new course materials on MIT OpenCourseWare for public access,
and further developing an open website for the distribution of simulation codes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arguably the most subtle quantum mechanical
effect, quantum coherence has no simple classical analog but lies at the root of
diffraction, interference, delocalization, and quantum entanglement. Evidently,
nature takes advantage of subtle coherence effects in the optimal design of
photosynthetic systems to effectively convert photons into chemical bonds. It
is, however, unclear how the coherence effects can facilitate the remarkably
efficient and robust energy transfer in photosynthesis and how quantum coherence
can be properly defined, measured, and controlled. To address these questions,
Jianshu Cao develops an active research program by integrating polaron theory,
stochastic simulations, and experimental collaborations. Specifically, the
research plan consists of three components: (i) theoretical and conceptual
issues centered on quantum coherence; (ii) a unified stochastic formalism for
simulating coherent exciton dynamics; and (iii) applications to light-harvesting
structures in natural photosynthetic systems and in artificial energy
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.