* 1800357
* Chemical and electronic states in chalcogenide-based electrocatalytic systems during CO2 reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jordi Cabana, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

The generation of carbon dioxide is one undesirable outcome of the combustion of
fossil fuels to fulfill the energy needs of modern society. Artificial
photosynthesis offers means to limit the corresponding impact in the environment
by reconverting the carbon dioxide to energy-rich chemicals, creating a closed
cycle that is inspired by nature. The technological viability of this concept
hinges on the development of catalysts that promote the conversion of carbon
dioxide at fast rates and high energy efficiency. The investigators have
recently discovered a way to make catalysts consisting of nanosized flakes of
earth abundant metal compounds. These "artificial leaves" have shown promise as
replacements for expensive noble metals such as platinum, but optimization of
the composition and detailed structure of these materials is hampered by a lack
of fundamental understanding of the chemical principles by which they work. The
research will employ a variety of experiments and analysis tools to better
understand those principles and use the knowledge gained to identify catalysts
that perform better and are more stable in the working environment of an
electrochemical cell. The work contributes to moving society toward an
increasingly sustainable future based on a closed carbon cycle. The research
activities are intertwined with broad efforts to expose future generations of
scientists to cutting-edge methodologies, through research internships for
undergraduate and high school students, field trips from K-12 schools to
university facilities, and a summer workshop on electrochemistry. Recruitment is
vigorous among the highly diverse community at the University of Illinois at
Chicago, to reach populations underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides
(TMDC) in contact with ionic liquid electrolytes exceed the performance of
state-of-the-art electrocatalysts toward the reduction of carbon dioxide to
synthesis gas. However, the fundamental underpinnings of this outstanding
performance have not yet been fully ascertained, especially synergies between
the ionic liquid electrolyte and the catalyst. The project will employ a
combination of spectroscopic techniques to build a library of critical states
that underpin the mechanisms of carbon dioxide reduction in TMDC/ionic liquid
systems. The evolution of the states is assessed by combining ex situ and
operando experiments, and the effect of chemical permutations is evaluated. The
outcomes increase the fundamental knowledge of a new and unexplored class of
candidates for an important electrocatalytic reaction. The topics of this
research also drive an educational plan that fosters excitement about the
scientific enterprise in future generations of scientists and technologists. The
researchers participate in outreach events at Chicago-area elementary and high
schools, spanning from the support of science teachers in the classroom to field
trips to laboratories at the University of Illinois at Chicago (UIC). They
actively mentor undergraduate students at UIC to enhance their ability to find
career paths after graduation, for instance, through research opportunities
relevant to the goals of this project, maximizing the exposure of the student to
cutting-edge methodologies. These activities will have a special focus on
members of Chicago's Hispanic communities, a large population that is severely
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.