* 1800860
* Cluster Algebras, Combinatorics, and Knot Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Ralf Schiffler, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 150,000.00

When cluster algebras were introduced by Fomin and Zelevinsky in 2002, their
original motivation came from representation theory, which is a branch of modern
algebra. Studying the symmetries of a model is often more fruitful than studying
the model directly, and representation theory has found many applications in
physics and chemistry as well as in other mathematical fields. The cluster
algebras provide a mathematical framework for fundamental patterns which occur
throughout representation theory. Surprisingly, these patterns are also observed
in various other branches of science which, a priori, are not related to
representation theory. This project will provide new directions of research in
an already highly active research area. The investigator will establish and
develop relations between cluster algebras and other areas of mathematics. These
new connections allow explicit computational results as well as structural
development. The project contains the instigation of new ideas as well as the
investigation of longstanding open questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on cluster algebras and their relation to combinatorics, knot theory,
number theory and representation theory of finite-dimensional algebras. The
investigator will pursue several investigations. He will apply his recent
discovery of a relation between cluster algebras and continued fractions to
study classical problems in number theory from a new point of view and to apply
the machinery of continued fractions to develop new tools in cluster algebras.
He will also establish and develop a new connection between cluster algebras and
knot theory providing explicit combinatorial formulas for Jones polynomials and
other knot invariants. Furthermore, he will continue his study of the
representation theory of finite-dimensional non-commutative algebras that arise
from cluster algebras.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.