* 1800584
* Accurate Treatment of Strong Electron Correlation in Relativistic Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Sandeep Sharma, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 04/30/2022
* USD 405,000.00

Sandeep Sharma at the University of Colorado, Boulder is supported by an award
from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC) Program in the
Chemistry Division to develop high accuracy theoretical methods to predict the
properties of transition metal-containing systems, which have critically
important technological impacts. Their applications range from catalyzing slow
chemical reactions to exhibiting unusual magnetic properties that can used for
quantum computing. Despite the technological importance of transition metals,
theoretical methods to calculate their properties are much less developed than
for organic molecules, where high-accuracy calculations can be performed that
rival the accuracy of experiments. This shortcoming can be traced to the
intricate interplay between correlated electronic motion and the impacts of
relativity, both of which are much more important for transition metals than for
organic molecules. Dr. Sharma is working to fill this void by developing a suite
of methods to treat metal-containing systems. Predictive, accurate calculations
on transition metal systems using these methods can direct experimental efforts
in designing efficient and cheap biomimetic catalysts as well help design the
next generation of systems for quantum computing. Dr. Sharma is also developing
a course to improve the mathematical skills of undergraduate chemists, which is
a critical need for young
chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sharma is developing ab
initio methods that can reliably be used for transition metal-containing
relativistic systems, that also display strong electron correlation. In the last
two decades, impressive advances have been made by largely independent
communities toward the development of algorithms to treat strong electron
correlation and large relativistic effects. However, treating them
simultaneously on an equal footing remains a formidable challenge. A major goal
of Dr. Sharma's research is the fruitful cross-fertilization of the latest ideas
in the two fields in order to develop algorithms that allow the treatment of
strongly correlated relativistic systems. More specifically, he is developing
methods that: (i) Calculate the ground and low-lying excited states of the fully
relativistic four-component Dirac-Coulomb-Breit Hamiltonian for small benchmark
systems containing heavy atoms, that are inaccessible by exact diagonalization,
to near-exact accuracy. (ii) Implement near-exact diagonalization as an active
space method to obtain a quantitatively accurate method for treating large
systems of interest in biology and material science. (iii) Employ analytic
response theory to calculate fully ab initio spin Hamiltonian parameters in
order to predict parameters that are widely used in experiments and theoretical
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.