* 1800697
* Probabilistic and Deterministic Aspects of Nonlinear Dispersive and Wave Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Dana Mendelson, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 07/31/2023
* USD 161,812.00

Nonlinear dispersive and wave equations model wave propagation phenomena for
many physical systems, from water waves to the dynamics of quantum gases.
Understanding the "typical" behavior of these systems has many applications,
such as problems in material science involving signal degeneration in optic
fibers. For the last few decades, research on these equations has centered
around questions on the existence of solutions, their long time behavior, and
the possibility of singularity formation. Fundamental progress has been made in
many settings, yet in some regimes, the nonlinear interactions are so strong
compared to the dispersion of the waves that typical methods break down. In
those regimes, probabilistic tools have been instrumental in analyzing the
behavior of these systems, enabling researchers to answer new and exciting
questions in a variety of settings.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
investigate the behavior of solutions to nonlinear wave and Schrodinger
equations, and more generally Hamiltonian equations in infinite dimensions. More
specifically, the PI will address several problems, including probabilistic
existence and long-time behavior for power-type nonlinear wave and Schrodinger
equations, the analysis of integrable structures, and the definition of
invariant Gibbs-type measures. These problems have several common goals, many of
them motivated by recent developments in the study of nonlinear dispersive and
wave equations via probabilistic techniques. The PI will refine existing
probabilistic tools and develop new ones in order to treat new settings, such as
certain geometric flows. Additionally, to tackle these problems, the PI will
employ a combination of tools from harmonic analysis, probability theory,
spectral theory and the theory of Hamiltonian systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.