* 1800395
* Design of New Ru(II) Complexes to Control Excited State Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Jeremy Kodanko, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 07/31/2021
* USD 750,000.00

In this project funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Claudia Turro of the Department of
Chemistry and Biochemistry at The Ohio State University works in collaboration
with Professor Kim Dunbar (Texas A&amp;M University) and Professor Jeremy
Kodanko (Wayne State University) investigate fundamental processes in inorganic
photochemistry. This project seeks to understand the fundamental steps that take
place on ultrafast (femtosecond to picosecond) time scales after a transition
metal complex absorbs a photon of light. New ruthenium complexes are designed,
synthesized and studied to determine how their excited state processes and
photochemistry depend on variation in structure. Transition metal complexes
studied in this research are important in applications that range from solar
energy conversion to the delivery of drugs for phototherapy. This collaborative
team is also well positioned to provide the highest level of education and
training for students underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central goal of this project is to understand the basic principles that govern
the photophysical processes in ruthenium II complexes at early times, including
the factors that control efficient photosubstitution and dual-activity
compounds. New ruthenium complexes are designed, synthesized and studied to test
theories about how variation in structure affects photochemistry and
photophysics. The mechanism by which two different photoactive states are
populated in these ruthenium complexes remains unknown and is counter to the
rules of photochemistry developed for organic molecules. Photoinduced ligand
release using ruthenium II complexes is highly dependent on the identity of both
the leaving and ancillary ligands. One hypothesis being tested to explain this
structural dependence is that fast population of the metal-centered ligand field
state is required for ligand exchange to take place. It is yet unknown if this
occurs through direct intersystem crossing from the singlet manifold or from a
vibrationally hot triplet state. The basic knowledge gained regarding
photoinduced ligand exchange also aids in the design of complexes that eliminate
the exchange process in order to increase the lifetime of the metal-to-ligand
charge transfer state. This is an important factor in solar energy conversion.
The project also focuses on the design and synthesis of new complexes that
release a wider range of ligands through irradiation with visible or low energy
near-infrared light. Transition metal complexes studied in this research have
potential applications that include solar energy conversion and phototherapy.
This collaborative research provides students with training in diverse research
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.