* 1800948
* National Science Foundation (NSF) Geospace Environment Modeling (GEM) Workshop Coordination: 2019-2023
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2024
* Christopher Mouikis, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 931,432.00

This grant is to support the organization of the NSF Geospace Environment
Modeling (GEM) Workshop Coordination for 2019-2023. The National Science
Foundation (NSF) GEM program is a cornerstone of NSF's Magnetospheric Physics
Program which supports the study of the physics of the magnetosphere and the
coupling of the magnetosphere to the atmosphere and to the solar wind. The GEM
program focuses on the development of global magnetospheric models. The success
of this effort depends on open cooperation and exchange of ideas and the
development and sharing of models. Through various data-model challenges, models
are compared and validated in an open and constructive process. The means of
achieving the open communication and cooperation required for GEM lies largely
in the regular GEM workshops. This workshop award supports the science of the
program by providing an opportunity for Principal Investigators (PIs) and
students present results and discuss outstanding issues in an interactive
setting. There are two GEM workshops each year: the week-long GEM Summer
workshop in June which includes a student day and the one-day Mini-GEM workshop
in December which is held the Sunday before the American Geophysical Union's
Fall meeting. This award provides coordination support for both GEM workshops
and travel support for approximately 75 students to attend the Summer workshop.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Basic research in magnetospheric physics is a critical
component of the National Space Weather Action Plan and associated efforts. The
magnetosphere is the dynamic force field protecting Earth from Solar radiation.
Space Weather impacts on Earth occur in and propagate through the magnetosphere.
The severity of the impacts depends on the condition of the magnetosphere at the
time of impact. Scientific modeling of the magnetosphere is critical for
building the tools that can transition to operationally relevant models. Another
very important component of the GEM workshops is a strong student-oriented
educational element. The majority of this award is for support of student
participation in the GEM Summer workshops. Most of the student support is
directed toward graduate students but may also toward very talented
undergraduate students (attending a U.S. university). In large part, the GEM
workshops act to mentor the students and facilitate the transition from student
to researcher in the science community. Students have the opportunity to
participate fully in the focus group sessions and to present their research in
poster sessions that enable detailed discussion and interaction with the broader
magnetospheric community. The GEM student organization has been formalized with
student leaders and a student-only meeting including tutorial
lectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.