* 1800158
* Molecular Dynamics of Chemical Reactions and Interactions at Liquid/Liquid Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ilan Benjamin, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Colby Foss
* 07/31/2023
* USD 390,082.00

Many important chemical reactions occur at the interface between water and
organic liquids, such as oil. This interfacial environment is particularly
challenging for computational simulations of chemical reactions because of the
complexity of molecular interactions. With support from the Chemical Structure
Dynamics and Mechanism A (CSDM-A) program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Ilan Benjamin of the University of California at Santa Cruz is using
sophisticated simulation tools to understand how a proton travels across the
water-oil interface. The gained knowledge could impact research in the areas of
chemical catalysis, clean energy production and storage. It could also provide
insight into understanding respiration and photosynthesis. The project provides
students opportunities working at the interface of computational and
experimental chemical research. Professor Benjamin also works closely with
students from underrepresented minority groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project focuses on several elementary processes that are crucial for
understanding recent experiments on proton transfer reactions at liquid
interfaces. These elementary processes include 1) weak and strong acid
ionization at the interface between water and several organic liquids; 2) proton
transfer across the interface to a surface-active proton acceptor; and 3) proton
transfer facilitated by a phase transfer catalyst. These processes are studied
mainly using the empirical valence-bond methodology, which enables efficient
examination of the complex interfacial system with sufficient statistical
accuracy. Fundamental questions addressed include the molecular mechanism of the
proton transfer, influence of surface fluctuations on transfer dynamics, and
influence of external potential on the rate and thermodynamics of the proton
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.