* 1800854
* Research Initiation Award: Introducing Electrochemistry in Hydrophobic Media Using Weakly Coordinating Cations
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ghislain Mandouma, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Leroy Jones II
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,921.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities-Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP)
Research Initiation Awards (RIAs) provide support to STEM faculty at HBCUs to
pursue research at their home institution, at an NSF-funded Center, at a
research intensive institution or at a national laboratory. The RIA projects are
expected to help further the faculty member's research capability and
effectiveness, to improve research and teaching at their home institution, and
to involve undergraduate students in research experiences. With support from the
National Science Foundation, an electrochemistry research program will be
established at Albany State University (ASU) where teaching and research in this
field are scant. Additionally, critical issues in sustainable energy research
will be integrated into undergraduate education at this predominantly African
American teaching institution, which serves mainly minority, underserved
students. This program will link STEM education and research by integrating
fundamental principles of electrochemistry with hands-on experience in renewable
energy, to produce better learning outcomes and ensure success in both college
and the job market for ASU graduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long term goal
of this project is to address issues related to renewable energy and its safe
and sustainable conversion and storage in batteries for use in appropriate
devices. The researchers hypothesize that electrolytes that can be used in non-
polar solvents could expand the ability to test other redox-active materials,
which may improve the performance of Organic Radical Batteries (ORBs) and
Organic Redox Flow Batteries (ORFBs). ORBs and ORFBs offer the possibility of
manufacturing lightweight and flexible devices with comparable performance but
better safety than lithium-based batteries and for which increasing demands
exist already. A series of weakly coordinating anions (WCAs) and cations (WCCs)
featuring polysubstituted tetraarylphosphonium/tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)borate
salts will be synthesized as novel electrolytes to enable electrochemistry in
low-polarity media. Electrochemical measurement will then be conducted in non-
polar solvents with electrolytes designed to be soluble in the solvents, having
increased ion mobility and, therefore, improved relative conductivities. Pulse
radiolysis experiments including time-resolved mid-infrared studies will be
employed to determine redox potentials of redox-active molecules in non-polar
solvents and, possibly to measure redox potentials in an electrolyte-free
environment for the first time. Redox potential determinations in non-polar
environments can be applied to a wider range of fields in science and
engineering, including organic synthesis, petroleum handling in pipelines,
energy, and biology. The energy community will benefit from the comprehensive
results of this project as newly designed electrolytes and superior measurement
of redox potentials will lead to a better understanding of energy storage by
electron transfer, especially as ORBs and ORFBs. This project will be conducted
in collaboration with the Brookhaven National Laboratory (BNL) and BNL's Laser
Electron Accelerator Facility (LEAF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.