* 1800344
* Coarse-graining complex interaction landscapes
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2018,11/30/2023
* M. Scott Shell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2023
* USD 408,219.00

M. Scott Shell of the University of California Santa Barbara is supported by an
award from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods program in the
Chemistry Division to develop broad-based algorithms for systematic coarse-
graining. Computer simulations of the molecular world are an established and
invaluable tool for understanding how the concert of atomic motions and
interactions gives rise to observed properties in biology, materials, fluid
mixtures, etc. Simulations may also suggest novel experimental directions for
the design of new synthetic molecules. It is very computationally expensive to
model every single atom in a molecule over even the shortest times (millionths
of a second). This expense puts severe limits on the complexity of simulations
that can be pursued. Dr. Shell and coworkers have developed an approach by which
unnecessary atomic detail in simulations can be automatically identified. These
unnecessary details are replaced by 'coarse-grained' models that require far
fewer calculations. In turn, these coarse models permit simulations on
dramatically larger scales. This capability opens new problems and systems of
study. This project develops this basic approach by creating powerful ways to
maintain high accuracy in highly coarse models and applies the new technique to
understand peptide-based materials. This project provides educational
opportunities for students at multiple levels, including involvement of those
from underrepresented groups. Professor Shell mentors undergraduate researchers
and participates in several campus-wide diversity initiatives that contribute to
the professional development and research training programs at
UCSB's&lt;br/&gt;California Nanosystems Institute. The team develops strategies
to improve the recruitment of women students in theoretical and computational
research. A yearly seminar coordinated by Dr. Shell brings distinguished female
researchers to campus to serve as role models for undergraduates, graduate
students, and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While coarse-graining methods have
been vigorously pursued in recent years, major practical and conceptual barriers
remain that compromise coarse-grained (CG) model accuracy, transferability, and
automation, and thus limit the general reliability of these all-important
modeling approaches. This project leverages the relative entropy framework
developed by the Shell group to create general new strategies for addressing
these limitations. These new methods are rooted in rigorous statistical
mechanical theory and state-of-the-art molecular simulation techniques.
Specifically, the project creates robust strategies for efficiently and
accurately modeling complex, multibody CG interactions across state conditions,
chemistries, and systems, and for seamlessly including external constraints
(like experimental information) in the bottom-up CG strategy. As an application
of the techniques, this work develops a next-generation, general but sequence-
sensitive CG peptide model suitable for understanding and predicting
supramolecular self-assembly in emerging hybrid polymer-peptide
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.