* 1800467
* Understanding and Directing the Reactivity of Cyclometalated Complexes in Late Transition Metal-Based Homogeneous Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Pinjing Zhao, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 462,000.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Pinjing Zhao of North Dakota State University Fargo is studying metal-based
catalysts for the synthesis of organic molecules. Metal catalysts, molecules
that speed up reactions, must interact with the target starting materials
(substrates) in order to transform the reactants into products. Dr. Zhao is
studying the rational design and development of new catalysts, including those
that do not employ expensive and rare metals, to provide new tools for
environmentally-friendly chemical synthesis. This project provides
interdisciplinary research training and career preparation for graduate and
undergraduate students. Catalytic and synthetic reactions are introduced in the
sophomore organic chemistry lecture course. Student projects are developed for
the inorganic laboratory course to provide hands-on experience with
instrumentation and lab techniques. Professor Zhao leads the construction of a
web-based database to promote general dissemination of the fundamental knowledge
and recent research progress on organometallic chemistry. This database provides
valuable training experiences for graduate and undergraduate students training
them for careers in industry, government and academia. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
Zhao is developing catalytic applications of late transition metal-based
cyclometalation processes. Catalytically-relevant metallacycles are generated
through nickel- and ruthenium-mediated C-H bond activation of ancillary ligands
such as N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHCs) and aromatic N-H ketimines. Other target
cyclometalation processes include rhodium- and ruthenium-mediated
decarboxylation of arene- and heteroarenecarboxylic acids via chelation
assistance. Results of structure-reactivity relationships of cyclometalated
catalyst precursors and reactive intermediates are guiding new catalyst
developments via atom-efficient activation of strong chemical bonds including
carbon-hydrogen, oxygen-hydrogen, and carbon-carbon bonds. Dr. Zhao is also
leading an initiative to develop a web-based searchable database to promote
general dissemination of fundamental knowledge on chemical bond transformations
in organometallic chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.