* 1800680
* Logic and combinatorics and topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2017,08/31/2020
* Slawomir Solecki, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2020
* USD 256,388.00

The project will develop new mathematical methods and establish new connections
between diverse areas of mathematics. The project will focus on connections
between Logic, on the one hand, and Topology and Combinatorics, on the other. It
will aim at connecting Fraisse theory, an amalgamation theory from Logic, with
deep questions on homogeneity of the generic continuum and with possible
development of a homology theory. Further, it will aim at establishing
connections between Ramsey theory, a branch of Combinatorics, with Topological
Dynamics, Algebraic Topology, and certain orders playing an important role in
parts of Set Theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop a
presentation of Ramsey theory in terms of algebraic topological notions -
simplicial&lt;br/&gt;complexes and simplicial maps. This presentation should
incorporate both finite and infinite Ramsey theory, and it should capture Ramsey
theoretic statements associated with amenability of subgroups of the permutation
group of the set of natural numbers. The project will also uncover implications
of the dynamics of monoid actions to Ramsey theory. The project will also
explore an approach to certain problems in topological dynamics and topology
that uses purely combinatorial/model theoretic methods. Some important compact
topological spaces are obtained as canonical quotients of generic inverse limits
of families of finite structures - projective Fraisse limits. Topological
homogeneity questions will be investigated using such presentations. Another aim
will be to develop the right notion of the simplex and the boundary operation
for homology theory of projective Fraisse limits. The test case here is the
development of universal Menger compacta through projective Fraisse limits.
Another goal of the project is to explore connections between a fixed point
property of group actions, concentration of measure phenomenon, and geometry of
submeasures.