* 1800959
* Developing an Accelerated Cybersecurity Program Aligned with Workforce Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John Mayhorne, Harford Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 518,928.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can detect,
investigate, and prevent cybersecurity breaches. The growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have specific knowledge and skills to
meet these workforce demands. In response to a persistent demand for a skilled
cybersecurity workforce in Maryland, this project will develop an accelerated
cybersecurity degree program. This program aims to prepare students for jobs at
the nearby Aberdeen Proving Ground and other companies in the surrounding area.
The program will be designed to maximize opportunities for online learning,
incorporate a "competency-based" approach, and promote quicker entry into
employment. The resulting 18-month degree program should be attractive to a
diverse population of students, promote their persistence and completion, and
give them the skills needed tackle dynamic, real-world challenges which will
have immediate value to their employers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By working closely
with government and industry partners, this project will ensure that the
college's cybersecurity program addresses the workforce skills and competencies
needed by regional employers. The project has three main objectives: (1) Develop
an accelerated Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree program in information
assurance and cybersecurity, which students can complete in 18 months and which
aims to produce at least 40 graduates (in two cohorts) by the end of the grant.
(2) Modify two of the AAS program's 13 core cybersecurity courses to an
adaptive-learning, competency-based format, and train faculty to convert topical
modules in courses to competency-based learning, so that the entire program
curriculum will become competency-based over time. (3) Determine whether the
competency-based learning approach is more effective than the traditional
outcomes-based approach in developing cybersecurity skills. To achieve these
objectives, the investigators will adapt the curriculum of the college's current
two-year AAS program in information assurance and cybersecurity to include more
online learning; establish a new cybersecurity teaching laboratory at a
convenient off-campus location; and oversee the adaptation of two courses to a
competency-based format, while assessing the skills and experiences of the
students compared to a control group taking outcomes-based
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.