* 1800329
* Alkynes As High-Energy Carbon-Rich Functionality For Synthesis Of Polyaromatics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Igor Alabugin, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jin Cha
* 06/30/2021
* USD 499,999.00

The Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division supports the project by
Professor Igor Alabugin. Professor Alabugin is a faculty member in the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the Florida State University. He is
developing new ways to prepare precisely shaped and functionalized structures of
graphene (a flat sheet containing only carbon atom). The goal of the project is
to provide the missing synthetic tools needed to construct new molecules with
interesting optoelectronic properties. To do this, the high energy and unique,
tunable reactivity of carbon-rich precursors for will be used to develop
strategies that build the shaped graphene structures from smaller pieces. Key to
this effort are cascade reactions that form multiple bonds and unite multiple
cyclic unites in a single operation. By splicing together the smaller structure
in a controlled fashion, the shape of the larger object can be controlled more
precisely. The results will be disseminated in the PI's publications and
outreach activities, including participation in public lectures, scientific
symposia, giving talks at industrial, undergraduate, and graduate institutions,
as well as recording educational videos at the GEOSET studio at Florida State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this research is in
leveraging electronic factors that control alkyne cyclizations for the
development of efficient routes to conjugated carbon nanostructures with
predesigned shape and functionality. In this approach, oilgoalkyne chains of
varying sizes, equipped with different substituents, are built in a modular
fashion and then "zipped" up via a cascade of fast and efficient radical
cyclizations. Selectivity of initial radical attack on the multifunctional
substrates is controlled by the presence of a "traceless directing group" that
is removed in the course of the one-pot process. By the choice of the relay
functional groups and the terminal pi-system, the final step of the cascade can
be controlled, so that either a five- or a six-membered rings is formed. In
particular, this work is developing a suite of peri-cyclizations based on a
combination of traceless directing groups, cyclization at the "zigzag edge" of
acene subunits, and fragmentations. This approach opens access to unusual
aromatics and conjugated persistent radicals. The broader impact include the
applications of the new carbon-rich conjugated molecules as components in the
design of optoelectronic materials, energy storage devices, sensors,
transistors, solar cells, polymer composites etc. The educational plan includes
providing advanced research training to students of different backgrounds,
including students from the Florida historically black universities. The
scholarly findings will be presented in scientific journals, conferences and
incorporated in the mini-courses on stereoelectronic
effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.