* 1800599
* Collaborative Research: Design and Study of Chalcogen-Containing Cationic Dyes for Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Theresa McCormick, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2022
* USD 291,677.00

The development of methods to transform molecules into useful materials and
products is a key challenge facing chemists. One common transformation is an
oxidation reaction, where oxygen is added to or electrons are removed from a
molecule. Oxidation reactions often rely on toxic reagents that produce a large
amount of waste. The use of molecular oxygen could reduce both the cost of these
reactions and the amount of waste produced. Molecular oxygen is also abundant in
air. Scientists generally do not know how to use atmospheric oxygen to transform
molecules into desired products. In this project, Dr. McCormick of Portland
State University and Drs. Detty and Cook of the University at Buffalo are
investigating dyes that can use energy from light to make desirable molecular
transformations with atmospheric oxygen. By understanding how changing the
structure of a dye influences its reactivity, it may be possible to control and
target these oxidation reactions. Drs. McCormick, Detty, and Cook are dedicated
to increasing education in areas of sustainability via the implementation of new
courses. They provide research internships to students to increase their
awareness of the impact of development on the environment and their role as
scientists in creating sustainable solutions. The curriculum revisions may
increase student engagement in issues of sustainability and photochemistry. The
modules are disseminated to allow schools across the country to adopt the
curriculum, which focuses on on principles of green chemistry, environmental
protection, and renewable energy. A more engaged and informed science workforce
may be better able to solve current and future problems of
sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drs. McCormick, Detty, and Cook are
supported by the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division to
investigate chalcogen-containing dyes as photosensitizers for photocatalytic
redox reactions. The use of photo-induced redox catalysis for synthetic
transformations is of interest due to its potential for the green production of
small molecules at both laboratory and industrial scale. The interchange of the
chalcogen atoms (O, S, or Se to Te) in the xanthylium or pyrylium core of the
dyes allows control of redox behavior in the dyes, as well as wavelengths of
absorption, fluorescence yields and lifetimes, and triplet yields and lifetimes.
The chalcogen-containing dyes function as photo-oxidants in that the excited
state can accept an electron to give a one-electron oxidation of a substrate.
The excited state can also intersystem-cross from singlet to triplet and then
interact with ground-state oxygen to generate singlet-oxygen, which can function
as a potent oxidant. This research may result in a decreased reliance on fossil
fuels by providing a route to hydrogen peroxide production, decreasing carbon
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.