* 1800789
* Water/Wastewater Certified Operator Education Project
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kane Barker, Pellissippi State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2022
* USD 463,348.00

According to a Georgetown University study, by 2020, 68% of jobs will require
some post-secondary education or training. Community colleges are positioned to
educate highly skilled workers for these jobs. According to utility industry
trade associations, a crisis is remerging from the unprecedented number of
water/wastewater facility operators who will be retiring in ten years or less.
The water/wastewater utility industry is asking community colleges to establish
a pipeline of new workers capable of passing state certification examinations
and taking over the management of the facilities that supply clean water.
Pellissippi State Community College proposes to establish a new Environmental
Science Technology Associate of Applied Science Degree. Graduates will be
eligible for employment in regional water quality and wastewater treatment
laboratories and plant facilities. In addition, they will be able to take state
certification exams more quickly than workers who have been trained on the job.
A successful program could be replicated by the other 12 Tennessee community
colleges, as well as community colleges across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: 1) Develop and incorporate the
necessary courses into a program of study leading to the Environmental Science
Technology (EST) Associate of Applied Science degree and recruit students into
that degree program; 2) Build a partnership network with area utility districts
to support: student participation in field and internship experiences; faculty
collaborations with current technicians to develop and adapt the core STEM
course curriculum; and identification of specific industry standards; 3)
Graduate a total of 36 EST majors for immediate entry into the workforce at
water/wastewater treatment facilities or other related jobs in the East
Tennessee region and beyond. Pellissippi State Community College will recruit a
diverse group of students for the project via a vigorous media and outreach
campaign. Retention, degree completion, and transition to employment will be
supported by advising, academic and career counseling, supplemental instruction,
student success coordinators, and tutoring. Senior industry management will
serve on the advisory board, assist with curriculum design, provide internships
and field experiences, and hire graduates as
appropriate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.