* 1800893
* Center for Renewable Energy Advanced Technological Education: Energy Storage Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Kathleen Alfano, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 599,582.00

Renewable energy has been the fastest growing source of new energy over the past
decade, and is expected to provide as much as 25% of the nation's electricity by
the year 2020 (US EIA). Driven by battery costs that have declined 70% since
2012, the global energy storage market is also experiencing tremendous growth,
as storage technology is integrated with renewable energy. Europe has been on
the leading edge of this trend: in 2017, half of all German solar energy
installations included energy storage systems, delivering a wide range of cost-
saving and energy resilience benefits for customers, utilities, and the grid.
The trend is being accelerated by the integration of energy storage and plug-in
electric vehicles, with major German manufacturers announcing new battery
storage products in 2016. However, in the next five years, the U.S. is expected
to become the world's largest energy storage market, having a compound annual
growth rate of 21% (IHS Market forecast). It is expected that, by 2020, more
than half of the deployments will be customer-owned systems. To support US
innovation in energy storage, industry needs technicians who have skills and
familiarity in this technology area. To meet this need, Madison Area Technical
College will prepare a new group of community college instructors and
technicians to work with energy storage technologies. This project will study
best practices from Europe, and use the information to develop industry-
validated instructional resources for community college students and faculty.
The results have the potential to shape and enhance energy storage technician
education efforts, and to support the greater role of the United States as a
global leader in the energy storage industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project will be to support the integration of energy storage technology
into existing educational programs for energy technicians. The project will use
an evidence-based international learning model, in which community college
faculty will gather global knowledge and expertise to produce an energy storage
job task analysis and industry-validated curriculum and instructional materials.
The project will equip a model teaching laboratory and develop courses that
integrate energy storage, electric vehicle, and solar photovoltaic technologies.
The teaching laboratory will serve as a platform for introduction of new
curriculum for college students. This facility will also be used to provide
professional development workshops for community college faculty from across the
country, with the goal of strengthening energy education across the nation. The
resources created in the project will be made available online and accessible to
a wide audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.