* 1800495
* Fully Nonlinear Elliptic and Parabolic Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yu Yuan, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2022
* USD 240,000.00

The research activity in this project will deepen our understanding of two
intimately connected mathematical fields: partial differential equations and
differential geometry, which are just super calculus. Simultaneously, the
project will also have impact on the areas where the equations to be
investigated rest: special Lagrangian equations and complex Monge-Ampere
equations provide the mathematical foundation for mirror symmetry in the string
theory of modern physics, which is a unified way to describe our physical
universe; maximal surface equations are directly from the fascinating general
relativity, which fundamentally changed our understanding of the world; mean
curvature flow is an effective model in material science; Hessian equations are
also related to nonlinear elasticity theory in mechanics, which studies the
mechanisms whereby a material that is stretched returns to its original size and
shape.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of research on special Lagrangian
equations are to derive Schauder and Calderon-Zygmund estimates for equations
with critical and supercritical phases, to answer whether any homogeneous order
two solution in dimension five or higher is trivial, to study low regularity of
continuous viscosity solutions to the equations with subcritical phases, and to
resolve exterior Liouville problems with constraints as well as (entire)
Liouville problem for the complex version of the special Lagrangian equation.
The aim of research on symmetric sigma-k equations is to investigate Hessian
estimates for sigma-2 equations in dimension four and higher and also sigma-2
principle curvature equations, to obtain Schauder and Calderon-Zygmund estimates
for 3-d sigma-2 equations, and to study the Liouville problem for sigma-k
equations. The plan for complex and real Monge-Ampere equations is to
demonstrate the triviality of any global solution to complex Monge-Ampere
equations including self-shrinking equations for the Kahler Ricci flow with
certain necessary restrictions and to derive regularity of solutions to the real
Monge-Ampere equations under a necessary noncollapsing condition. The attempt
for maximal surface equations is to study the Bernstein problems for exterior
solutions and regularity for solutions under a noncollapsing condition. The
purposes for the study on fully nonlinear parabolic equations are to show
uniqueness and existence for viscosity solutions to parabolic Monge-Ampere
equations under certain necessary conditions and to derive Hessian estimates for
Lagrangian mean curvature flow under certain convexity
condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.