* 1801756
* RET Site: Authentic Research Experiences for Teachers (ARETe): Connecting Community College Faculty and Students to University Engineering and Computer Science Labs
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Sean Shaheen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,360.00

This RET Site: Authentic Research Experiences for Teachers (ARETe): Connecting
Community College Faculty and Students to University Engineering and Computer
Science Labs enhances coordination between the University of Colorado Boulder
(CU) and five, 2-year degree granting community colleges (2YCs) in the Denver-
Boulder metropolitan area: Arapahoe Community College, Community College of
Aurora, Community College of Denver, Front Range Community College, and Red
Rocks Community College. The project creates and cultivates a network of
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) 2YC faculty with
specific expertise on cutting edge topics from first-hand research experience,
along with a set of collaboratively-developed educational modules that integrate
content with 2YC learning and curricula development goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In each year of the project, ten 2YC faculty will
collaborate with CU faculty to carry out laboratory research in engineering and
computer science disciplines. Example research topics include: organic and
hybrid photovoltaics for renewable electric energy generation; remote sensing
for precision agriculture; soft robotic manipulators for tactile sensing and
robotic perception; ultrafast laser pulse experiments for infrared sensing and
chemical characterization; metal nanoparticle catalysis for reduced automotive
emissions and renewable material synthesis from biomass; dynamic solar windows
for energy-efficient building; coherent laser sources for biomedical imaging;
and organic electrochemical transistors for bioelectronic sensing and drug
delivery. The 2YC faculty will come away from the immersive experience with in-
depth understanding of topics of national need and at the forefront of research
on areas as diverse as renewable energy, materials science, biomedical research,
robotics, and other areas. In addition to advancing research in a broad array of
topics while developing 2YC faculty research knowledge and skills, the project
will help 2YCs to integrate their research into STEM curriculum modules
specifically targeting 2YC learning goals, but focusing on ARETe research
topics. Collaborative module development will be primarily driven by
participating 2YC faculty, based on their research experiences at CU. The
project aims to establish and cultivate learning communities to facilitate
transfer of knowledge to 2YC students, rapid progression of 2YC STEM curricula,
and stronger connections between CU and Colorado 2YCs. CU faculty and graduate
students will provide in-person and remote support of the implementation and
assessment of new curricula, including co-instruction on 2YC campuses. Research
teams will follow a structured backward design approach to curriculum module
development, utilizing blended and active learning to convey important modern
content. As a broad-ranging goal, the cultivation of these Colorado learning
communities is expected to help lower the barrier for student transfer from
Colorado 2YCs to CU Engineering, through both academic preparation and
social/emotional benefits from mentoring by CU faculty and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.