* 1801599
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: REVELARE: A Hardware-Supported Dynamic Information Flow Tracking Framework for IoT Security and Forensics
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* John Harris, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 607,667.00

Smart and connected devices, also known as Internet of Things (IoT) devices, are
now an integral part of our daily lives. These devices are found in cars,
phones, watches, appliances, home security systems, and in critical
applications, such as utilities and in the biomedical industry. The convenience
provided by IoT devices comes with unique security and privacy concerns. Because
of the shortened time-to-market and the fierce competition among companies,
security has not been treated as a priority in these devices. Very importantly,
IoT security challenges are different from those present in conventional devices
because IoT devices (i) are heterogeneous, (ii) have limited computational
resources, and (iii) can be prevalent in very large numbers. Thus, there is an
urgent need to develop standardized, efficient, and embedded security modules to
protect such devices from cyber attacks. The goal of this project is to design,
implement, and fabricate REVELARE, a security solution for IoT devices, which
protects IoT devices in two ways. The first is through a hardware module
embedded in the device, which can analyze and filter low-level events based on
predefined security policies. The second component resides on a cloud
environment and performs forensic analyses on a large set of events continuously
recorded from the IoT device. This project has the potential to immensely
improve IoT security. Manufacturers will be able to ship IoT devices with built-
in protection against cyber attacks. The principal investigators, with
complementary expertises in the Computer Science and Engineering fields, have a
strong record of advancement of female and minority students, as well as
involvement of undergraduate students in research projects. Further, this
project opens up new avenues for future work in hardware-for-software security,
an area which, while still in its infancy, has the potential for breakthroughs
in cyber security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REVELARE is a hardware-supported dynamic
information flow tracking (DIFT) framework to enhance IoT security and
forensics. It consists of the following components: (i) a DIFT-enabling core for
the ARM and the RISC-V architectures, which complements the main processor with
DIFT capabilities, (ii) two DIFT-based security policies (prevention of memory
corruption and in-memory-only attacks) enforced by hardware, whose accuracy is
enhanced by the capture of DIFT indirect flows, and (iii) a mechanism for IoT
virtualization-based security analysis and forensics, with the implementation of
two types of security/forensics analyses: causality graphs and personalized
(per-device) anomaly detection. REVELARE realizes the potential of DIFT
capabilities for the needs of IoT security and forensics, transforming the
state-of-the-art for how researchers in academia and industry have been
addressing IoT security. Our efficient (architecture-supported) and effective
(addressing indirect flows) DIFT framework can also inform future research on
architecture-supported DIFT for other architectures (e.g., Intel x86) leveraged
in traditional devices. Our combination of in-device built-in protection with
cloud heavy-weight analysis and forensics has the potential to ignite the new
field of IoT virtualization, in which IoT device management and security are
outsourced to the cloud via virtualized devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.