* 1801071
* Cybersecurity Advanced Technological Education at a Tribal College
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Chad Davis, Turtle Mountain Community College
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2023
* USD 590,000.00

Keeping computers and information systems secure is a major challenge. Business,
industry, and government need well-prepared technicians who can prevent, detect,
and investigate cybersecurity breaches, and the growth of cyber-threats has
created a need for many more workers who have the necessary knowledge and
skills. To address this nationwide challenge in education and workforce
development, this project will establish a cybersecurity program at a tribal
college, building a seamless pathway for students to move from high school into
an associate degree program in cybersecurity and on to a job or a related
bachelor's degree program. The project's overarching goal is to increase the
number of students, including Native Americans, veterans, and women, pursuing
cybersecurity-focused degrees and technical certifications. The investigators
aim to build a replicable model that can be adapted and scaled, especially at
other tribal colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Turtle Mountain
Community College will build on the college's Computer Support Specialist
program, which provides two years of technical computer education leading to an
Associate of Applied Science (AAS) degree. Students in the new cybersecurity
program will learn skills in computer architecture, operating systems, computer
troubleshooting and repair, server administration, network infrastructure design
and support, network infrastructure security, and programming. The curriculum
will incorporate a hands-on, experiential learning approach. Local employers
have committed to provide on-the-job training, job shadowing, and part-time or
full-time positions for students. Minot State University's Business Information
Technology department will provide professional development for Turtle Mountain
Community College faculty, will assist them with developing courses in different
formats (on-campus, online, and hybrid), and will support a pathway for students
who wish to transfer to the university after completing the two-year degree. The
key activities in the project are (1) to develop a new AAS degree in
cybersecurity/information assurance that is aligned with the needs of local
business and industry; (2) to recruit high school students on or near the Turtle
Mountain Indian Reservation into the program through summer camps and other
outreach; (3) to encourage students to obtain industry-recognized certifications
to validate the skills they learn in the degree program; (4) to utilize
connections within the Northern Information Technology Consortium (including
Dakota College at Bottineau, Lake Region State College, Minot State University,
and Williston State College) to extend the reach of the curriculum and support
students who would like to transition to a related four-year degree program; and
(5) to provide workshops, seminars, and other professional development
activities to improve the cybersecurity knowledge and skills of Turtle Mountain
Community College faculty. This project will contribute to national priorities
by strengthening cybersecurity education and increasing the diversity of the
cybersecurity technical workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.