* 1801094
* Unmanned Aerial Systems Technology Curriculum to Meet Industry Demand
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Amanda Briggs, Parkland College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2022
* USD 364,334.00

Careers involving the understanding and use of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS),
commonly known as drones, are developing rapidly. A wide range of careers, from
precision agriculture and crop insurance to real estate and police work, need
trained UAS technicians. In addition, industries are discovering new needs for
UAS and industries that use UAS are finding new ways to benefit from the data
and imagery gathered by UAS. To meet these increasing demands, Parkland College
will develop UAS courses and certificates with a focus on agricultural
applications. This project will include the participation of five other
community colleges, three four-year institutions, and industry partners. The new
curriculum will advance UAS technician education so that students earn relevant
credentials that will prepare them for jobs after completion. The project will
focus on recruiting women and veterans into the UAS program, and will engage
high schools and universities to enhance educational avenues into UAS technology
careers. Students who graduate with credentials in UAS technologies should be
able to enter a high-growth STEM industry that is expected to need many workers
in the next decade. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of the project is to
develop UAS curricula at Parkland College that meet industry needs in the major
agricultural hub of Central Illinois and its surrounding area, which is
expanding the use of UAS technologies. The newly-developed courses will be based
on existing courses from partnering community colleges but with an emphasis on
UAS applications for agricultural industries. Topics covered in the courses will
include flight controllers, aerodynamics, managing data, regulations, and safety
and operational considerations. The courses will be combined to create 6-credit
and 18-credit UAS certificates. Industry input about curricular content will be
integrated into designing the credentials so that the credentials appropriately
prepare technicians for jobs in the UAS sector. The project team also aims to
develop articulation agreements with universities offering UAS degrees. These
connections will ensure that the new curriculum will be transferable for
students wishing to continue their education. Project outreach activities will
focus on recruiting women and veterans into the program, and foster associations
with regional high schools. The products and best practices from the project
will be disseminated through coordination with community college and university
partners as well as online at multiple NSF-ATE Centers, including the National
Geospatial Technology Center of Excellence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.