* 1801163
* PathTech LISTEN: Mixed Methods Longitudinal Investigations of Students in Technician EducatioN
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,10/31/2023
* Lakshmi Jayaram, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 10/31/2023
* USD 1,117,688.00

Producing more middle skills professionals in advanced technology fields is
important for the nations' prosperity. To promote greater success in advanced
technology education, this project aims to study the relationships between
community college attendance and later educational and occupational outcomes.
The research team from the University of South Florida and the Florida
Technological Education Center at Hillsborough Community College propose
extending their current research on school-work-life balance. To accomplish this
goal, they will conduct a longitudinal research study that examines the
transition from taking community college courses, to attaining associates and
baccalaureate degrees, to reaching career goals, such as better pay and job
promotion. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will increase understanding of
issues and challenges involved in the school-work-life balance for students
pursuing credentials and careers in advanced technology. A qualitative and
quantitative mixed method longitudinal study will examine student life
experiences and pathways, from entry to completion of academic programs to
entrance into the workforce. The study will address the shortage of information
about pre-college and college technician and occupational pathways, and
attainment of credentials and post-program outcomes (e.g., careers and
employment). The proposed work builds on the first two phases of the PathTech
Life study and focuses on Engineering Technology, Advanced Manufacturing, and
Biotechnology. The project team will conduct a longitudinal interview study with
national scope coupled with the development and administration of a national
survey to answer four sets of research questions that examine the connections
among school, work, and other life responsibilities: 1. How do students from
diverse backgrounds at different life stages experience their advanced
technological program? 2. What are students' short-term education goals (i.e.,
complete specific coursework, earn certificate or degree) and do they accomplish
them? 3. What aspects of an advanced technology education programs prepare
student to meet their broader educational and employment goals? 4. What program
and institutional efforts do colleges employ to increase recruitment, retention,
and connections with students from diverse backgrounds? Results of this research
can inform improvements to advanced technological education that support greater
retention, graduation, and successful entry into the technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.