* 1801820
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Why Has the Meritocratic Power of Advanced Degrees Declined?: The Role of Higher Education in Promoting Upward Mobility
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2020
* ChangHwan Kim, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2020
* USD 12,000.00

Why has graduate education not facilitated greater social mobility while
undergraduate education has? College is often thought to be the great equalizer
because it promotes upward mobility. But the expansion of higher education may
not ensure equal opportunity for everyone, especially when a growing number of
people are acquiring an advanced degree. This project will study why the
influence of family background becomes stronger among advanced degree holders
while it is still weak among those with a BA/BS degree only. This study
evaluates three explanations by studying the income levels of those with at
least a BA/BS degree. These people may: 1) attain a highly-lucrative advanced
degree such as an MBA or professional degree (vertical selection); 2) major in a
non-vocational field of study at the undergraduate level and a profitable one at
the graduate level, including health, law, and business (horizontal selection);
or 3) complete education at an earlier age and have more years of work
experience (cumulative advantage). The project will provide implications for
families and educators concerned with the relative tradeoffs for investment in
various types of higher education. The project will also provide implications
for states and U.S. society generally in creating policies aimed at promoting
useful educational investment.

This project will analyze income returns to education for adults who achieve
various levels of higher education. The project will analyze over 150,000
respondents aged 35-54 from the 2003, 2010, 2013 and 2015 National Survey of
College Graduates data and the IPUMS 5% Census data with at least a bachelor?s
degree and having a positive income. The project will use log-multiplicative
layer effect and multivariate regression models to examine the extent to which
vertical selection, horizontal selection, and cumulative advantage explain
income level differences. The project will also study gender differences in
these processes as well as how these effects have changed over time. The project
will inform sociological theories concerned with social mobility and the role of
social selection into various types of higher education in the United States.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.