* 1801630
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Secure Distributed Coded Computations for IoT: An Information Theoretic and Network Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Yingying Chen, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 800,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) is emerging as a new Internet paradigm connecting
an exponentially increasing number of smart IoT devices and sensors. IoT
applications include smart cities, transportation systems, mobile healthcare and
smart grid, to name a few. Unlocking the full power of IoT requires analyzing
and processing large amounts of data collected by the IoT devices through
computationally intensive algorithms that are typically run in the cloud. This
leaves the IoT network, and the applications it is supporting, at the complete
mercy of an adversary (enemy nations, hackers, etc.), or a natural disaster
(hurricane, earthquake, etc.), that can jeopardize the IoT, or completely
disconnect it from its "brain" (the cloud), with potentially catastrophic
consequences. This research studies Secure Coded Computations aimed at
addressing the security challenges of IoT dependence on the cloud for
computations by allowing data to be processed locally by IoT-devices that
collaborate together to compute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is based on
the new theory of coded computations, which studies the design of erasure and
error-correcting codes to improve the performance of distributed algorithms
through "smart" data redundancy. This project represents the first attempt to
create a unified framework to study schemes for secure coded computations that,
in addition to providing reliable and secure computations on coded data, cater
to the specific challenges of IoT. The focus of the proposed research is on (i)
devising secure codes and algorithms with low computational complexity that are
amenable to implementation on IoT devices typically characterized by low
computation power, bandwidth, battery, and storage. Our approach will be based
on information theoretic security that presents a lucrative alternative to high
complexity homomorphic encryption methods; (ii) developing networking algorithms
and protocols to make our secure coded computation framework adaptive to the
heterogeneous and dynamic nature of IoT devices; (iii) validating the
feasibility of the proposed secure codes and algorithms by building a mobile
healthcare monitoring framework using IoT devices. The project also incorporates
educational and outreach efforts with a focus on minority groups in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM). In addition, it includes
opportunities for guided tours and possible internships at Rutgers WINLAB for
undergraduate students, and a workshop that focuses on theoretical and systems
aspects of security in IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.