* 1801329
* Collaborative Research: Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets (CLOUD) Consortium Membership
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Richard Flagan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 05/31/2023
* USD 282,543.00

This project supports the continued membership in the CLOUD consortium at CERN,
by Carnegie-Mellon University and the California Institute of Technology, and
provides new membership for the University of Colorado at Boulder. The CLOUD
(Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets) experimental facility is likely the world's
most sophisticated experiment addressing atmospheric new-particle formation. It
was constructed to measure new particle formation under highly controlled,
ultra-clean conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CLOUD is an international member-
funded consortium supporting the maintenance and operation of the experiment.
Members raise research funding from their national agencies to participate.
Experiments are conducted at CERN during 1-2 carefully planned campaigns per
year, each lasting 8-10 weeks. These campaigns are planned, and data are
assessed, during two major week-long consortium meetings each year, while more
focused, intensive data analysis is carried out at all times by individuals, but
also in several focused team meetings scheduled and hosted on an ad-hoc basis
during the course of each year as analysis and interpretation require. Virtual
team meetings via skype and other media are ongoing and
continuous.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to providing the required
consortium fee, this project will support shipping and travel to CLOUD
experimental campaigns and associated consortium meetings and data workshops.
The doctoral and postdoctoral students associated with the project will be
integrated into an international collaborative network of students and senior
researchers who are among the most highly regarded in aerosol science and
atmospheric chemistry. They will receive invaluable training in the conduct of
international collaborative research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of the
CLOUD experiments is of high national and international interest. Aerosol-cloud
interactions are among the largest sources of uncertainty in the understanding
of climate forcing and climate sensitivity. CLOUD experiments confirm that ions
can stabilize nucleating clusters, and that, for otherwise weakly bound clusters
(such as ammonia sulfuric acid, organics with sulfuric acid, and pure organics),
ions can enhance nucleation rates by factors of 3-100 depending on conditions.
During the period of this project, three campaigns, CLOUD-13, CLOUD-14, and
CLOUD-15, are planned. The campaigns will focus on the following broad topics:
the role of organic oxidation chemistry in new-particle formation and growth;
new-particle formation in urban areas; new-particle formation in the marine
atmosphere; and the role, if any, of charge in cloud-droplet formation and ice-
crystal nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.