* 1801146
* Student Travel Support for the 2018 Power and Energy Conference, to be Held at the Univ. of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, February 22-23, 2018.
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2018,08/31/2018
* Peter Sauer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

The 9th Annual Power and Energy Conference at Illinois (PECI) will take place on
the campus of the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in February 2018.
The objective of this proposal is to request partial support for the
registration and accommodation expenses of US-based undergraduate and graduate
students traveling to the conference. Beginning in 2010, PECI is the oldest
annual, student-run IEEE international conference about power and energy
technology. PECI is an Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE)
approved conference and technically co-sponsored by PES, PELS, and IAS
professional societies of IEEE. The conference is organized by the IEEE
PES/PELS/IAS Joint Graduate Student Chapter at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign and is advised by faculty in the Power and Energy area of the
Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at the University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign. PECI has become a perfect place in the Midwest for industry
and academic researchers to discuss future power and energy topics such as
renewable energy, machines for electric transportation, smart grid reliability,
security of cyber-physical systems, and power electronics for emerging
technologies. Thus, the intellectual merit of PECI are the student focused
nature of the conference, from the student led steering committee to all
technical and presentations, and the high quality publications and posters from
student attendees.

PECI was founded for three key reasons: 1) to provide students in the Midwest an
opportunity to participate in a research conference, 2) to provide a forum for
students in the Midwest to present their research progress and outcomes for
feedback to a technical audience of peers, industry professional, and 3) to
inspire both undergraduate and graduate students to pursue careers in power and
energy STEM fields. While PECI impact has expanded over the last eight years to
include participants from around the world, we have retained our Midwest roots
and mission statement by encouraging participation from Midwest universities,
especially undergraduate students for the poster session. By attending PECI
students benefit from closer interactions with experts, professors, and industry
professionals and potentially receive advice or mentorship for their future
career. In addition to student technical presentations and posters, students
also learn about the mega-trends in power and energy and cutting edge research
from three industry leaders and experts, who deliver keynote presentations and
tours of a local microgrid research facility and new ECE building. Moreover, the
importance of pursuing a career in power and energy is highlighted by a special
careers session involving industry presentations about research demands for
power and energy companies and a panel discussion regarding what a career in
industry, a national laboratory, academia, or government would entail. With
support from NSF, PECI seeks to reach a wider audience with this impact by
encouraging participation from a larger number of Midwest and US schools,
especially schools that do not offer a Ph.D. degree.