* 1801569
* GP-IMPACT: Professional Development Pathways to Diversifying the Geosciences Workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2023
* USD 419,761.00

Professional Development Pathways to Diversifying the Geosciences Workforce is a
partnership between the University of Arkansas and the Geological Society of
America (GSA) with assistance from UNAVCO and the University of Texas-Austin to
broaden participation and increase inclusion in the global geosciences
workforce. A primary objective is aiding progress of underrepresented minority
students (URMs) toward employment in the national geosciences workforce, an area
of critical national need. The project proposes to design professional
development workshops intended to increase the quantity and quality of
applications from URMs for internships or other professional opportunities (e.g.
GeoCorps; Geoscientist-In-the-Parks, GIP; Research Experiences in Solid Earth
Science for Students, RESESS, etc.). The objective is to aid URMs who are
advanced undergraduate or beginning graduate students to improve written and
oral communication skills as expressed in written applications and/or interviews
for internships/fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is an extension of
programs to broaden participation and increase inclusion of underrepresented
minorities (URMs) in geosciences developed at the Department of Geosciences,
University of Arkansas and the Geological Society of America (GSA) with
assistance from UNAVCO. The proposed effort will target URMs in GSA's On to the
Future (OTF) initiative and offer financial support to participants to attend
professional development workshops focused on acquiring soft skills (written and
oral communication skills related to internship/fellowship applications) at
multiple GSA conference venues (annual and geographic section meetings)
annually. The primary goal of the proposed program is to provide URMs in the
geosciences academic/career pipeline supplemental professional training to
enhance the quantity and quality of internship/fellowship applications such that
greater numbers of URMs are selected for these educational and professional
experiences, ultimately aiding their transition to the geosciences workforce
through acquisition of both technical and non-technical skills coveted by
employers. A critical aspect of this experiment will be to track progress of URM
participants and their success rate being selected for internships/fellowships
as a consequence of participation in the proposed workshops. Project personnel
are uniquely positioned to monitor this population over the next three years to
determine how well they perform at this task and how they progress through the
pathways to the national geoscience workforce. It is anticipated the project
will support at least 40 participants annually (minimum of 120 over 3 years).
Participants will be supported for 2nd and 3rd year experiences in an effort to
greatly increase their retention and persistence in GSA and, by extension, the
geosciences profession. Recurrent counseling, mentoring, education, training,
and engagement with this cohort will help them establish a sense of community
and belonging within the geosciences. This strategy is a well-documented best
practice for promoting URM progress and ultimate success in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.