* 1801010
* Expanding Educational Opportunities for Nondestructive Testing Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Duncan Estep, Lorain County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2024
* USD 586,948.00

The demand among companies in the United States for skilled technicians in
nondestructive testing (NDT) is growing at a steady rate. These technicians
ensure the quality and safety of manufactured products in industries such as
aerospace, construction, manufacturing, and transportation. Companies typically
create their own internal training programs. The technician employees earn
certifications that may only be recognized at a specific company or include only
a few types of testing methods. A limited number of educational institutions
offer courses or programs in NDT technology. To keep up with the increasing
workforce demand for NDT technicians, the nation needs more educational programs
that provide complete professional preparation. To meet this need, Lorain County
Community College will collaborate with two national industry associations and
leading employers of technicians to identify the required skills, student
learning outcomes, and best practices for NDT programs. The project has the
potential to enhance the preparation of future NDT technicians to meet the need
in the nation's workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project main goal is to
develop the capacity of community colleges to educate students for jobs in the
NDT technician workforce. The project will involve collaboration between Lorain
County Community College, the American Society for Nondestructive Testing, the
American Welding Society Foundation, and industry partners. It will build upon
results from two prior NSF-funded projects at Chattanooga State Community
College and Iowa State University that focused in this technology area. Both
institutions will also collaborate to accomplish project activities. The
collaborators will perform a job task analysis for one technician job level. The
results will then be combined with existing job task analyses for the other job
levels. This synthesis aims to create comprehensive competency models for NDT
technicians. These competency models will be used to define the desirable
student learning outcomes for an associate degree that includes stackable
credentials. Educators, along with subject matter experts in industry, will
review and validate these learning outcomes. A framework for implementing NDT
courses and programs will be developed, documented, and disseminated. The
existing professional development program, Weld-Ed Module 7, for high school,
community college, and university faculty will also be refined and tested at
Lorain County Community College. Approaches to promote awareness of NDT
technology and career pathways will be developed and implemented. These
strategies will emphasize the inclusion of underrepresented groups and veterans
to enhance the diversity of the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.