* 1801861
* NeTS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Riding the Stress Wave: Integrated Monitoring, Communications, and Networking for Subsea Infrastructure
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Aijun Song, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 08/31/2022
* USD 268,000.00

Thousands of miles of pipelines crisscrossing the Gulf of Mexico seafloor are
the veins for the offshore oil and gas industry in the U.S. and the world. Leaks
and ruptures in those pipelines lead to not only enormous economic loss but also
environmental disasters. The goal of this project is to effectively monitor the
subsea infrastructure such as offshore pipelines, and efficiently deliver the
sensed information for subsequent control and action. To provide a viable
solution, this project will integrate piezoelectric transducer designs, acoustic
communications, stress wave communications (SWC), and hybrid networking, and
conduct experiments and field tests to validate the proposed designs. Such a
vision needs efforts from both engineering and scientific perspectives, and the
success of the proposed transformative research will significantly improve the
design, analysis and implementation of subsea infrastructure monitoring and data
transmission systems. The research outcomes will potentially contribute to a
future subsea Internet of Things and ocean big data systems, and have impact on
offshore oil and gas industry, pollution control, ocean agriculture, disaster
rescue, etc. The project will also provide special interdisciplinary training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students, particularly women
and minority students, across multiple institutions through both research work
and related courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop an
effective subsea infrastructure health monitoring, and efficient information
delivery network design via five synergistic thrusts: (1) structural health
monitoring, which will employ Lead Zirconate Titanate (PZT) transducers to
perform integrated structural health monitoring of pipelines, including impact,
leakage, and damage detection, and explore how to send the detected damage
information via SWC; (2) SWC channel modeling, which will conduct model analysis
and simulation of SWC traveling along a fluid-filled pipeline in the subsea
environment, and characterize SWC channels in a complicated pipeline network;
(3) adaptive time reversal acoustic communications, which will characterize the
acoustic communication channel in high frequency bands of 80-200 kilohertz for
short range transmissions in the ocean and develop new adaptive communication
receivers and strategies based on time reversal processing; (4) hybrid subsea
network development, which will develop a hybrid subsea wireless network to
integrate traditional acoustic communications and SWC depending on the subsea
infrastructure, and study the hybrid network performance from multiple
perspectives; (5) integrated experimental validation, which will conduct a
series of lab and at-sea field tests on campus and at industrial/academic
collaborators' sites to verify the proposed designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.