* 1801043
* Pathways into Careers in Information Technology: Community College Student Decision-Making about Academic Programs and Jobs
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2023
* Michelle Van Noy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 12/31/2023
* USD 1,114,778.00

Graduates of technician programs have opportunities to enter well-paying, high-
demand careers. However, only 20% of community college students complete their
programs of study within six years. Prior research highlights the challenges
facing students at community colleges. However, the career development
literature includes little research on community college students and their
decision-making processes. The literature is even more lacking about community
college students in technician fields. The goal of this research project is to
increase understanding of the decisions students make in pursuing credentials
(e.g., degrees and certificates) at two-year institutions, and in pursuing
careers in information technology. The research focuses on Information
Technology (IT) because it offers students a wide-array of opportunities and
specialties. In addition, many two-year institutions have developed IT programs
to address the growing need for IT professionals. Relying on multiple sources of
data, the project brings together a multidisciplinary team to investigate
student decision-making. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This quantitative and qualitative
mixed methods research project will examine how students' experiences and
information resources influence their decision making, particularly early in
their enrollment in college, and how that process evolves over time. The
longitudinal and cross-sectional mixed methods study takes a multidisciplinary
theoretical approach, drawing on literature from career development, psychology,
sociology, and economics. The study employs a variety of research methods,
including student surveys, in-depth longitudinal student interviews, point-in-
time interviews with faculty and administrators, secondary data analysis of
administrative records, site visits, and document analysis. The quantitative and
qualitative data collection and analyses are designed to investigate,
triangulate, test, and confirm findings. The research project is designed to
generate knowledge useful to students, the public, community college/technician
education professionals, and policy-makers committed to increasing student
success in advanced technological programs and to meeting the demand for a
middle skills workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.