* 1801014
* Unmanned Aircraft Systems Operations and Maintenance Education and Training Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Al Jou, Atlantic Cape Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2021
* USD 224,761.00

The Unmanned Aircraft Systems Operations and Maintenance Training Project at
Atlantic Cape Community College in New Jersey aims to advance technician
education and training in the rapidly evolving and critically important field of
small commercial unmanned aircraft systems (UAS). To this end, this project
plans to develop a curriculum for a new academic program that will prepare
students to work as technicians in operation, maintenance, and repair of small
UAS. Through site visits and a national steering committee, the project will
work with employers to identify current and future needs for technicians. It
will use this information to create an associate degree program that aligns with
the expectations of employers, manufacturers, and regulatory agencies. This new
curriculum could benefit employers involved directly in the UAS industry, as
well as employers in other fields such as agriculture, insurance, real estate,
utilities, construction, media, and law enforcement/public safety. Project
results will be shared with other community and technical colleges interested in
training UAS technicians, with a special focus on building capacity for colleges
that wish to develop an aviation technician program or to enhance current
offerings. The project will promote diversity in the technical workforce by
training all students in entrepreneurial principles and skills, and by
supporting enrollment and retention of female students. The project aims to
create a pool of trained technicians available for work in southern New Jersey,
a region in which policymakers and government agencies are encouraging
development of a robust UAS industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
define the skills and knowledge needed to enable a technician to maintain,
upgrade, or repair a small UAS, and develop an innovative academic program that
promotes the requisite student learning. Curriculum development will use a
systematic approach to instructional design, based on the Dick and Carey model
instructional model. This approach includes defining the needs, the audience,
the tasks that students will need to master, as well as planning for student
assessment and course/program evaluation. The curriculum will include education
and training in aviation regulation, aviation weather, aeronautical knowledge,
mechanical/electronic engineering, geospatial data collection, and computer
science. The curriculum will also include three competency areas that
researchers have identified for UAS technicians: hardware, software, and
documentation and personnel issues. Drone manufacturers and employers will
provide input to ensure that the program educates skilled technicians who can
comply with FAA regulations for safe operation of small drones in the national
airspace system. Industry experts conclude that the largest barrier in building
a UAS maintenance knowledge base is lack of maintenance documentation for
drones. The project will address this barrier by facilitating greater
information-sharing by manufacturers. Project leaders have extensive
professional contacts and collaborators in the UAS industry, as well as
administrative experience and expertise in engineering curriculum development.
The project plans to build on an existing aviation program at the college that
can provide resources (e.g., equipment; teaching space; administrative support)
and a sustainable source of new equipment and ongoing professional development
opportunities for faculty. Other academic institutions, including Rutgers
University, New Jersey Institute of Technology, and the University of Arkansas-
Fort Smith, will provide input on the curriculum and related project activities.
In addition, so that this program can build on existing expertise and experience
in UAS technician training, the project leaders will make site visits to other
community colleges with active UAS training programs, including Sinclair
Community College in Ohio and Northland Community and Technical College in
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.