* 1801598
* GP-EXTRA: RiGs - Road maps into the Geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* John Hogan, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 306,716.00

Many college STEM majors are unaware of the multitude of geoscience careers
available to them. This particularly applies to students from rural areas who
are the first in their family to attend college. These students are often
academically gifted, but feel that they have to enter the workforce directly
upon graduating with a BS degree, often due to financial hardship. This short-
circuits these students' ability to participate in more intellectually
demanding, rewarding, and lucrative geoscience careers, and limits the potential
for universities to meet the projected future demands for the nation's
geoscience workforce. To address this issue, the RiGs (Road maps into the
Geosciences) summer program will form a multi-institutional alliance among the
Missouri University of Science and Technology (S&amp;T), Southern Utah
University, Kutztown University (Pennsylvania), state/federal agencies in
Missouri, and the private sector. The goal of RiGs is to (i) facilitate exposure
of financially challenged STEM students from rural areas, at minimal to zero
costs, to a wide array of geoscience career pathways, and (ii) to highlight the
educational tracks and professional skills necessary to pursue those tracks. The
RiGs program will provide an academic and professional development opportunity
for financially challenged undergraduate students that these students would
normally forego, thus serving as a pilot for increasing the economic
competitiveness of the U.S. through rural workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;RiGs (Road maps into the Geosciences) will establish a recurring two-
month summer program on the Missouri S&amp;T campus that will help undergraduate
students to successfully transition into the post-baccalaureate geoscience
workforce. The focus is to immerse the students into an active research and/or
private sector work environment that will allow them to develop academic and
professional skills typically not taught in the classroom. Students will learn
these skills through an Introduction to Geoscience Research Methodologies class,
a mentored research project or job shadowing at state/federal agencies in
Missouri, and a series of extracurricular activities. The Introduction to
Geoscience Research Methodologies class is designed to provide context for the
active, hands-on learning of practical skills applicable to geoscience research.
As part of individual research projects, the students will be paired with
Missouri S&amp;T graduate students to guarantee full immersion into an active
graduate research environment (i.e., the "Grad School Experience"). Job
shadowing at the US Geological Survey, the US Forest Service, and the Missouri
Department of Natural Resources will provide participating students with unique
insight into the daily life of a professional geoscientist, which will be
complemented by a career day at the Doe Run lead mining company in Missouri.
Furthermore, extracurricular activities throughout the summer program (team
building exercises, mock job interviews, oral presentation skill development)
will help students acquire the necessary professional and social skills for a
successful geoscience career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.