* 1801897
* Understanding Formation of Condensible Organics from Photochemical Oxidation During New-Particle Formation Experiments
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Neil Donahue, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 07/31/2021
* USD 721,501.00

This project focuses on the study of the formation and growth of new particles
in the atmosphere. The research will combine collaborative experiments at CERN
as part of the Cosmics Leaving OUtdoor Droplets (CLOUD) consortium, with smog-
chamber studies at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU). The CLOUD experimental
facility is likely the world's most sophisticated experiment addressing
atmospheric new-particle formation. It was constructed to measure new particle
formation under highly controlled, ultra-clean
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At CLOUD, the CMU team will use an iodide
chemical ionization mass spectrometer to measure the composition of gases and
growing particles, the later by thermal desorption from teflon filters (FIGAERO
CIMS). The major objective will be to understand how gas-phase oxidation
chemistry makes products with extraordinary low vapor pressures, capable of
forming new particles and also condensing on existing particles making them
grow. A major focus will be to compare chemical conditions in CLOUD, which more
closely resemble the clean background atmosphere, with those in traditional smog
chamber experiments, that often exceed those in the most polluted cities. The
project will focus on the role of peroxy radical formation and subsequent "auto-
oxidation" that can convert semi-volatile peroxy radicals into low-volatility
peroxy radicals, and the subsequent termination chemistry that generates
condensible products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will form the core of
two student dissertations. One will focus principally on gas-phase oxidation
chemistry, specifically the temperature dependent sources and fate of highly
oxidized peroxy radicals that is hypothesized to be at the center of the
formation of low-volatility and extremely low-volatility organic compounds. The
other will focus on the composition of the condensed phase and the potential for
reactive uptake of semivolatile organic compounds to contribute to particle
growth. The project results will yield a much better understanding of the rate-
limiting elementary steps associated with new-particle formation and growth and
competing atmospheric processes that might interfere with those rate-limiting
steps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.