* 1801435
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Presentation-attack-robust biometrics systems via computational imaging of physiology and materials
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Vishal Patel, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Nina Amla
* 04/30/2019
* USD 300,002.00

Many physical characteristics, such as face, fingerprints, and iris as well as
behavioral characteristics such as voice, gait, and keystroke dynamics, are
believed to be unique to an individual. Hence, biometric analysis offers a
reliable solution to the problem of identity verification. It is now widely
acknowledged that biometric systems are vulnerable to manipulation where the
true biometric is falsified using various attack strategies; such attacks are
referred to as Presentation Attacks (PAs). This project develops computational
imaging-based methods for detecting known and unknown PAs for face and iris
biometric systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While biometrics has been an active
field of research for more than three decades, the design of biometric systems
that are robust to a diverse set of known and unknown PAs is still in its
infancy. This project seeks to build biometric systems that integrate
computational imaging sensors for acquiring physiological, spectral, and
material properties with the goal of detecting and mitigating the effects of
known and unknown PA attacks. Specifically, as part of the project novel
computational cameras will be built that augment traditional sensors used for
face and iris recognition by adding subsystems that measure changes in a
subject's physiology including vital signs, blood perfusion, voluntary and
involuntary responses to external stimuli as well as composition as measured in
scattering, reflectance and spectral profiles. The rich signatures sensed by
these computational cameras is expected to provide a robust characterization of
the true biometric and its variations while providing high discriminability to
commonly used PAs. Further, by virtue of outlier detection and open-set
modeling, this project develops a highly flexible approach for detecting
previously unseen PAs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.