* 1801198
* Braided Tensor Categories, Their Structures, Symmetries, and Graded Extensions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Dmitri Nikshych, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 165,066.00

This project concerns the study of tensor categories. These are mathematical
structures consisting of objects that can be added and multiplied using certain
natural rules. The abstract nature of these structures makes them a very
convenient tool to study symmetries, both in the classical and quantum arenas.
Recently, tensor categories were proposed as mathematical models of a
topological quantum computation, one of the most promising models for the
construction of a quantum computer. They are also closely related to symmetries
of topological phases of matter and are used to predict the existence of new
types of such phases and their physical realization. This project deals with
algebraic aspects of the theory of tensor categories: their structure,
classification, and arithmetic properties. The emphasis is on categories that
are most widely used in applications. Such categories admit an additional
symmetry constraint called braiding that is used to model interaction of pairs
of quantum particles. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tensor categories provide a unified
framework for studying various quantum symmetries such as quantum groups, vertex
operator algebras, Jones-von Neumann subfactors,and conformal field theories.
Categorical methods in the theory of Hopf algebras and quantum groups led to a
number of important classification results and continue to bring forth new
insights. This project will use the machinery that has already been developed to
approach fundamental questions concerning the structure and classification of
tensor categories. It will address problems related to extensions of braided
tensor categories, their modules, and groups of symmetries. The concrete areas
of research include the following: (1) the theory of graded extensions of
braided tensor categories and classification of minimal non-degenerate
extensions, (2) the Picard groups of braided tensor categories and their actions
on categorical orthogonal Grassmannians with applications to the representation
categories of small quantum groups; (3) arithmetic properties and structure of
fusion categories and semisimple Hopf algebras; (4) classification of non-
semisimple pointed braided tensor categories and their module
categories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.