* 1801937
* A Census of Mass-Transfer, Merger, and Collision Products in Old Open Clusters
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Emily Leiner, Leiner                  Emily
* Fellowship Award
* Andrea Prestwich
* 09/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Emily Leiner is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at Northwestern
University. Nearly half of the stars similar to the Sun exist in binary star
systems. Leiner will study hundreds of binary stars within ?open clusters?, or
groups of stars similar in age and composition. This study will yield an
extensive and well characterized sample of binary stars that could help advance
our understanding of binary stellar evolution. Alongside this research, Leiner
will work with local high school students through an outreach program at
Northwestern, and she will conduct public outreach at the Adler
Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leiner will perform a census of post-
interaction binary stars on the main sequence and giant branches of five open
clusters ranging in age from 2.5 to 8 billion years. She will identify these
stars using rotation rates derived from light curves and extensive radial
velocity catalogs. In addition, she will identify exceedingly massive stars from
their oscillation frequencies and determine their masses and radii using
asteroseismic techniques. Leiner will use this new census to constrain formation
rates and lifetimes for these post-interaction populations, as well as to
investigate the physics that sets these rates and lifetimes. Leiner will also
engage Chicago-area high school students to produce 3D-printed models of
oscillating red giant stars and interacting binary systems, and she will use
these models to enhance the learning experience of visitors to the Adler
Planetarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.