* 1801717
* UNS:  Collaborative Research: Testing the paradigms of the colloidal glass: Novel concentration jump experiments and large scale computer modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,05/31/2018
* Roseanna Zia, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2018
* USD 6,257.00

CBET - 1506072 McKenna, Gregory B.&lt;br/&gt;CBET - 1506079 Zia, Roseanna
N.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colloids are dispersions of particles in a liquid, such
as water, and the particles are so small that they do not separate for very long
times. The materials are widely used in commercial products such as paints and
inks. They are also believed to be a good model materials for glasses. The
present work is a collaborative study that combines experiment and large scale
computer simulations that will provide novel scientific understanding of the
behavior of colloidal glasses and comparisons will be made with knowledge from
the literature concerning molecular glasses in similar conditions. Graduate and
high school students will participate in the research activities at both PIs'
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding dynamical arrest in complex
matter is a great challenge in soft matter science. Most study of colloidal
systems near jamming assumes parity with corresponding behavior in molecular
glasses. Yet, recent studies reveal non-equilibrium responses in colloids that
differ qualitatively from glassy dynamics as monitored via the Kovacs
signatures, viz., the intrinsic isotherm, the asymmetry of approach, and the
memory effect. The proposed study will illuminate the structural underpinnings
of such differences through a novel combination of experiment and dynamic
simulation. The structure and dynamics will be determined in experiments
analogous to the Kovacs experiments for molecular glass-forming systems. Here
stimulus-responsive particles will change diameter at constant number density to
create concentration-jump conditions to mimic the temperature-jumps of the
Kovacs signature experiments. Concurrent simulations will effect similar
conditions in silico. Experiment and simulation will inform and validate each
other and the joint interrogation of the colloid dynamics near to the jamming
transition will potentially create a transformative understanding of arrested
states in soft matter. In a broader sense, this is a collaboration of two very
different PIs. One is an expert in the experimental physics of molecular
glasses, especially aging. The other is an expert in large scale computer
simulation, with emphasis on colloidal systems. The result provides unique
cross-disciplinary training to graduate students in both computational and
experimental physics, deepening their knowledge of the fundamentals of dynamics
and aging of molecular and colloidal glasses. Further, women and under-
represented minorities will play a central role as undergraduate and graduate
researchers.