* 1801181
* Creating Career Pathways for Manufacturing Systems Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Charles Sekafetz, Chemeketa Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 224,924.00

Community colleges face significant challenges when designing technician
education programs for occupations that are not defined by a single job title.
To address this important national issue, Chemeketa Community College in Oregon
will collaborate with food and beverage processors and processing equipment
manufacturers to develop a new education program for manufacturing systems
technicians. The goal is to develop an industry-driven program with stackable
certificates embedded in a two-year associate degree, and with clear pathways to
employment in high wage fields and/or a baccalaureate degree. As courses are
developed, the project will use a work-based learning model that allows
employees to engage both in the classroom and on the job. In this way, employees
and employers can immediately benefit from the new skills and knowledge that the
employees are learning. This industry-driven project is designed to develop a
prototype that could be useful regionally and nationally for addressing
technician education in other areas such aerospace and technology manufacturing,
both growing manufacturing sectors with large existing companies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities will include conducting a DACUM
(Developing a Curriculum), the occupational analysis process developed by Ohio
State University that is used extensively in developing two-year college
workforce programs. Based on the DACUM results, programs and courses in current
associate degree technician programs at the institution will be reorganized and
modified to fit the needs of the cross-sector group of industry partners. As
needed, new courses will be created to meet industry-specific requirements. For
example, industry partners have indicated that they increasingly use automated
processes and robots to improve quality of products and reduce costs. To
accommodate these changes in manufacturing processes, this project will
research, develop, and disseminate curriculum to prepare workers with the skills
and knowledge to set up, operate, test, and maintain these
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.