* 1801120
* Smart Manufacturing for America's Revolutionizing Technological Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Motlow State Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 545,000.00

Smart manufacturing combines automated processes with networks of advanced
sensors, data analytics, and information and communication technologies to
improve the productivity of companies. It has been widely recognized as a
groundbreaking technological trend with the potential to transform manufacturing
industries. Smart manufacturing was first defined by the United States in 2015.
However, current efforts in the United States have not resulted in the growth of
a workforce trained to utilize smart manufacturing techniques. Many individuals
are not quite sure what is involved in smart manufacturing, what is its
importance, or how it applies to their companies. To overcome this knowledge
gap, it is important for technician educators to have opportunities to become
well-informed about such advances in technology. They are then able to properly
prepare technicians with the skills needed for rapidly-changing industries. In
this project, training workshops and resources will be created and offered for
educators in mechatronics and engineering technology programs. These resources
will also be made available to manufacturers and local industries to increase
their involvement with this technology area. The project will contribute to
improving the education of future manufacturing technicians and the nation's
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project will be to: 1) create
educational modules and workforce development tools on smart manufacturing; 2)
identify the skill sets and needs of smart manufacturing professionals; 3)
develop a repository that serves as a knowledge base for industry and STEM
educators; 4) increase awareness about smart manufacturing; and 5) develop a
knowledge base of best practices for Industrial Assessment Center (IAC) site
visits. In this project, the educational modules on smart manufacturing will be
implemented in train-the-trainer workshops and webinars. Topics covered in the
modules will include: an overview of technologies used in smart manufacturing;
sustainable manufacturing; additive manufacturing; the fourth industrial
revolution and manufacturing innovations; data science in manufacturing; and
adaptive control systems and machine intelligence. An online platform will be
established as the repository for the developed materials and resources, and
will allow educators and manufacturing personnel in industry to exchange ideas
on applications and techniques for smart manufacturing. Results from the project
will be widely disseminated within technical communities and
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.