* 1801207
* RAPID: Building Judicial Legitimacy or Inviting Institutional Backlash?
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Eric Kramon, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Humes
* 02/28/2019
* USD 163,929.00

Democracy depends on popular will but also obedience to a rule of law ultimately
prescribed by the Constitution. High courts are called on to be final arbiters
of constitutional meaning. The Kenyan Supreme Court's invalidation of the August
2017 presidential election and directive for a new election in late October 2017
presents a crucial test of the Court's institutional legitimacy, or rightful
authority to render constitutional and legal rulings for the polity. This
project examines how the public has responded to this landmark ruling, as well
as to the new election that the Court has ordered. Do citizens' ethnic and
partisan affiliations drive their assessments of the Supreme Court's legitimacy
in light of this landmark ruling? Or can perceptions of procedural fairness and
other non-policy factors overcome ethnic or partisan bias and build a reservoir
of legitimacy for the Court? These questions are incredibly important in an
emerging democracy like Kenya with a high court that has a short institutional
history. Mass and elite responses to the Court's actions will set a strong
precedent for the future of the rule of law and democratic governance, not only
in Kenya but in Africa writ large. Moreover, a history of mass public protests
and violence in response to controversial elections makes understanding the
public's response to this episode extremely important for theoretical,
empirical, and normative reasons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project will test
theoretical hypotheses centered on process-based (procedural fairness,
subscription to democratic values) versus outcome-based (ethnic or partisan
disagreement with Court outcomes) models of institutional legitimacy. These
hypotheses with a two-wave national panel survey, which includes a survey
experiment, of Kenyan citizens. Using an oversample of control group respondents
from the first wave, descriptive statistics related to legitimacy and other
Court-related assessments and examine the effects of process and outcome-based
factors on legitimacy and other evaluations will be generated. A field
experiment will also be conducted to allow identification of the causal effects
of procedural fairness and elite cues, both countervailing and aligning with
ethnopartisan preferences' on Supreme Court legitimacy. The experiment will also
examine whether procedural fairness and countervailing elite cues can attenuate
ethnopartisan bias in legitimacy judgments. Finally, the second wave survey will
allow the identification of how different ethno-partisans' attitudes toward the
Supreme Court change in light of the outcome of the new election. Examining
these changes will provide an additional test of the outcome-based model and
examine how and whether reactions (both positive and negative) to the court?s
decision persist into the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.