* 1801041
* Professional Development to Enhance Skills of Manufacturing Instructors
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Tunxis Community-Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 11/30/2022
* USD 719,871.00

The need for skilled manufacturing technicians has led to expansion of quality
manufacturing technology programs in community colleges. State funding and a US
Department of Labor Trade Adjustment Assistance Community College Career
Training Grant provided Connecticut Community Colleges with the facilities and
equipment to expand their manufacturing programs and serve more students. The
ATE Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing has supported program and
curriculum development in this area. In addition, it has supported professional
development opportunities for current faculty and instructors across the state
and New England. However, the rate of expansion industry's need for skilled
technicians has exceeded the ability of the community colleges to find qualified
instructors who have both industry and educational experience. Many potential
instructors have over twenty years of industry experience but lack the skills
associated with different methodologies used in classroom teaching and course
management, including assessment. Faculty need expertise on methods that
integrate professional skills into classrooms and laboratories. This Skills for
Manufacturing Instructors project will address these needs for professional
development for community college manufacturing technology
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage all twelve Connecticut
public community colleges and their Advanced Manufacturing Technology Centers.
The project will develop modules and a new course that will provide faculty with
the skills needed to enhance their teaching effectiveness, improve classroom
management, develop high quality student assessments of learning, and strategies
to increase student persistence. The proposed course and modules will assist
newly hired manufacturing technicians from industry as well as provide
opportunities for current instructors to learn new teaching methodologies in a
higher education academic environment. Additionally, the project will organize
two workshops annually on essential technical skills for the manufacturing
instructors and faculty, as well as provide opportunities for certification in
widely used technologies. Examples of certifications that would be supported are
the National Institute for Metalworking Skills, SolidWorks Computer-Aided Design
software, and SME's Additive Manufacturing Certification. Additional workshops
will be offered that provide strategies for increasing the persistence of
underrepresented populations in the manufacturing
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.