* 1801865
* NeTS: Large: Collaborative Research: ASTRO: A Platform for 3-D Data-Driven Mobile Sensing via Networked Drones
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Yingyan Lin, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,647,000.00

The driving vision of this project is to detect Volatile Organic Compounds
(VOCs) through ASTRO, a platform for autonomous 3-D data-driven mobile sensing
via networked drones equipped with gas sensors. VOCs are hazardous to human
health and the environment; they are released by explosions, gas leaks, and
industrial accidents prevalent in low-income and under-resourced urban
neighborhoods in close proximity to industrial processing plants, chemical
refineries, and other sources of airborne pollutants. The project is located in
an economically disadvantaged area of Houston, Texas. With Technology For All
(TFA), the project team has a history of engaging the local community via
broadband access, technology training, and connected health. The TFA wireless
network already serves 1000's of community members in several square kilometers
in Houston's East End via a mix of commercial Wi-Fi and software defined radios.
The project targets realizing a high-resolution ground truth of environmental
conditions in low-income urban areas which can impact emergency response
procedures and environmental justice via policy and law. The project will
develop a mobile app that alerts community residents of hazardous VOC
concentrations near their current location. This project will impact urban areas
with a demonstration of fusing next generation environmental sensing with next
generation wireless access via networked drones. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project's objective is to realize an unprecedented resolution in VOC sensing by
development and demonstration of ASTRO, a system for networked drone sensing
missions without ground control. ASTRO will realize the unique capability to
dynamically move sensors in 3-D according to real-time measurements.
Consequently, networks of drones with on-board sensors can find and track VOC
plumes, solely by coordinating among themselves, and without requiring a
centralized ground controller. Two inter-related thrusts will realize this
vision. The first is target detection, tracking, and modeling high VOC
concentration clusters, targeting health and environmental safety. The second is
development of the underlying principles and methodologies for data-driven
mobile missions via drone networks. The project's outcomes will include
lightweight machine learning methods that provide foundations for real-time
distributed autonomous sensing with environmental and health objectives. These
data sets will yield development of atmospheric models of VOCs at a finer
resolution than is possible today. Moreover, the outcomes will also include
methods for adaptive communication among the networked drones via software
defined radios that can adapt their network topology and spectrum usage to
realize mission objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.