* 1801007
* The Internet of Things Coordination Network
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* John Sands, Moraine Valley Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to establish a coordination network including representatives
of industry, manufacturers, academia, and users of integrated smart devices. The
"Internet of Things (IoT)" is the term used to describe the use and integration
of smart devices capable of monitoring, controlling, collecting, sending, and
receiving data to intelligent systems. The emergence of IoT will transform
homes, institutions of education, manufacturing facilities, and other work
places. As a new and rapidly emerging area of technology, IoT will generate a
substantial need for technicians, technology integrators, and programmers.
Community colleges across the nation are struggling with understanding and
building programs to meet this future workforce need. As for other disruptive
technologies, the emergence of IoT challenges educators to acquire the
background knowledge needed to design high-quality IoT classes and programs.
This collaboration network is designed to support the academic community at
community colleges by studying the emergence of IoT technologies. The network
plans to complete research projects on IoT products, technologies, standards,
and applications. The results of these studies will help to inform decisions
about how to optimally develop IoT programs at community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The IoT Coordination Network aspires to bring
together the principals and organizations that are leading the emergence of this
technology. Members of this network include companies that manufacture and
integrate IoT devices, and organizations that establish standards that govern
IoT technologies. The network also intends to include experts on protecting the
users and environments that are projected to be affected by these IoT devices.
The project intends to convene this network of experts quarterly to examine
emerging technologies, explore new products and devices, and provide guidance to
educators preparing the next generation of IoT
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.