* 1801389
* GP:IMPACT: Collaborative Research: TSU-Vanderbilt Partnership - A Pathway to Broaden Participation of Underrepresented Groups in Graduate School and the Geoscience Workforce
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Thomas Byl, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,742.00

Many pressing social, economic and environmental issues are informed by the
geosciences including geohazards, natural resource management and climate
change. These issues have potential impacts on all populations, however many
minority groups continue to be proportionally underrepresented in geoscience
related professions in academia, government and the private sector. In order to
help close this persistent diversity gap within the geosciences, this project
seeks to build a partnership between Tennessee State University (TSU),
Vanderbilt University (VU), several federal, state and municipal government
agencies, and the private sector with the goal of strengthening the pathway for
minority students entering geoscience careers and graduate programs.
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), like TSU, have a strong
track record in recruiting and retaining minority students in STEM programs.
However, only two of the 82 HBCUs have undergraduate geoscience programs. Thus,
HBCUs represent a significant, underutilized opportunity to recruit diverse
students into the geosciences. TSU has recently developed an Environmental
Sciences concentration that does not currently include geoscience. VU is a
research institution with a strong geoscience department with an institutional
commitment to increasing diversity in all fields. The TSU-VU Partnership
leverages TSU's strong record of preparing minority students for STEM careers
and VU's vibrant geoscience research environment to draw students from
underrepresented groups and prepare them for the geoscience workforce. To
recruit, train and retain minority geoscience students, the partnership focuses
on classroom and experiential learning to build the intellectual foundations and
professional connections needed for successful geoscience careers. Upon
completion of the program, students will be eligible and competitive for
internships with program partners including Tennessee State Parks, the USGS, and
several local businesses. Many of these internships involve direct interaction
with the public, allowing the students to serve as role models of minority
geoscientists. Thus, this program will work to increase the diversity of the
geoscience workforce, change public perceptions of geoscientists and demonstrate
the value of geoscience careers in the community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed TSU-VU Partnership has high potential to be transformative in the lives
of the individual students involved, the relationship between two neighboring
institutions, and the perception of geoscientists and geoscience careers in
Tennessee and beyond. This 2-year program targets TSU Environmental Science
students in their junior and senior years. Key program components during the
first year include an introductory geology course taught by VU faculty at TSU,
an intensive two-week summer field course investigating the geology of Tennessee
state parks and an 8-week paid research internship in a VU or TSU lab. Year two
supports advanced skill development through upper level coursework at VU and a
Career Seminar to help the students determine the geoscience career pathways
that best fit their goals. The program will be evaluated via a mixed methods
approach to measure program and participant success. Through these evaluations,
the program effectiveness will be documented and refined. A main product of this
effort will be the construction and dissemination of a translatable model, or
toolkit, designed to help institutions create and sustain partnerships at the
undergraduate level. This toolkit will be particularly useful for other HBCUs
wishing to partner with local or regional institutions to promote geoscience
education. In this way, this partnership can be the start of a larger movement
that promotes cross-institutional and agency collaboration to provide crucial
support for students at key transitional moments in their careers and therefore
to enhance diversity in the career and academic
pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.