* 1801177
* Collaborative Proposal: Pathways for Learners to Engineering Technology Employment
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Michael Swanbom, Louisiana Delta Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 07/31/2022
* USD 599,973.00

Louisiana Delta Community College in collaboration with Louisiana Technology
University propose an engineering technology career pathway for high school and
post-secondary students. This project aims to prepare students for
instrumentation technician careers in manufacturing and other highly automated
industries. Through recruitment and retention programs set in a diverse
geographic region, this project has the potential to promote increased
participation in the STEM workforce by veterans, women, and students from groups
that have been traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields. This project aims
to positively affect local industry and residents by strengthening the pipeline
into high-technology, high-wage jobs. As a result, this project has the
potential to improve the quality of life for these residents and to serve as a
model for high-tech workforce development in other rural areas across the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project will be to
increase engineering technology career pathways for high school students, engage
and retain these students through college, and ensure they will be employable
upon graduation. The two pathways to become an automation technician will be
either through a two-year technology degree or a four-year engineering
technology degree. High school students will be offered dual credit courses to
seamlessly transfer into the two-year or four-year career paths in automation
technology. High school teachers and counselors from across North Louisiana will
participate in workshops where they will be introduced to advanced manufacturing
curriculum and career pathways. A strong collaboration between higher education
and industry will help to align the curriculum to workforce needs. This project
expects that it will reach about 500 high school students, about 100
undergraduate students, and more than 25 high school teachers and counselors
over a three-year period.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.