* 1801154
* Scaling Up Utah's Automated Manufacturing Technician Pipeline
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Mason Lefler, Bridgerland Applied Technology College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 04/30/2022
* USD 225,000.00

Utah is experiencing a critical shortage of skilled technicians in advanced
manufacturing due, in part, to the abundance of large and small industries which
continue to automate their facilitates statewide. Furthermore, there are a
limited number of advanced manufacturing programs which are able to adequately
educate and prepare future technicians for the workforce. In addition to
creating an innovative pipeline of high school students into advanced
manufacturing to support the economy, this project will provide a refined
prepackaged curriculum and programmatic resources that could be easily shared
anywhere across the state or nation. The project will serve as a model on how
applied technical colleges and secondary schools can collaborate through
learning management systems to simultaneously prepare participants with high
paying jobs and/or a pathway to college. A professional development model will
also be developed and implemented to best serve high school and college faculty
as they adapt the advanced manufacturing program at their own institutions. It
is anticipated that the expected outcomes and findings will offer the
educational community an insight as to how to build blended learning
environments comprised of learning management systems with high levels of hands-
on training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make a significant impact on
the capacity and quality of advanced manufacturing technicians statewide by
directly impacting high school and college students, Bridgerland Technical
College, the Utah System of Technical Colleges, and our industry partners. The
benefits to students will be: (1) improved curriculum, (2) higher retention
rates, (3) access to a pathway into a career into automated manufacturing and
robotics, and (4) strong connections to local industry leaders. The benefits to
the College will be: (1) improved curriculum, (2) new branding of recruitment
strategies, (3) enhanced tracking/retention, (4) advanced leadership development
in project management/grant writing, and (5) a pathway for the College to become
a regional training leader in automated manufacturing. The benefits to the Utah
System of Technical Colleges will be: (1) a pilot of curriculum development and
collaboration across technical colleges, and (2) a mechanism of how to share and
scale best practices across the State of Utah. The benefits to industry partners
will be: (1) growing number of students pursuing careers in automated
manufacturing, and (2) a curriculum more reflective of industry
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.