* 1801716
* Collaborative Research: RET Site: Quadcopter Research Experiences for Tulsa-Area STEM Teachers
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2018,04/30/2022
* Peter LoPresti, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 04/30/2022
* USD 376,064.00

Technological advancements over the past 15 years are positioning unmanned
aerial systems (UASs) (including drones and unmanned aircraft ) to play a
pivotal role in both civilian and military domains. Industry, military, and
academic scientists and engineers look to employ UASs to support and advance
increases in agricultural productivity, monitoring the health of forests and
oceans, the success of search and rescue efforts after disasters, robotic
deliveries, and defending the nation's citizens. Students interested in STEM
careers will likely encounter or work with systems that utilize UASs, both in
school and in their work, as the market and range of applications continue to
grow. UASs also provide a potentially fun and creative way to approach, learn,
and work with concepts and design aspects of several critical STEM subjects
including math, mechanical and electrical engineering, physics, and computer
science. This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site program aims to
provide teachers with research experiences related to UASs, particularly
commercially available quadcopters (4-rotor drones) and their applications, and
to assist the teachers in developing curricular materials that connect topics in
math, science, and technology classes to real applications. The project will
connect teachers with university researchers, education professionals, and
industry engineers to explore how drones work, the math and science involved in
controlling a drone, and constructing a drone to carry payloads, survive
crashes, and ignore interference from cell phones, radio-controlled vehicles,
cell towers and other radio frequency sources. Providing teachers with training
in STEM subjects through research experiences and assistance with the
development of UAS-based curriculum elements will allow teachers to connect
material to realistic problems to better engage students and help the teachers
pass along problem solving skills to their students. This, in turn, better
prepares students for the 21st century business and technology environment which
strongly values the ability to solve problems effectively and efficiently, and
achieves a STEM aware and capable workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University
of Tulsa (TU), in partnership with Tulsa Regional STEM Alliance (TRSA), will
conduct an RET Site based on the operation and application of quadcopter UASs,
addressing the major fields of electrical engineering, mechanical engineering,
and computer science. The Site will invite 10 Tulsa-area high school teachers
each year for a period of two years to conduct research and curriculum
development activities at TU for six weeks during the summer months. The program
will also engage Tulsa Technology Center (TTC) for teachers and for follow-up
activities. TU and TRSA will partner to disseminate the results of activities,
including curriculum modules, activities for follow-on quadcopter-based STEM
camps, program evaluations, both locally and nationally. State and local
industry will benefit from students trained in problem solving and STEM
disciplines and better prepared to fulfill high-skill, higher paying jobs. TU
students involved in the project will develop professional and technical skills
that increase their competitiveness and potentially attract them to STEM
education, either professionally or through service to communities and schools.
The investigators will engage local industry to partner with the Site and extend
operation and scope beyond the initial two years of the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.