* 1801369
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Automated Support for Writing High-Assurance Smart Contracts
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Bryan Parno, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 816,000.00

Smart contracts, popularized by cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin and Ethereum, are
programs that run atop financial infrastructure and command the flow of money
according to user-defined algorithms. Such contracts can implement new,
decentralized financial instruments or even virtual corporations defined only by
the bundle of smart contracts programmatically governing their behavior. For
example, an eBay-like smart contract could directly connect buyers with sellers,
support a variety of auction mechanisms, and manage necessary payments
(including escrow), without the transaction charges currently imposed by eBay,
PayPal, and the credit card companies. In general, moving business processes
into smart contracts promises to lower costs, reduce friction, and unleash
innovation by eliminating intermediaries and automating settlements. However,
programming smart contracts requires a deep understanding of cryptographic
techniques, a non-standard execution cost model, and economic mechanism design.
Existing smart-contract programming languages provide little support for such
reasoning; indeed, contract vulnerabilities (such as TheDAO) have already led to
multi-million-dollar thefts. In contrast, this project will develop new
techniques and tools to support the development of high-assurance smart
contracts, with an emphasis on the challenges that make such contracts
particularly difficult to write correctly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will address the unique challenges of writing high-assurance smart contracts by
designing a new high-level language, Solidified, that allows a programmer to
express both the intent of the contract and its design constraints (e.g., bounds
on resource usage, synchronicity or secrecy requirements, or economic
expectations). We will develop tools to analyze and compile such contracts into
executable code. At a high-level, Solidified will support high-assurance smart-
contract writing across three dimensions. First, Solidified will mix automatic
and annotation-driven compilation to a diverse set of underlying cryptographic
primitives necessary to provide the security smart contracts require. The
compilation process will be integrated with tools for automated resource
analysis that will compute tight bounds on the amount of gas a smart contract
uses. Resource analysis, in turn, will enable automated reasoning about higher-
level properties, particularly those with an economic flavor. For example, given
a contract, new analysis tools, using probabilistic resource analysis, will
determine whether a player's expected payoff is maximized by following the
protocol, indicating whether it is incentive compatible. Extending the analysis
across contracts will evaluate whether systemic risks are understood and
mitigated. This project's foundational work in high-assurance smart contracts
will help realize the vision of blockchain technology. In addition, smart-
contract programming also provides a unique pedagogical opportunity for teaching
security. Hence, research results will be incorporated into graduate security
courses, a smart-contract security MOOC, and an outreach program for K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.