* 1801317
* Fullerene Cages as Molecular Nanocontainers to Stabilize Unprecedented Uranium Clusters and Bonding Motifs
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Luis Echegoyen, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 08/31/2023
* USD 599,999.00

Professors Luis Echegoyen and Skye Fortier of the University of Texas at El Paso
are supported by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of
the Division of Chemistry to prepare, purify and characterize novel uranium-
based endohedral fullerenes. The goal is to explore the fundamental bonding
properties of uranium within the fullerene cage with other atoms such as carbon,
sulfur, and oxygen. Fullerenes are chemical compounds composed exclusively of
many carbon atoms that are bonded together to form spherical or pseudo-spherical
closed structures, that in some cases resemble nano-sized soccer balls.
Fullerenes are essential components in materials applications such as in solar
cells and photovoltaics. The hollow cavities inside these fullerenes offer a
unique environment to study isolated chemical systems with unusual structures
and bonding motifs as well as interesting electronic properties. The entrapment
of metals or metal clusters inside these endohedral fullerenes provides a stable
nanocontainer environment. This enables the study of unique and unusual uranium
clusters that will allow for a better fundamental and practical understanding of
uranium electronic properties in particular and the actinide series of elements
in general. The project provides an entryway into an essentially new branch of
fullerene and actinide science. A group of students from the University of Texas
at El Paso, which is a minority serving institution, are involved in the
project. Given the collaborative nature of the project, they are also exposed to
an international research experience. In addition, several learning modules,
targeting middle school, mainly Hispanic science students, are developed. This
new, one month, 20-25 student community outreach program is intended to
stimulate their interest in science while developing critical thinking and
problem-solving skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, a new series of
uranium containing endohedral fullerenes is synthesized, purified and isolated.
It is expected that these carbon caged nanocontainers will allow access to
unusual uranium clusters and provide a better fundamental understanding of
actinide bonding and chemistry. Initial results on the isolation and structural
characterization of a non-IPR (Isolated Pentagon Rule) uranium endohedral,
U@C80, provide incontrovertible support for the uniqueness of these molecules
and the feasibility of the approach. The synthetic methodology is being
optimized using different reactor gases, while soot extraction conditions are
being tested to maximize the yield. The isolated compounds are being studied
through a full battery of techniques that includes X-ray crystallographic
analysis, cyclic voltammetry, electronic and vibrational spectroscopy, SQUID
magnetic analysis, and theoretical modeling to fully elucidate their structures
and properties. Both national and international collaborations are being
leveraged to accomplish these critical tasks. This work provides an entryway
into an essentially new branch of fullerene and actinide science and is expected
to yield fundamental knowledge and new discoveries on both
fronts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.