* 1801285
* Determinantal Rings, Local Cohomology, and Tight Closure
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Anurag Singh, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,000.00

The project is concerned with several questions in commutative algebra: this is
a field that studies solution sets of polynomial equations by means of studying
polynomial functions on the solution sets. Polynomial equations arise naturally
in a number of situations, and commutative algebra continues to develop a
fascinating interaction with several fields, becoming an increasingly valuable
tool in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the project
is on questions in commutative algebra relating to local cohomology, tight
closure theory, and classical rings of invariants; all of these questions arise
quite naturally from recent developments. Local cohomology often provides the
best answers to fundamental questions such as the least number of polynomial
equations needed to define a solution set. Projects in this direction include
algorithmic aspects as well as structural properties; there is a special focus
on local cohomology modules of polynomial rings over the integers: this stems
from the fact that there is a canonical homomorphism from the integers to any
ring, and this makes local cohomology modules over the integers, in a sense,
universal. This viewpoint has proved useful in recent joint work with Lyubeznik
and Walther. At the same time, new techniques for investigating local cohomology
over the integers have been developed in joint work with Bhatt, Blickle,
Lyubeznik, and Zhang; it is proposed to extend these new techniques to an
algorithm. Projects related to tight closure theory include investigating the
singularities of Hankel determinantal rings, a question coming from recent joint
work with Conca, Mostafazadehfard, and Varbaro, and whether these rings arise as
invariant rings for actions of linearly reductive
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.