* 1801525
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Rethinking Access Pattern Privacy: From Theory to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Yaacov Nissim Kobliner, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2018
* USD 0.00

When a program accesses data stored in memory, disk, or on a remote server, its
access patterns can leak information about the secret inputs and data. There has
been decades of work that investigated how to make a program "oblivious", such
that its access patterns leak nothing about the secret inputs or data. Past
techniques, however, incur a considerable performance overhead. This project
conceives and investigates new, relaxed notions of access pattern privacy, and
discovers new algorithms that achieve such notions of privacy with little to no
overhead. The project includes training of Ph.D. students and postdoctoral
researchers, and mentoring activities focused on high school, undergraduate, and
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project rethinks the definition of
access pattern privacy, including (but not limited to) a new notion called
"differential obliviousness" that is the differential privacy analog for access
patterns. The project establishes theoretical understanding, including new lower
and upper bounds, of the extent to which various privacy notions impact the
performance of programs. The investigators also explore the practical
performance of new privacy-preserving algorithms in cloud outsourcing and
database scenarios. The project develops open-source libraries for the new,
differentially oblivious algorithms and data
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.