* 1801768
* GP EXTRA: Exploration of Recruitment of Earth Scientists (EXPLORES)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,06/30/2024
* James Sample, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2024
* USD 534,314.00

It has long been widely recognized that there is a shortage of students
successfully pursuing STEM degrees and careers. The impending shortage is
particularly acute for careers in the geosciences, where it is anticipated there
will be a deficit of 90,000 professionals by the year 2024. There are multiple
reasons for this, but paramount among them is the aging out of professional
geoscientists through retirements, and low awareness of geoscience career
opportunities and financial opportunities among college freshman because
rigorous geology courses are not commonly taught in secondary schools. Yet,
students who discover a geoscience major at the university have very high
satisfaction with their degree and the prospects of careers in the management of
natural resources and mitigation of human impacts on the environment. Project
EXPLORES (EXPLOration of Recruitment of Earth Scientists) is looking to address
many of these issues through a combination of recruitment, curricular changes in
a course taken by nearly all STEM majors at Northern Arizona University (NAU),
near-peer and research mentoring, career advising, and a welcoming social and
educational environment in the Geology Program. The project aims for at least an
average 10% growth per year in the number of new students entering the geology
major at NAU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project EXPLORES takes multiple actions to
improve student understanding of the geology major and career opportunities in
the geosciences. The basis of our project is a collaboration among faculty from
the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry and the School of Earth and
Sustainability to develop several new geoscience-focused labs in a chemistry
foundational course taken by 2000 STEM majors each year, including 30-40% of
students from underrepresented groups. The labs will expose early-career STEM
majors to how geoscientists use chemistry to quantify and understand changes in
the Earth system. After the project ends the new labs will be institutionalized
as a permanent part of the Chemistry curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To those
students who show interest in the geoscience major the project will offer
experiences that build their exposure to the major and careers after graduation.
The experiences include:pairing geology undergraduate peer mentors (Geoscience
Ambassadors) with prospective students to provide information about the geology
major and their experiences in classes and with faculty; leading day-long field
trips to local, spectacular geologic settings so prospective majors can learn
how geoscientists incorporate experiential learning into classes; inviting
career geoscience professionals to talk about their career paths and
opportunities, as well as provide advice about which courses of study to pursue
within the major; providing prospective majors and their research mentors
stipends to conduct authentic research in one of our cutting-edge research
groups that include climate science, geochemistry, geophysics, tectonics, and
biogeoscience. Research mentors comprising graduate students and faculty will
receive multi-day training on effective mentoring
practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.