* 1801805
* Research in Classical and Quantum Gravity
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Gary Horowitz, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 07/31/2021
* USD 1,140,000.00

This award supports research in gravitational physics at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. Many of the deepest problems in theoretical physics
revolve around combining Einstein's theory of general relativity with quantum
theory. The resulting theory is called "quantum gravity" and is needed to better
understand the origin of the universe, the nature of space and time on small
scales, and what happens inside black holes. The research supported by this
award will use the latest techniques and tools to try to answer some of these
fundamental problems. An essential part of the project is the training of
graduate students and postdoctoral researchers in the knowledge and techniques
that are central to understanding and discovery in gravitational physics.
Through a range of forums from public lectures, to informing media reporters,
the Principal Investigators will disseminate the directions and results of their
research to a broad audience. Society at large will benefit by increasing their
understanding of science and the world they live in.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James
Hartle will continue exploring the interface between quantum mechanics and
cosmology. He will work on extending the predictions of the no-boundary quantum
state of the universe for observations today to increasingly general and
detailed situations. He will further develop the generalizations of quantum
mechanics that are necessary for cosmology and investigate cosmologically
motivated extensions of quantum mechanics. He proposes to continue to refine our
understanding of the origin of the quasiclassical realm of every day experience
as an emergent feature of our quantum universe. Gary Horowitz will investigate a
variety of topics in classical and quantum gravity, focussing on singularities
and the origin of spacetime. He will explore whether classical singularities can
be visible, or must always be hidden behind event horizons. He will also examine
a recently discovered connection between potential visible singularities and
charged matter. In addition, Horowitz will study how spacetime geometry emerges
from a holographic theory of quantum gravity. He will consider the roll of
quantum entanglement, but also pursue a new direction based on special cross-
sections of the boundary at infinity. Don Marolf will explore a variety of
issues in classical and quantum gravity generally related to black holes,
thermodynamics, and entropy. While there is already much evidence that black
holes are in some sense thermal systems (with entropy proportional to their
surface area), and while this is expected to hold deep and fundamental lessons
for physics, the argument has not yet been made in complete generality. Marolf
will explore the required extensions and the resulting implications. Another
part of his work seeks to more deeply understand so-called holographic
descriptions of gravity, where phenomena in a dynamical spacetime are in fact
equivalent to the quantum physics of a seemingly very different non-gravitating
system. In this regard, Marolf is particularly interested in understanding the
dictionary that allows one to translate physics inside black holes into the
language of the non-gravitating formulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.