* 1801237
* Arithmetic Intersection on Shimura Varieties and Properties of Abelian Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yunqing Tang, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 166,960.00

This research project concerns work in arithmetic geometry, a branch of
mathematics that studies polynomial equations over the integers. Such equations
define geometric objects; among them the most accessible and fundamental ones
are elliptic curves (one-dimensional case) and abelian varieties (higher-
dimensional analogue). A modern way to approach these objects is to study them
in families, and certain geometric objects, so-called Shimura varieties, have
been used to parametrize these families. Arithmetic properties of abelian
varieties can be translated into arithmetic-geometric properties of the
corresponding Shimura variety. In this way, the principal investigator and her
collaborators will be able to use methods from different areas of mathematics
such as algebraic geometry, number theory, and representation theory to study
the arithmetic of abelian varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main theme of this
project is the infinitude of certain thin sets of primes arising from reduction
types of abelian varieties. When the abelian varieties are over number fields,
the principal investigator and her collaborators are aiming for results along
the line of Elkies' theorem on supersingular reductions of elliptic curves. The
research will focus on nonsimple reductions or reductions with higher Picard
rank and establish a general framework to treat certain abelian varieties of
arbitrarily high dimension. In the function field case, certain new phenomena
appear and are related to the geometry of the Newton strata of the corresponding
Shimura variety. The philosophy of this project is related to the Kudla program
on arithmetic intersection of special cycles on Shimura varieties. In addition
to the usual setting of the Kudla program, certain non-special cycles are
studied in the framework of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.