* 1801804
* Southeastern Lie Theory Workshop Series
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Daniel Nakano, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 03/31/2024
* USD 49,970.00

This award will support two workshops: "Representation Theory of Algebraic
Groups and Lie Superalgebras" at the University of Georgia in June 2018 and
"Geometric and Categorical Representation Theory" at Louisiana State University
in May, 2019. These workshops are part of the annual Southeastern Lie Theory
Workshop Series held at universities in the southeastern region of the U.S.
since 2009. The aim of this workshop series is to bring together senior and
junior researchers, as well as graduate students, in order to build cohesive
research groups in various aspects of Lie theory, to stimulate and enhance
research collaborations in Lie theory, and to instill a strong tradition of
research and research-oriented education in the region. A long-term goal is for
the workshop series to foster the research development of mathematics
departments in the southeastern region of the U.S. in order to attract more
minority and underrepresented groups to the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Representation theory of Lie algebras, algebraic
groups, Lie superalgebras, and related algebraic structures has become a central
research area in mathematics, with numerous applications in many areas of
mathematics and theoretical physics. The first workshop in Georgia in 2018 will
focus on the representation theory of algebraic groups and Lie superalgebras.
The second workshop in Louisiana in 2019 will focus on categorification and
geometric approaches to representation theory. Each workshop will feature one or
two main speakers, each giving two or three expository talks in the theme area,
which are accessible to graduate students and postdocs. In addition, there will
be invited talks by other researchers. There will be ample time for informal
discussion among participants. Considerable time will be devoted to informal
discussion among participants in small groups, led by invited team leaders
chosen from among the participants. There will also be contributed talk sessions
to provide opportunities for junior researchers, postdocs, and advanced graduate
students to disseminate their research. The website for this workshop series is:
http://pi.math.virginia.edu/lieworkshops/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.