* 1801993
* Structure and Dynamics of Asymmetric Block Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Frank Bates, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 03/31/2024
* USD 875,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block polymers are a class of
macromolecules that combine the physical properties of two or more different
compounds into a single material. Recent advances in understanding the
molecular-scale structure associated with block polymers has led to innovative
new applications in numerous areas of technology including batteries,
cardiovascular stents, tough versatile plastics for use in packaging and health
care products, and manufacturing of computer chips. Surprising new states of
nanoscale molecular organization have recently been discovered in the simplest
type of such compounds known as "diblock copolymers", which contain just two
polymer molecules linked end-to-end. When designed with an asymmetric
composition these diblock copolymers form a variety of ordered structures that
mimic the behavior of metals and alloys. This research program aims to uncover
the fundamental molecular phenomena associated with this remarkable phase
behavior, with the goal of establishing the basic principles responsible for the
development of low-symmetry phases including quasicrystals in self-assembled
soft materials. Students and post docs will synthesize useful quantities of
model diblock copolymers and investigate the structure and dynamics of these
materials using a host of experimental tools including X-ray scattering,
electron microscopy, mechanical spectroscopy, and optical methods. This research
will simultaneously train future leaders in the field of polymers while
advancing the fundamental base of knowledge enabling expanded application of
block polymers to myriad technologically advanced products that serve society. A
collaboration with the Science Museum of Minnesota will engage the public in the
exciting field of materials science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Block copolymers
command a leading position in the field of synthetic polymers, offering
innumerable opportunities to advance our fundamental understanding of soft
materials while addressing myriad technological applications across various
disciplines associated with materials science and engineering. Recent advances
with diblock copolymers, the simplest molecular architecture in this category of
self-assembling materials, have exposed extraordinary new concepts regarding
order and disorder in the limit of asymmetric molecular architectures leading to
the formation of discrete, nominally spherical particles. This project outlines
an ambitious experimental program designed to uncover the basic principles
responsible for the formation of tetrahedrally close-packed Frank-Kasper phases
and quasicrystals in diblock copolymer melts. Model materials will be
synthesized in nearly monodisperse form and characterized structurally using
small-angle X-ray scattering and electron microscopy. The molecular transport
phenomena that govern phase transition dynamics will be assessed using time-
resolved techniques including small-angle neutron scattering, optical methods
and dynamic mechanical spectroscopy. This program will establish the principles
that govern the formation of low symmetry phases as a function of molecular
architecture, dispersity, compositional and conformational asymmetry, and
molecular weight in pure block copolymers and blends.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.