* 1801057
* Leveraging Supply Chain and Logistics Emerging Technologies to Serve Industry Needs
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ronnie Brannon, Palo Alto College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 224,997.00

Logistics and Supply Chain (L/SC) professionals find sources of and distribute
both raw materials and finished products. A shortage of qualified L/SC
technicians has resulted in a growing workforce gap of six available jobs for
every currently employed skilled worker. Industry officials have linked the
workforce shortage to five key factors: increasing demand for new L/SC talent,
L/SC talent gaps, changing dynamics of supply chains, limited capacity to
educate and train new talent, and the poor image of the profession with the
millennial workforce. To meet industry needs, community colleges must work
collaboratively with industry partners to revise current L/SC programs or
develop new programs that prepare the next generation of L/SC professionals.
This project at Palo Alto College (San Antonio, Texas) aims to better serve the
specific L/SC workforce education needs of regional businesses and industries.
The program aims to: increase the science, technology, engineering and
mathematics content and technical training in its L/SC programs; increase L/SC
student enrollment; improve L/SC student technical skills and STEM knowledge;
and improve L/SC educational and workforce pipelines. The project will combine
an L/SC industry workforce assessment with research on the career expectations
of millennial students. By appealing to the millennials' interest in new
technologies and leveraging the evolving technological landscape of supply
chains, the project has the potential to change the perception of L/SC careers
among millennial students. As a result, a new generation of workers can be
recruited into an industry with national and global importance. Because Palo
Alto College is a Hispanic Serving Institution and the dual credit partner
school districts have a majority Hispanic student population, an additional
outcome of this project is the potential to diversify the L/SC industry. It also
will serve a student group that is typically underrepresented in STEM education
and training. The program will include hands-on technology-based lesson modules,
mini-case competitions, recruitment efforts, industry internships, and
development of an active student organization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of the project is to create a high school to two-year to four-year
L/SC educational pipeline, while incorporating robotics and other emerging
supply chain technologies into the program curriculum. The project aims to
educate and train more qualified (L/SC) technicians to meet workforce needs by:
(1) conducting an industry review of the college Logistics associate degree and
certificates, (2) creating four L/SC emerging technology course modules; (3)
establishing a dual credit programs with three high schools (Southside,
Southwest Legacy, and Veterans Memorial) where students can earn an L/SC
associate degree; (4) conducting targeted recruitment activities to educate
students about L/SC careers; (5) creating a Discover Logistics training module
for secondary school educators; and (6) establishing a transfer agreement
between Palo Alto College and the Texas A&amp;M San Antonio (TAMUSA) four-year
L/SC program. The project also plans to create and host an annual L/SC mini-case
competition for partner high schools. STEM-based recruitment activities will
strive to serve more than 1,000 high school students, while the dual credit
program and course modules will aim to serve an estimated 150 high school
students and 100 L/SC college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.