* 1801289
* RAPID:  Interacting effects of disturbances on population demography
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Martha Burford Reiskind, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 04/30/2019
* USD 140,000.00

Hurricane disturbances may have large negative impacts on wildlife restricted to
small coastal islands, through intense rain, wind, and storm surge.
Paradoxically, hurricane disturbance may also regenerate certain habitats that
particular species of wildlife depend on. The goal of this research is to
investigate the interaction of a periodic, small scale disturbances such as
fire, with an extreme disturbance (hurricane) on population growth and survival
of an endangered butterfly species, Bartram's scrub-hairstreak (Strymon acis
bartrami) and its rare host, pineland croton (Croton linearis). These species
are patchily distributed throughout South Florida in rockland habitat, which was
recently struck by the eyewall of Hurricane Irma. Results from this research
will inform management of fourteen sensitive plants and animals in South
Florida, including three additional endangered butterfly species affected by
Hurricane Irma. By understanding the mechanisms of how one endangered insect-
plant host pair responds to interacting disturbances, this project will provide
insight into how these disturbances might influence other sensitive species.
This project will also provide research training for a postdoctoral fellow and
for undergraduate students.

This project will test the hypothesis that hurricanes interact synergistically
with more regular, localized disturbances to accelerate habitat change. Based on
existing data from an ongoing experiment and observational data on the
distribution of the study organisms in relation to previous hurricane
disturbances, researchers will test the hypothesis that the two types of
disturbances will interact synergistically to increase host plant recruitment
and mortality. Prior research has already measured vital rate responses to
management-based disturbance (understory removal to simulate wildfire), and this
RAPID project will measure vital rate responses to hurricane disturbance and the
interaction between management and hurricane disturbances. Empirical data will
be used to parameterize demographic matrix models to predict population
responses to future interacting disturbances, and to project populations across
a range of disturbance frequencies, including frequencies of human-managed
disturbances that can be controlled and frequencies of intense hurricanes that
cannot be controlled.