* 1801328
* Arithmetic Geometry: Topics in Iwasawa Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Frauke Bleher, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2022
* USD 190,000.00

A common theme in science is the study and measurement of growth rates. This
research project investigates growth rates of arithmetic invariants related to
the symmetry groups of algebraic equations in infinite families. This work was
begun in the 1950's by Kenkichi Iwasawa, who conjectured that many such families
have a well-defined asymptotic behavior. The proofs of such "main conjectures"
have been at the forefront of algebraic number theory. To date, research has
focused on first-order estimates of growth rates. The goal of this project is to
study the higher-order terms, beyond their first-order terms. This will lead to
more precise measurements of the growth rates in question. The project's broader
significance is that it will provide a better understanding of important methods
in algebraic number theory that have in the past led to the development of
technology essential to society, such as the improved compression and secure
transmission of data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iwasawa theory has played an
essential role in the development of modern number theory and arithmetic
geometry. This project concerns a new frontier in the subject, namely the study
of the higher-order terms of Iwasawa and Selmer modules. One focus will be on
conjectures about when the first-order terms are zero and what one should expect
for the leading terms in such cases. A main goal is to formulate a general
framework for studying higher-order terms in Iwasawa theory using a two-step
approach: The first step is to define a "large" Selmer module via the Galois
cohomology of a motive or a family of Galois representations; the second step is
to impose local conditions on the cohomology classes to produce a "small" Selmer
module. Greenberg formulated a "main conjecture" in this generality, which can
be thought of as concerning the first-order term of the small Selmer module. The
overall goal of this project is to develop a higher-order term Iwawasa theory in
the same generality and to explore its consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.