* 1801076
* Process Technology: Flexible Entry/Flexible Exit Curriculum Adaptation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Hugh Gallagher, Community College of Beaver County
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2022
* USD 539,987.00

The Community College of Beaver County (CCBC) aims to enhance a regionally-
distinctive Process Technology (PTEC) program by converting a traditional
lecture/lab structure to a Flexible Entry/Flexible Exit delivery format. The
expectation is that these changes will increase student accessibility and the
number of credentialed process technicians in the tristate region (Pennsylvania,
Ohio, and West Virginia). An economic report from the American Chemical Society
predicts that, by 2025, development of the region's natural gas resources will
create 25,000 new job in the region's energy and advanced manufacturing sectors.
The proposed Flexible Entry/Flexible Exit format will build upon the successful
model developed by Polk State College with a prior NSF award. This program
format permits students to enroll in PTEC technical courses at virtually any
point in the academic year, complete the courses at their own pace, and increase
the amount of time spent on hands-on technical education. By accommodating
personal and professional schedules, this approach could also enable existing
workers and non-traditional students to enroll in the program. Thus, the program
format can broaden the diversity of graduates who are prepared for careers in
the region's rapidly expanding energy and advanced manufacturing sectors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the Process Technology: Flexible
Entry/Flexible Exit Curriculum Adaptation project are to: 1) build capacity of
CCBC's Process Technology program to educate the technician workforce needed in
the tristate region; 2) increase program accessibility for non-traditional
students and incumbent workers from the Appalachian Region interested in an
associate degree in process technology; and 3) increase collaboration between
education and industry within the tristate region. The project plans to use a
flipped-hybrid, competency-based delivery model that is detached from the
traditional semester framework. It is expected that this flexible model will
permit the College to institute an "every day is a new class start" approach
that will increase accessibility of the program to diverse groups of students.
Each current PTEC technical course will be modularized into multiple one-credit
courses. Each one-credit course will consist of an online component,
corresponding hands-on requirements, and one or more hands-on assessments. Each
one-credit course will be self-paced, and faculty will support learners by
serving as success coaches as the students complete the online and hands-on
requirements. Learners will schedule the final hands-on assessment of each
course with faculty, when the learners are ready and it fits in their
schedules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.