* 1801306
* GP-IMPACT: Geosciences Streamlined Pipeline And Research for Community Colleges (Geo-SPARCC)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Eric Shows, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 325,626.00

Increased participation in STEM (science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics) is an area of national concern, especially as enrollment in STEM
disciplines and development of the STEM workforce is not keeping pace with the
need. This is particularly true in the geosciences where the lack of diversity
compounds the problem. This Geosciences Streamlined Pipeline And Research for
Community Colleges (Geo-SPARCC) at Mississippi State University (MSU) fills a
gap in the awareness of and education in the geosciences through collaboration
with the State's community colleges. Mississippi is a rural state with a strong
community college system, enrolling greater than 75,000 students, ~42% from
underrepresented groups (majority African American). Mississippi State
University collaborates with Jones County Junior College to develop engaging
online versions of introductory geology courses, which will be available to all
community college students through Mississippi's Virtual Community College
Consortium. The Geo-SPARCC project also develops an e-mentoring network to
recruit community college students to consider geosciences degrees and careers,
and facilitate their transfer into a 4-year university. The MS Virtual Community
College Consortium fosters sustainability of Geo-SPARCC and has the potential to
help significantly increase the number of underserved and underrepresented
populations in the geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Geosciences Streamlined
Pipeline And Research for Community Colleges (Geo-SPARCC) project proposes a
collaboration between Mississippi State University (MSU) and Mississippi's
community colleges (CCs) to develop a pathway from 2 year to 4 year institutions
via online instruction and e-mentoring. Geo-SPARCC will 1) interest/recruit CC
students in geosciences through engaging online physical/historical geology
courses; 2) provide individualized research and field opportunities within
online courses; and 3) develop an e-mentoring/social media program between MSU
Geosciences faculty/graduate students and CC students. Jones County Junior
College (JCJC), the lead CC on the Geo-SPARCC project, will make Geo-SPARCC's
online geology courses available through the Mississippi Virtual Community
College (MSVCC), providing access for students at all 15 Mississippi CCs as well
as MS high school students in dual enrollment courses. The Geo-SPARCC online
courses will include personalized research/field components where students
conduct independent research and geocaching, and opportunities to participate in
MSU Geosciences-led field excursions. Career video vignettes included in the
online course design will introduce students to geosciences employment
opportunities. Geo-SPARCC further provides CC students with directed individual
study research opportunities that can culminate in student presentations at the
Mississippi Academy of Science annual conference. Sustainability is ensured
since the Geo-SPARCC online courses will be offered in perpetuity by JCJC
through the MSVCC, with MSU collaborating with JCJC beyond the Geo-SPARCC
project to provide credentialed adjunct instructors to teach the online
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.