* 1801414
* GP EXTRA: Engaging Students in the Geosciences Using a Lake Watershed Geosystems Path
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lisa Doner, Plymouth State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 367,059.00

In response to national and state concerns, New Hampshire?s public systems of
higher education set a goal of a 50% increase in STEM graduates by 2020 and to
double that by 2025. Recruiting, retaining, and graduating undergraduate
students in STEM disciplines, like geoscience, is a major challenge especially
at Predominantly Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs). The Lake Watershed
Geosystems Path (LWGP) directly responds to these local and regional mandates
while helping meet national needs to augment the geoscience trained workforce.
Students learn scientific concepts quicker and more permanently when the
concepts are provided as relevant applications. This project uses this
educational principle of a problem-based, field-intensive, applied
interdisciplinary science approach and seamlessly scaffolds it into existing
curriculum and research opportunities. It also includes faculty and peer
mentoring and links participants to applied geoscience internships and career
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lake Watershed Geosystems Path (LWGP)
project seeks to increase STEM preparation and graduates in the following ways:
1) partnering with the Plymouth State University Admissions to recruit a diverse
cohort of first-year students in STEM fields, 2) encouraging participating
students to enroll in a newly created first-year seminar course that develops
critical thinking through a geoscience lens, 3) engaging students in
extracurricular field- and lab-based research as part of a new PSU Cluster
project which spans the major hydrological components of watershed systems,
including atmospheric deposition, land surface runoff, stream flow, and
resulting effects on lake basins, and 4) assisting participating students in
entering into pre-arranged internships and externships which leverage their
newly acquired geoscience training. LWGP alumni will be recruited to help peer
mentor and train subsequent participants via a 1-credit independent study
elective. Ultimately, LWGP will blend field and laboratory student experiences
oriented around hydrologic pathways in lake watersheds with community
partnerships and faculty/peer mentoring to: 1) introduce geoscience principles,
systems thinking and skill development at the onset of student university
experiences; 2) increase student retention and success in non-geoscience degree
programs that serve as pathways into geoscience fields; 3) foster strong cohort
identification, and 4) apply knowledge and skills gained by students in this
project to enhance their future work experiences, education goals, and career
objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.