* 1801176
* Advanced Technological Education in the Intelligent Infrastructure for the Industrial Internet-of-Things
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Michael Guericke, Metropolitan Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2022
* USD 590,577.00

The speed of technological innovation in the 21st century requires companies to
work across levels, functions, and locations, so they can use new technologies
and solve problems quickly. Consequently, industries increasingly need teams of
workers who can fill multiple roles and communicate clearly with others, while
performing a variety of tasks. This collaborative, flexible work environment is
supported by an Intelligent Industrial Internet-of-Things (I4T), a sophisticated
network of machines, systems, and humans that work together to manufacture
goods. This project will develop and deploy an online learning platform and
curriculum to prepare skilled technicians to work effectively in I4T settings.
Working in cross-functional teams assigned to hands-on projects, students will
learn to use a shared vocabulary, and to work effectively and collaboratively in
diverse teams. The training aims to establish a pipeline of manufacturing
technicians who can use technologies for competitive advantages.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop, pilot, refine, and deliver
interdisciplinary team-based training on I4T systems for manufacturing. To
achieve these goals, the project aims to develop learning modules to support
training in Rapid Prototyping, Lean Production, Just-In-Time Inventory
Management, and Predictive Maintenance/Reduced Downtime; these learning modules
will also form an integral part of a Prototype Design degree. The faculty
developing the learning modules will collaborate with Instructional Designers on
curriculum design. Experts in advanced manufacturing and automated guided
vehicles will provide subject matter expertise, to ensure that modules are
relevant to industry needs. The learning modules will feature hands-on, problem-
based activity kits designed to train both high school and college students to
work with I4T. Industry partners will provide both hardware, such as sensors and
web-based dashboards, and the expertise required to develop real life scenarios
across the four topic areas. The cost of individual kits will be kept low by
using readily available materials. Teams of high school and college teachers
will be invited to participate in Train-the-Trainer workshops, to learn how to
deploy the learning modules at their schools. The trainers will subsequently
offer a series of one-day workshops and three-day summer boot camps to middle
school, high school, and college students. Faculty will be trained to
incorporate the platform and modules across production-related programs. In
addition, they will receive training in problem-based learning techniques and
ways to engage women. The low cost and supportive training should facilitate
adoption by other institutions. Resources and results will be disseminated
broadly through venues such as Hi-Tech annual conferences, the National
Convergence Technology Center, the ATE Central website, and professional
research journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.