* 1801855
* CIF: Small: Collaborative Research: Network Event Detection with Multistream Observations
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2021
* Yingbin Liang, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2021
* USD 184,277.00

The goal in network event detection is to detect the existence of a set of nodes
over a large network whose observations reflect the occurrence of an unusual
event. Existing studies of network event detection have been mainly from two
perspectives. The first is data-driven without assuming any underlying
statistical model, and is typically applicable to more general data sets, but
may not come with performance guarantees. The second perspective is model-
driven, with certain statistical distributions (e.g., Gaussian) assumed for the
data, and usually comes with performance guarantees, but may be limited to
applications where the data fit the model. The goal in this project is to
explore a framework for network event detection that unifies a wide range of
event detection problems, in which the data are assumed to be governed by some
underlying statistical distributions, but is data-driven in the sense that
little is assumed a priori about the distributions. The developed detection
approaches and statistical tools have a wide range of applications, including
fraud detection, clinical trials, medical diagnosis, high-frequency trading,
voting irregularity analysis, and network intrusion.

A comprehensive approach to general network event detection problems is
developed in this project through the exploration of three thrusts: (i)
detection of (unstructured) point events, (ii) detection of graph-based
structured events, and (iii) sequential and quickest detection of dynamically
evolving graph structures. The performance of the designed tests is
characterized in terms of the probability of detection error and the rate at
which this error goes to zero. Various fundamental issues are addressed,
including non-i.i.d. data streams, as well as the interplay between network
size, event size, sample size, and data dimension.