* 1801780
* High Reynolds Number Turbulence Research in Cryogenic Helium
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2021
* Louis Cattafesta, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 375,003.00

Many flows in nature, including those generated by aircraft, ships, and the
atmosphere, have extremely high Reynolds numbers. The Reynolds number is the
ratio of flow's inertial forces relative to viscous forces, and it determines
important flow properties such as turbulence. Understanding flows with extremely
high Reynolds numbers will increase efficiency in practical vehicle applications
and improve understanding of the climate. However, high Reynolds-number flow in
conventional fluids like air and water occurs on a relatively large scale thus
is difficult to study on the laboratory scale. Fortunately, high Reynolds number
flows can be achieved using lower-density fluids such as cryogenic helium-4 in,
for example, a small-scale laboratory pipe flow experiment. But to unlock the
full potential of cryogenic helium-4, suitable flow measurement tools to
quantify the turbulence are also required. The proposed research will therefore
develop advanced molecular tagging velocity measurement techniques and apply the
technique to high Reynolds number cryogenic helium pipe flow. In terms of
educational opportunities, the joint College of Engineering operated by Florida
State University and Florida A&amp;M University will be leveraged to recruit
under-represented minorities to participate in the project. The PI and the co-
PI's groups will also contribute educational demonstrations for public open-
house events at the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory and at the Florida
Center for Advanced Aero-Propulsion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of
this project is to develop a state-of-the-art molecular tagging velocimetry
technique for cryogenic helium and to demonstrate its usefulness by applying it
in the study of high Reynolds number cryogenic helium pipe flow. Sophisticated
patterns of the molecular tracer lines will be created by splitting and focusing
a femtosecond laser beam in liquid helium. Advanced pattern-tracking algorithms
will be incorporated, and the spatial and temporal resolutions of the tracer
imaging process will be optimized. These developments will unlock the full
potential of cryogenic helium in turbulence research and model testing. The
planned study on high Reynolds number pipe flows in helium will allow an
independent examination of the near-wall velocity field and the associated von
K?rm?n coefficient, which may help resolve existing controversies regarding the
universality of this coefficient. Also, new knowledge about the near-wall
spatial velocity correlations will be produced by tracking the tracer lines
created perpendicular to the wall. Furthermore, by measuring the pressure drop
along the pipe, reliable friction factor data for high Reynolds number flows
will be obtained, which will benefit the design of various engineering systems
that exhibit high Reynolds numbers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.