* 1801367
* Disturbance and recovery of the microbial communities in Galveston Bay following Hurricane Harvey and flooding of the Houston area
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Jessica Labonte, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Sieracki
* 10/31/2019
* USD 52,063.00

On August 25, Hurricane Harvey made landfall on San Jose Island, TX as a
category 4 storm. During the subsequent five days, precipitation reached over
130 cm of rain onto the Houston area, causing city-wide flooding. The
floodwaters/runoff inundation introduced large amounts of terrestrial and
freshwater microbes and anthropogenic pollutants into Galveston Bay and
ultimately the Gulf of Mexico, causing disruptions to the resident communities.
Microbes, composed of viruses, bacteria, and protists, are tightly inter-
connected and are constantly adjusting to their environment to maintain a
critical balance in global biogeochemical cycles. The main objective of this
project is to characterize the effect of Hurricane Harvey on microbial
communities in Galveston Bay, with a focus on determining the role of viruses in
the ecosystem recovery. This project will determine the effect of Hurricane
Harvey and subsequent flooding in the Houston area on microbial communities,
measure the impact of viral lysis on the ecosystem to determine the role of
viruses in the recovery of the ecosystem after heavy mixing and flooding caused
by a major storm, and identify the role of viruses in the adaptation of their
hosts in the acquisition of new metabolic capabilities. The approach is to
integrate metagenomic characterization of viral and bacterial host diversity
over time with water quality measurements. Virus-induced microbial mortality
will also be calculated to measure the impact of viral lysis on the ecosystem,
while prophage induction will be used to identify the role of viruses in the
adaptation of their hosts.

This research will provide significant insight on how viruses play an important
role in the adaptation and resilience to environmental changes and stresses.
Consequences of climate change include stronger and more frequent tropical
storms and hurricanes, with worsening droughts but higher precipitation.
Subtropical climates such as the one in Galveston Bay are already feeling the
consequences of climate change and it is becoming clearer that there is a need
to understand how microbial communities are impacted by environmental
perturbations. Collectively microbes in these environmental zones have the
greatest influence on biogeochemical cycles; and thus, are also those likely to
be under greatest pressure to respond to changes. This project will provide
direct quantification of the impact of viral lysis after an extreme weather
event towards a better understanding of their role in the adaptation of
microbial communities to changes. This study will help to develop an
understanding of the evolution and adaptation of microbial communities over time
to environmental stresses and how the confluence of weather events creates
pressures on microbial community dynamics.