* 1801677
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Civic Infrastructures as Determinants of  Urban Resilience
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Walter Powell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2020
* USD 11,923.00

Environmental resilience has been a growing challenge for city administrations
around the world. Environmental disasters alone are likely to cost cities
billions of dollars and have the potential to plummet an estimated 77 million
city dwellers into poverty. Cities are first responders and political actors who
can effectively mitigate and adapt to environmental and economic changes. Civic
infrastructures, or networks of private, pro-social organizations that include
the nonprofit sector and socially responsible corporations, can enable local
action. This project asks why city action, or communities' ability to act,
differs between locales. Project findings can help policy-makers to identify the
ways in which targeted public investments and policies can improve the
resilience of communities to natural disasters and other unexpected
crises.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project integrates urban sociology and
organizational sociology to study city variation in urban resilience. The
research design is large-scale and comparative. The first part of the study
examines how the relationships between cities through membership in professional
associations shape urban resilience strategies. The second part of the study
focuses on all cities above 50,000 inhabitants in the United States to study the
association between the density and multiplicity of civic infrastructures and
city action. Data analytic techniques include econometric fixed effects-models
with computational measures based on affiliation networks and structural topic
modeling. Semi-structured interviews with urban resilience practitioners
worldwide allow for cross-validation of the
hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.