* 1801902
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effect of Pay for Success Models on Social Service Provision
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2020
* Kelly Russell, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This project examines how policy makers develop and implement hybrid models of
social service provision. Specifically, this project studies how Pay for Success
(PFS), a public-private model for social programs, shapes state spending on
specific populations in the United States. Under a PFS contract, private
investors provide initial funding for a public program, which the government
repays only if the program proves successful. The PFS model promises to meet
citizen needs while minimizing costs, but it is not yet clear who benefits from
these programs, who is left out, and how these decisions are made. This project
aims to determine (1) whether the goals of PFS projects influence which
populations ultimately benefit from these projects and (2) the consequences of
the PFS model for the scope of social provision more broadly. Findings from this
study will be useful to policymakers and public advocates as the implementation
or modification of PFS programs is considered, and so will contribute to the
general public well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The analysis employs a
comparative case study design to assess the effect of PFS structure on
beneficiary populations across three social service domains. Data collection
will be via interviews with public and private actors involved in the design and
implementation of PFS programs. Two sets of comparisons will be made: (1)
comparisons between PFS proposals that matriculate into social programs and PFS
proposals that fail to launch; and (2) comparisons between PFS-structured social
programs and traditional social programs within specific issue areas. The case
comparisons will illustrate the relationship between the PFS models' cost-
savings structure and the populations the model ultimately serves. They will
also elucidate the ways in which the PFS model differs from traditional models
of service provision in terms of cost and scope. In evaluating these outcomes,
this project will contribute to research on public policy and public-private
models of social service provision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.