* 1801099
* Growing CTE/STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Kathleen White, City College of San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2021
* USD 413,250.00

California faces a shortage in qualified Science, Technology, Engineering and
Math/Career and Technical Education (STEM/CTE) instructors who have the work
experience, proficiency in academic subject areas, and pedagogical knowledge to
effectively prepare high school and community college students for careers. With
32 trade and technical schools and 28 community colleges offering CTE programs
in the San Francisco Bay Area alone, the need for well-prepared CTE teachers in
this region is enormous. To meet the workforce needs of the science- and
technology-focused economy of the San Francisco Bay Area, it is critical that
CTE teacher preparation efforts include a commitment to increasing the pool of
qualified STEM teachers at the secondary and community college level. The City
College of San Francisco's "Growing CTE/STEM Teachers" project aims to ensure
that clear pathways exist for future STEM/CTE teachers at the high school and
community college levels. These pathways will include resources, support,
information, courses, and partnerships with employers. The project will focus on
those priority or emerging industry sectors identified by the California
Community Colleges Chancellors Office. These include: advanced manufacturing;
advanced transportation and renewables; agriculture, water and environmental
technologies; energy efficiency and utilities; ICT/digital media; and life
sciences/biotechnology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will carry out four
primary activities in pursuit of its goal of increasing the pool of qualified
STEM teachers at the secondary and community college level. First, the project
team will engage in outreach to recruit high school students, community college
students, and individuals already in the workforce into CTE/STEM teacher
preparation pathways. Second, the principal investigators (PIs) will provide
student support services to increase persistence and completion rates. Third,
the PIs will provide technical assistance and professional development to other
colleges in the region and statewide and serve as a clearinghouse for technical
assistance and professional development, especially in the area of CTE/STEM
teacher preparation. Finally, the project will advocate for CTE/STEM teacher
preparation as a vital part of the statewide infrastructure supporting STEM-
based CTE industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.