* 1801719
* CAREER: Rheology, Stability, and Sudden Collapse of Colloidal Gels: A Micromechanical Study
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,01/31/2019
* Roseanna Zia, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 01/31/2019
* USD 17,455.00

PI: Zia, Roseanna N.&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1351184&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop a predictive theory for gel stability
by discovering and elucidating the underlying mechanisms of the sudden collapse
of colloidal gels. Such research is important for the rational design of soft
biomaterials, such as injectable drug delivery platforms and transplantable
tissue scaffolds to patients whose body cannot generate such tissue. The
development of such theory is potentially transformative, because it would
establish qualitative understanding of gel
collapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Injectable gels have emerged in the past decade
as a premier tool in tissue engineering and drug delivery due to their
biocompatibility, tunability to different therapeutic moieties, and minimally
invasive delivery. However, such gels are susceptible to sudden failure ?
without warning the scaffold collapses into a dense, structureless sediment. In
that case, the transport of active compounds is dramatically curtailed, and the
scaffold-like structural support is lost. It is not currently possible to
predict gel collapse owing to the difficulty of detailed observation of
collapse, the computational expense of simulating large-scale gel evolution, and
limited theory of arrested colloidal dynamics. This study will create a window
through which to view, in exacting detail of particle and network
rearrangements, the real-time collapse, as it occurs. This will yield a phase
map that, for the first time, predicts the collapse and the characteristic
length scale, age, attraction and underlying forces that lead to collapse.