* 1801063
* Automation Workforce Development through Aligned Industry Partnerships and Training - Project ADAPT
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Josh Gamer, Western Technical College
* Standard Grant
* John Jackman
* 07/31/2021
* USD 564,093.00

There is a growing demand in manufacturing industries for well-qualified
mechatronics technicians with skills in industrial automation processes. In
rural communities near Western Technical College in western Wisconsin, there has
been a rising difference between the manufacturing processes used in the
region's industries and those in urban areas. Advanced processes are slower to
be adopted in this rural setting. Educational programs in mechatronics are also
hard to find in these rural locations. This situation makes it more difficult to
supply the technicians needed to support an advanced manufacturing workforce.
The potential innovation of the United States is affected as rural industries
and populations trail behind on manufacturing processes and training programs.
To help address this issue, Western Technical College will develop an advanced
mechatronics program to prepare more technicians with the necessary skills to
support industrial automation. This project has the potential to increase the
efficiency of rurally-located populations to produce advanced manufacturing
technicians. It will also provide a model that could be adopted by other
institutions. The project will contribute to the nation's economic
competitiveness by addressing a crucial piece of this skills improvement
challenge on a regional level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
and implement advanced manufacturing courses for the Automation Program at
Western Technical College. The courses are based on a proven apprenticeship
model at the Applied Sciences College in Mosbach Germany. These courses will
merge traditional classroom and apprenticeship philosophies by engaging industry
in workforce exposure as well as content delivery. Students will be immersed in
classroom learning and application of their knowledge on the job site multiple
times while earning their associate degree. The project will also focus on
enhancing career pathways in mechatronics for students. It will leverage
partnerships with a consortium of rural secondary schools to support dual-credit
mechatronics courses for high-school students and advanced standing upon
completion. Collaboration with the University of Wisconsin-Stout will also be
used to co-develop courses in a 2+2 mechatronics degree pathway for students who
want to advance their degrees. Throughout completion and documentation of
project successes and challenges, the project will generate best practices and
help serve as a model for recruitment, retention, persistence, and modified
apprenticeship delivery methods. Project results will be shared through ongoing
outreach and education efforts on regional, statewide, and national
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.