* 1801284
* Fundamentals of a New All Solid-state Metal-air Redox Battery Operated on Oxide-ion Chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kevin Huang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2023
* USD 313,194.00

This project addresses fundamental research of advanced battery systems for
large-scale stationary energy storage applications in renewable energy
production and utility grid stability management. Current state-of-the-art
lithium-ion batteries are not sufficient for large-scale stationary energy
storage due to concerns of cycle stability, particularly at high cycling rate
and cost. Solid oxide metal-air battery systems represent a new class of
advanced batteries operated on high-temperature oxide-ion chemistry. It is
capable of being charged and discharged at a much faster rate and lower cost and
is well suited for large-scale stationary energy storage due to its scalable and
modular nature. This project aims to advance the high-temperature solid oxide
metal-air battery towards commercialization through fundamental studies on the
dynamic interplays between the two key components of the new battery: reversible
solid oxide fuel cell and metal-based energy storage bed. From a broader impacts
perspective, the project will advance the science of materials chemistry,
electrochemistry and heterogeneous catalysis. The progress and new findings of
the project will be included in a new graduate course and disseminated to the
community through journal publications. Long-term research collaborations will
be strengthened with a neighboring small college Historically Black College and
University (HBCU), Benedict College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The reduction
kinetics of metal-oxide redox couples during charging is key to obtain stable
long cycle life and high round trip efficiency for solid oxide metal-air battery
systems. The project focuses on fundamental studies on the rate limiting steps
and their associated rate constants during charging/discharging cycles, based on
which dynamic interplays, between reversible solid oxide fuel cells and energy
storage materials, can be revealed. Advanced in situ surface techniques such as
synchrotron-based ambient pressure x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and Raman
spectroscopy will be used to identify the elementary steps and determine the
kinetic rate constants for the redox couple energy storage bed. In parallel,
materials development will be focused on energy storage materials including
highly active, atomic layer deposition derived active metals, catalysts and
proton-conducting oxide supports. Multiphysics modeling including elementary
microscale kinetics will also be used to guide the fundamental understanding and
development of the battery. By interpreting the results from synthesis,
performance testing, and surface chemistry characterization, fundamental
insights on the metal/metal-oxide based redox chemistry will be gained,
hypotheses will be tested, and the model will be validated and further refined
to facilitate the engineering design of the new solid oxide metal-air battery
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.