* 1801945
* RAPID: Collaborative Proposal: Dynamics of storm-mediated asexual reproduction in Florida Keys corals post-Hurricane Irma
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Carly Kenkel, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2019
* USD 44,281.00

Reef-building corals can reproduce clonally through the process of
fragmentation. Clonal reproduction can maintain population abundance in spite of
poor sexual reproduction, a chronic problem for major reef-building coral
species in the Florida Keys. Understanding the ecological dynamics of asexual
(clonal) reproduction is therefore essential for predicting the reefs' future
and planning of conservation efforts. This project will take advantage of the
extensive physical damage to reefs in the Florida Keys caused by Hurricane Irma
to characterize the extent of storm-driven fragmentation, quantify the rate of
fragment survival, and compare the results to the existing clonal structure of
abundant coral species. By combining detailed site surveys with novel genomic
tools, this project will be the first to assess the ecological dynamics
governing clonal reproduction of corals on a community-level following the most
significant disturbance event to impact the Florida Keys in the last 25 years.
The investigators are members of the Restoration Genetics Working Group, a part
of the Caribbean Coral Restoration Consortium and will utilize this channel to
present results to relevant stake-holders. Undergraduate and graduate student
researchers will participate in all aspects of this project. Results will also
be shared with the broader public through open-access lecture series and social-
media based outreach initiatives to increase knowledge of coral ecology, and
factors affecting reef decline. To promote rapid data sharing, manuscripts
resulting from this project will be posted to preprint servers and both data and
computational methods will be made freely available on open access
repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For several key reef-building corals in the
Florida Keys, such as Acropora and Orbicella spp., asexual reproduction remains
the only option to replenish local populations. This project will capitalize on
the physical damage caused by Hurricane Irma to test specific hypotheses about
factors affecting the rate of fragmentation-mediated asexual coral reproduction.
This project combines surveys of coral fragmentation and fragment survival with
comprehensive genotyping of fragments and the whole local coral community to
identify natural clones and attribute fragments to source colonies. This project
will test whether hurricane-driven fragmentation and survival patterns correlate
with the existing clonal structure across coral species, to evaluate the long-
term impact of storms in contributing to asexual propagation of Florida corals.
This project will also determine whether asexual reproduction depends more on
the rate of initial fragmentation or the rate of fragment survival. Finally,
this project will investigate the relationship between fragment survival rate
and the size of the source clonal group. A positive relationship could indicate
natural selection for increased asexual reproduction, implying that Florida Keys
reefs are evolving towards higher asexuality.