* 1801513
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Big Data and Data Science
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2024
* Olfa Nasraoui, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2024
* USD 598,128.00

This award creates a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site focused on
Big Data and data science at the University of Louisville. Each summer, ten high
school Science/Technology/Engineering/Mathematics (STEM) teachers will
participate in research activities with faculty in labs at the University of
Louisville. The teachers will be recruited from Jefferson County Public Schools
and the Ohio Valley Education Consortium. Teachers in this site will apply
fundamental data science techniques and learn Big Data principles while
investigating real world problems with social relevance. The fast pace of low-
cost technological innovation and data-centered operations have led to an
explosion of data that can be used to solve problems and provide new insights
for the future. This includes projects involving areas such as human welfare,
healthcare, smart cities, and robotics. The participating teachers will
translate their research experiences and knowledge into classroom practice by
developing instructional modules and course materials that they will introduce
in their classrooms and share with other teachers in their school districts.
These activities all contribute to the formation of a community of practice in
partnership with the University of Louisville faculty mentors that has the
potential to significantly enhance STEM education in the participating school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RET Site participants will participate in
cutting-edge research projects with state-of-the-art data science tools and
techniques. The RET Site features a unique combination of faculty mentors from
the Department of Computer Engineering and Computer Science who have experience
in both hardware and software, which is a synergistic combination in the field
of Big Data. The goals include: providing quality research experiences in Big
Data and data science for the high school teachers; strengthening the connection
between the computing faculty and the school districts; enhancing high school
teachers' understanding of engineering research design and the principles of Big
Data; enhancing high school teachers' abilities to teach engineering and
computer science concepts in a compelling way; and preparing engineering
graduate students and university faculty to assist and support the high school
teachers and their students. As Big Data permeates all sectors of society, Big
Data problems often arise in diverse disciplines, not just the computing field.
The data-enabled approach is revolutionizing the way scientists and engineers in
many fields practice, understand, and make discoveries. Thus, Big Data can
impact all STEM subjects and may become fundamental to a quality high school
STEM education. This project will help develop a core group of teachers who can
bring Big Data principles and methods into their classrooms and excite high
school students about the potential of Big Data and data science and its
relevance to many possible career paths of the future.