* 1801090
* The Internet of Things Education Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Aura Ganz, Springfield Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2023
* USD 599,388.00

A convergence of technologies has given rise to cyber-physical systems known as
the Internet of Things (IoT). IoT applications incorporate networks of advanced
sensors and actuators, embedded intelligence, and networking technologies to
provide control that were not previously possible. IoT technology has the
potential to affect nearly every aspect of human endeavor and commerce by
increasing system efficiency and reducing energy consumption. It also can
provide real-time monitoring of the nation's infrastructure and environment and
has the potential to improve public health, safety, and national security. This
project has four objectives. First, it will create and test interdisciplinary
IoT learning material in electronics, computing, and networking. Second, it will
broadly disseminate the materials through established networks such as the
Advanced Technological Education Centers. Third, the project will develop
teacher and faculty expertise in IoT and active-learner technologies. Fourth, it
will interest under-represented groups in STEM fields by recruiting K-12
students into summer workshops. It is vitally important that the United States
be at the forefront of the development of this technology and has a workforce
that can install, maintain, and update this emerging technology. This project
has the potential to provide the necessary curricula and training to teachers,
who can educate the IoT technicians needed to work in this critical and evolving
area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multi-interdisciplinary project aims to improve
STEM-related undergraduate education in electronics, computing, and networking
technology areas. It also aims to improve education in non-electronics-based
technologies that use cyber-physical systems to provide advanced automation and
control functions and enhance system efficiency, safety, and security. The
project will develop courses, modules, labs, and simulations. These teaching
resources will focus on advanced manufacturing or Industrial IoT, IoT
cybersecurity, e-healthcare IoT applications, and IoT based advanced automotive
technologies. The project will create an IoT Systems Field Technician option or
certificate under existing electronics, computing, and networking programs. The
certificate has the potential to benefit incumbent workers and is expected to be
of greater benefit to students pursuing degrees in areas such as Biomedical
Equipment Repair or Mechanical Engineering Technology than a standalone IoT
degree. Broad dissemination of the results and an emphasis on cultivating high
school teacher and college faculty expertise will support broad impact. The
project impact is broadened further by recruitment of diverse K-12 students to
participate in summer workshops. These workshops will expose K-12 students to
coding, sensors, data acquisition, interactive virtual labs, simulations, and
low-cost computing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.