* 1801477
* NNA: NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: The Integrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and Precipitation at Summit, Aerosol-Cloud Experiment (ICECAPS-ACE)
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Shupe, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2022
* USD 270,514.00

The Greenland Ice Sheet is a unique location in the Arctic. It rises from sea
level to over 10,000 feet in elevation and is, by far, the largest topographic
feature north of the Arctic Circle. Scientists have determined that the ice
sheet is sensitive to climatic fluctuations. In spite of its uniqueness and
importance, it is relatively under-studied compared to other locations on Earth.
The Integrated Characterization of Energy, Clouds, Atmospheric state, and
Precipitation at Summit (ICECAPS) project has been measuring properties of the
surface and atmosphere over Greenland since 2010. This long-term field campaign
has allowed researchers to better understand how the atmosphere affects the ice
sheet. In particular, the project has helped to determine the role that clouds
and precipitation over Greenland play in modulating the mass and energy budgets
of the ice sheet. These processes are essential for properly quantifying how
much melt water is produced by the Greenland Ice Sheet, and how this contributes
to global sea-level rise. As part of this new project, the instrument suite will
be expanded to include an Aerosol-Cloud Experiment (ACE) through a partnership
with researchers at the U.K. Natural Environment Research Council. ICECAPS-ACE
will continue to make routine observations of the atmosphere, but includes two
new major goals. First, ICECAPS-ACE will provide a better understanding of
aerosol-cloud interactions over the Greenland Ice Sheet. Summit Station is a
unique location to study such interactions because there are no significant
local sources of cloud-active aerosols. Aerosols are tiny particles in the
atmosphere that play a significant role in cloud formation. Knowledge of the
interaction between aerosols and clouds is important for providing more accurate
models of weather and climate over Greenland. Secondly, ICECAPS-ACE will provide
a comprehensive suite of observations as part of the Year of Polar Prediction
(YOPP) that can be used for the assessment of numerical models. It will also
overlap with field activities of the Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory for
the Study of Arctic Climate (MOSAiC) project, which offers an unprecedented
focus by the operational modeling community on the Arctic system. The
continuation of the ICECAPS field campaign will create a valuable 10-year
dataset that documents changes from year-to-year from this unique location in
Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Greenland Ice Sheet (GrIS) is of critical
importance to human society because of its role in global sea-level rise, and it
is melting at an accelerating rate. Providing a better understanding of the
interactions between aerosols and clouds is of direct societal value because of
their ultimate impact on the GrIS mass and energy budgets. Since 2010 ICECAPS
has significantly advanced understanding of cloud properties, radiation and
surface energy, and precipitation processes over the GrIS, while also supporting
process-based model evaluation, development of new measurement techniques,
ground comparisons for multiple satellite measurements and aircraft missions,
and operational radiosonde data for weather forecast models. The new ICECAPS-ACE
will provide insight into the role that advective aerosol sources play in cloud
and precipitation processes. The addition of the aerosol measurements will
allow, for the first time, an investigation of how aerosols impact the surface
energy and mass budgets of the central GrIS. Because of the importance of the
GrIS to the Arctic, the ICECAPS project has been endorsed as a YOPP activity and
will archive high-resolution data to be used for physical process-based model
evaluation and verification that will focus on the surface energy budget,
precipitation, and cloud-aerosol interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.