* 1801115
* Problem-Based Learning in Advanced Photonics Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Judith Donnelly, Springfield Technical Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 551,202.00

Many manufacturing industries in the Northeast region of the United States have
added photonics technologies into their manufacturing processes. A recent study
of companies in the region revealed a critical need for more optics and
photonics technicians. The demand for these technicians is growing rapidly and
surpasses the total number of graduates each year in this technical field. It is
essential to motivate, engage, and prepare more students for careers as
technicians in advanced photonics manufacturing. A proven method for recruitment
is to provide students with meaningful learning experiences that captivate their
interest with the kinds of technical problems and challenges technicians
encounter on the job. Problem-based learning (PBL) is a powerful method for
motivating students, and simultaneously developing the problem solving and
critical thinking skills required for the workplace. Springfield Technical
Community College is currently the only two-year institution in New England that
offers programs in optics and photonics technology. These programs combine
project-based and problem-based activities with extensive hands-on experience on
state-of-the-art equipment. In this project, the college will work with regional
industries and organizations in advanced photonics manufacturing to expand the
available library of PBL activities in its programs. Workshops on using PBL in
advanced photonics manufacturing education will also be provided to high school
and community college instructors across the Northeast. The project will
contribute to meeting the demand for well-skilled photonics technicians in the
nation's workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
to increase the number of photonics technicians prepared with the knowledge and
skills needed to sustain and grow the advanced photonics manufacturing industry
in the Northeast region of the United States. The proposed effort will build on
previous work by the investigators to promote use of the PBL approach in
developing problem-solving, critical thinking, and teamwork skills among
students. The project will: 1) create eight new multimedia PBL modules featuring
real-world problems developed with input from industry partners across New
England and New York; 2) provide professional development for high school and
college-level educators on photonics technologies and strategies for using the
PBL pedagogy; 3) develop a comprehensive recruitment strategy for increasing the
number of high school and community college students who pursue career pathways
in photonics; and 4) research the efficacy of the PBL approach on improving
technician education in advanced photonics manufacturing. Materials developed in
the project will be freely available on the project website, and results will be
widely disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.