* 1801472
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: End-to-End Support for Privacy in the Internet -of-things
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Jason Hong, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* James Joshi
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,148,000.00

Interest in the Internet-of-Things (IoT) has increased tremendously over the
past few years. Our homes, buildings, and even cities are starting to be
instrumented with devices, sensors, and actuators that will provide new
capabilities to users, help automate the mundane tasks in their lives, and
ultimately to improve quality of life. However, a primary challenge to the long-
term success of IoT is privacy. IoT sensors and actuators will be diverse and
embedded all around us in the infrastructure, largely in shared spaces with
unclear kinds of controls and feedback; further these devices and apps that use
them will often be created by developers with little awareness or knowledge of
privacy. This project takes a first-principles based approach towards enabling
holistic privacy controls to address these concerns, developing an open source
IoT stack which will include new privacy mechanisms, privacy models, and systems
support for privacy notifications, allowing other researchers and practitioners
to build upon them. The research results will serve as an educational resource
for students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, and as course
projects through new and existing courses taught by the researchers, such as
Ubiquitous Personal Smart Agents, User-Focused Sensing Systems and Distributed
Systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
support privacy in Internet of Things deployments from an end-to-end
perspective, taking an interdisciplinary approach to address fundamental issues
in IoT privacy along four main thrusts: (1) conducting a series of interviews
and surveys to understand user concerns about IoT privacy (e.g. type of data,
granularity, purpose, and so on); (2) developing a suite of novel privacy
mechanisms on top of an IoT software stack to make it easier for developers and
end-users to manage privacy, including new forms of access control, a stream-
based functional programming approach that makes it easier for developers to get
personal data in a privacy-sensitive manner, and developer support for
specifying purposes of data access and usage; (3) designing and evaluating new
kinds of privacy notifications, as well as ways to inspect and offer some
control over what specific sensors are doing; and (4) designing and evaluating
new kinds of policies for letting administrators and end-users manage sensitive
data, including proximity and temporal degradation of data. These proposed ideas
will be implemented, deployed, and evaluated in an extensive IoT living lab
testbed that is being deployed at the university. The work will lead to
significant interdisciplinary advances at the intersection of cyber-physical
systems, human-computer interaction, and usable
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.