* 1801335
* RAPID: Hurricane Irma: Effects of repeated severe storms on shallow Caribbean reefs and their changing ecological resilience
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2017,04/30/2019
* Peter Edmunds, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2019
* USD 73,296.00

Coral reefs have long been recognized for their diversity, and unique functional
roles, but these features have been undermined by decades of disturbances that
cast doubt on their ability to survive. Against this backdrop, 2017 brought two
hurricanes of unprecedented magnitude to the Caribbean, both of which damaged
coral reefs that already were degraded compared to those of a few decades ago.
While the impacts of these storms on some of the few coral reefs protected
within the US National Park and National Monument systems is particularly
unfortunate, it also creates unique opportunities to understand the impacts on
coral reefs that have been studied in detail for decades. This project builds on
these opportunities by leveraging 31 years of coral reef monitoring research,
much of which has been supported by NSF, to describe the impacts of Hurricanes
Irma and Maria on coral reefs in St. John, US Virgin Islands. That the analyses
will reveal severe destruction is a forgone conclusion, but what remains unknown
is how present-day reefs will respond to severe versions of a well-known
disturbance (hurricanes), and how these effects will impact their long-term
survival. Post-storm surveys and new analyses will be used to determine whether
ongoing declines in coral abundance have influenced the way coral reefs respond
to storms, notably to enhance post-storm mortality, and reduce the capacity to
recover from such event. To achieve these outcomes, a team of researchers from
California State University, Northridge, will use a cruise on the R/V Walton
Smith to survey the reefs of St. John using photography and in-water counts to
generate data that will be analyzed throughout 2018. The benefits of this
research will extend beyond scientific discoveries to include leveraged support
for other scientists participating in the cruise, evaluation of the status of
natural resources in the VI National Park, the delivery of relief supplies from
Miami to St. John, and the creation of unique research and training
opportunities for graduate students who will participate in all phases of the
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coral reefs have undergone dramatic changes in
community structure since they were first described in the 1950's, and the
current onslaught of threats from rising temperature, declining seawater pH,
storms, and numerous other events has cast doubt on their persistence in the
Athropocene. With such profound changes underway, time-series analyses of
community structure are on the cutting edge of contemporary studies of coral
reefs. In the Caribbean, the impact of two category 5 hurricanes underscores why
time-series are important, as they are the only means to describe the impact of
such events, and critically, create the context for testing hypotheses regarding
impacts and consequences of disturbances. This project addresses the impacts of
Hurricanes Irma and Maria on the coral reefs of St. John, US Virgin Islands,
which have been studied since the 1950's, and for the last 31 years largely with
NSF LTREB support. This support provides descriptions of the population dynamics
of the important coral, Orbicella annularis, and the coral community dynamics in
adjacent habitats. Any study of the effects of these storms will demonstrate
that large waves kill corals, but here intellectual merit is acquired through
testing of general hypotheses: (1) storm impacts on O. annularis will be colony-
density dependent, (2) delayed coral mortality will be accentuated compared to
previous storms, (3) the resilience of coral communities to physical
disturbances has declined since 1989, and (4) evolutionary rescue will mediate
reef recovery for select corals through large initial population sizes, density-
dependent population growth, and recruitment. These hypotheses will be tested
using a 14 day cruise on the R/V Walton Smith to collect critical time-sensitive
data, followed by a year of analysis of new and legacy photographic data.