* 1801086
* Engineering Technology Supply Chain Automation
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Nasser Hedayat, Valencia Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 01/31/2022
* USD 224,999.00

To best serve the growing national and global supply chain workforce
environment, new talent must be engaged in programmatic opportunities to address
the skills-gap in emerging technician occupations. The Valencia College
Engineering Technology Supply Chain Automation ATE project located in Central
Florida aims to advance research on effective practices in engineering
technology (ET) workforce education through a new curriculum framework and
innovative approaches to teaching supply chain automation (SCA). The need for
the project was driven in consultation with the National Center of Supply Chain
Automation and with input from nationally recognized regional employers who
reinforced the national and regional labor shortage. The new SCA-specialization
will seek to provide a model for community colleges across the country,
contributing to a growing movement for businesses and industries to become more
efficient in distribution and supply chain automation practices. As the first
program offered in the state of Florida, working closely with local business,
industry, civic, and government partners, the program plans to attract and
graduate a diversity of students, including underrepresented minorities (URMs)
and women, to the growing field of supply chain technician jobs. The project is
designed to demonstrate that the SCA-specialization within the ET associate
degree (A.S.) program is a viable two-year degree option that will serve the
community through partnerships with industry, leading to high wage employment
opportunities in high-demand occupations, and generating new knowledge on the
skills and competencies identified by industry to meet the workforce needs in
SCA. Following a rigorous evaluation, Valencia will share best practices,
curriculum and insight with other ATE centers and projects and collaborators to
add knowledge to benefit the whole. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
support building a robust workforce within demographics that will impact the
future vitality of the technically-trained workforce. Through a replicable
model, the project aims to develop this new SCA-specialization and college
certificate and offer rigorous technical courses that will be taught in creative
ways, using approaches proven to engage all students. Project objectives are to
(1) develop and implement the new specialization within the state ET associate
degree curriculum framework; (2) provide professional development for faculty
and secondary education teachers aimed at improving instructional practices and
learning outcomes, and having faculty obtain industry-recognized credentials;
and (3) collaborate with high schools to develop a pathway to the SCA
specialization with evidenced-based teaching and learning practices that
increase early awareness and exposure to ET pathways for a wide diversity of
students. Project deliverables will target (a) increased industry connections,
(b) the development of a new SCA-specialization and college certificate, (c)
increased secondary education partnerships, (d) professional development for a
minimum of eight high school teachers a year who participate in the SCA
trainings to learn best-practices on the engagement of URM and female students
in ET pathways, and (e) faculty preparation for a minimum of four faculty who
will complete the trainings to be prepared with the necessary skills and
credentials to teach the SCA curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.