* 1801143
* Building New Pathways to Biotechnology Technician Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Heidi Kaeppler, Madison Area Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 395,495.00

The Madison, Wisconsin, region has a high concentration of jobs in bioscience
industries. For example, it ranks fourth in the nation for concentration of
pharmaceutical industries. The existing Biotechnology Program at Madison Area
Technical College has a 90% job placement rate, but does not produce sufficient
graduates to meet regional industry demands. This project will establish a nine-
credit Biotechnology Program for liberal arts and undeclared students at Madison
Area Technical College. By integrating biotechnology laboratory skills and
career development experiences into the general biology curriculum, more
students may be attracted to bioscience technician careers. The project will
develop undergraduate research experiences, internships, and digital badges to
assess and document student mastery of key biotechnology skills. The nine-credit
certificate program, which includes coursework in basic laboratory techniques
and concepts, will provide students with the knowledge and skills needed to gain
employment in the biotechnology industry. Offering this certificate program to
liberal arts/undeclared students who are not in the biotechnology career
pipeline has the potential to increase the pool of qualified biotech employees.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project involves a collaboration between the Biology
department and Biotechnology associate degree program at the Madison Area
Technical College, and the Wisconsin Crop Innovation Center at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. These partners will develop and implement a bioscience
curriculum with the unifying theme of food security. This curriculum will be
designed to incorporate the core competencies of undergraduate biology education
and core skill standards for bioscience technicians. The project activities will
provide liberal arts/undeclared students an opportunity at Madison Area
Technical College to complete a biotechnology certificate and participate in
digital badging system designed to communicate these skills to industry.
Partnership with the Wisconsin Crop Innovation Center will provide students with
internship experiences to hone skills and make industry connections. These
activities have the potential to increase the number of students who have skills
in demand for biotechnology jobs, improve and grow academic and industry
opportunities, and increase access to STEM careers for all students. Students
and key academic advisors (high school teachers, guidance counselors and
administration) will be able to learn more about the academic programming
available for bioscience students and associated bioscience careers through
newly developed "Bioscience Career Roadmaps."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.