* 1801983
* Nearby Exoplanet Imaging Enabled by Active Speckle-Nulling Control Algorithms
* MPS,AST
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kristina Davis, Davis                   Kristina       K
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Kristina Davis is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the University of
California, Santa Barbara. Davis will develop techniques to drastically enhance
the contrast of detectors used with ground-based optical telescopes. The
enhancements will enable very sharp images of, for example, "exoplanets", or
planets outside our solar system. This new capability should significantly
increase the number of exoplanets detected around nearby stars. Davis will also
develop lessons and hands-on activities that will introduce high school students
to principles of physics and advanced astronomical
instrumentation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing Microwave Kinetic Inductance
Detector (MKID) technology, this project seeks to increase by nearly two orders
of magnitude the contrast ratio of adaptive optics imaging of exoplanets. Davis
will accomplish this by developing algorithms that use the raw data stream to
make corrections to the instrument control loop and thus cancel atmospheric
'speckles', which reduce the contrast of existing images. By increasing the raw
contrast level in observations, this project will improve the output of
exoplanet surveys carried out by existing ground-based telescopes. Davis will
also develop lessons for high school students on the conversion of light into
electrical energy and on the phenomenon of resonance. She will use these lessons
to engage students at local high schools and conduct teacher training
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.