* 1801417
* Automorphic Forms, Sphere Packing, and Energy Minimization in Euclidean Space
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Stephen Miller, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

The classical sphere packing problem (stated by Kepler in 1611) asks how densely
equal-sized, non-overlapping spheres can be fit into a region of space. This
abstract mathematical question plays a fundamental role in understanding
crystalline structures in chemistry, physics, and materials science. The
question can be mathematically generalized to any number of dimensions, where it
is related to other topics such as the construction of robust, error proof
communication codes. The full solution to the problem is now known in dimensions
1, 2, 3, 8, and 24. In this project, the principal investigator and
collaborators aim to apply new techniques from analytic number theory and
modular forms to settle a more general question about what configuration of
points minimizes energy between them. A related version of this question would
be "why do atoms in certain solids form repeating crystals?" An answer to this
question would provide a new proof of the Kepler's sphere packing conjecture, as
well as resolve other open questions in geometry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the
technical side, the work of the project involves harmonic analysis and
automorphic forms. The principal investigator and collaborators aim to use
quasi-modular forms to solve the "universal optimality conjecture" of Cohn and
Kumar alluded to above, particularly in dimensions 8 and 24. Other projects
involving automorphic forms have potential applications to the unitary dual
problem in representation theory, particularly an analysis of residual
Eisenstein series and non-Langlands elements of unipotent Arthur packets for
split real reductive groups. Finally, the project aims to create new Voronoi-
style summation formulas in analytic number theory using automorphic
distributions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.