* 1801734
* RET Site: Applied Data Science for Cyber Security
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2021
* Jerry Dwyer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 01/31/2021
* USD 600,000.00

This award creates a new Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site focused on
data science and cybersecurity at the Texas Tech University. Each summer, ten
high school science and mathematics teachers will participate in summer research
activities with faculty in labs at Texas Tech University. The teachers will be
recruited from the area served by the Texas Educational Service Center Region
17, which includes the city of Lubbock and the surrounding rural areas. Cyber
security is important for many technical applications as well as for the daily
lives of most citizens. Teachers in this site will apply fundamental data
science techniques and learn basic cyber security principles while investigating
real world problems involving cybersecurity. The participating teachers will
translate their research experiences and knowledge into classroom practice by
developing instructional modules and course materials that they will introduce
in their classrooms and share with other teachers in their school districts.
Thus students and teachers should become much more aware of the challenges of
cybersecurity and how they can act responsibly and safely in the cyber connected
world they live in. These activities all contribute to the formation of a
community of practice in partnership with Texas Tech faculty mentors that has
the potential to significantly enhance Science/Technology/Engineering/Math
(STEM) education in the participating school districts. This award is co-funded
by the Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RET participants will participate in cutting-edge
research projects with state-of-the-art data science tools and techniques in
cyber security. The teachers will work with a team of experienced faculty from
the Department of Computer Science on projects focusing on data science and its
application in authentic settings. The teachers will be introduced to the data
science pipeline of data collection, feature engineering, data cleaning, and
model building, before applying this knowledge to solve problems on a range of
topics including biometrics, user authentication, network traffic anomaly
detection, and mobile device security and privacy. These projects have the
potential to impact the field of cybersecurity itself as well as to bring
important topics and techniques to high school teachers and their students.