* 1801373
* SHINE:  A Vlasov-Maxwell Study of Solar Wind Turbulence Heating and Distribution Function Dynamics
* GEO,AGS
* 08/19/2017,05/31/2020
* Jason TenBarge, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Ilia Roussev
* 05/31/2020
* USD 212,003.00

The development of a detailed understanding of turbulence in magnetized plasmas
has been a long standing goal of the broader scientific community, both as a
fundamental physics process and because of its applicability to a wide variety
of phenomena. Turbulence in a magnetized plasma is the primary mechanism
responsible for transforming energy at large injection scales into small-scale
motions, which are ultimately dissipated as heat in systems such as the solar
corona and wind. In this regard, the main purpose of this 3-year SHINE project
is to improve present understanding of plasma heating and distribution function
dynamics in weakly collisional plasmas using both hybrid and fully kinetic,
continuum Vlasov-Maxwell simulations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 3-year SHINE
project aims to accomplish the following three science objectives. The first
objective is to develop a better understanding of the distribution function
dynamics related to wave damping in fully non-linear turbulence. The second
objective is to examine the behavior of Alfvenic turbulence near the proton
scale. The third objective is to determine the relative importance of proton and
electron heating in large-scale intermittent structures produced as a natural
consequence of turbulence. The project is directly relevant to the NSF's SHINE
program, because it will provide important knowledge about the nature of
turbulence in space and astrophysical plasmas. Such knowledge is critical for
accurate modeling and prediction of the space weather conditions from the solar
surface to the Earth and beyond. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research outcome of
this project may have implications for weakly collisional fusion experiments,
and it could provide additional insight into a myriad of heliospheric domains,
and be of interest to the astrophysics community. The parameters chosen and the
continuum nature of the simulations will provide valuable particle distribution
function information for existing and upcoming spacecraft missions, such as
Solar Probe Plus. The knowledge gained from this project will aid in the
development of improved models of energy transport, which may aid in global
modeling of many disparate, large-scale phenomena. The full simulation data from
the final stage of the project will be made available to the community to
analyze and compare directly to available spacecraft data. Additionally, the
simulation code, Gkeyll, and associated analysis scripts are openly available
for community use. The project will support a graduate student at the University
of Maryland College Park. Additionally, underrepresented undergraduate students
from mid-Atlantic minority-serving institutions will be involved in the research
through the Graduate Resources Advancing Diversity with Maryland Astronomy and
Physics (GRAD-MAP) program during their annual winter workshops. The students in
the workshops will develop input scripts and analyze simulation data to
introduce them to high performance computing research, aiding in their
preparation for graduate school. The research and EPO agenda of this project
supports the Strategic Goals of the AGS Division in discovery, learning,
diversity, and interdisciplinary research.