* 1801424
* GP-EXTRA: Advancing Undergraduate Geoscience through Integrated Training Experiences (AUGITE)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Mark Krekeler, Miami University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 333,703.00

Universities across the United States play a crucial role in preparing the
nation's future generations for success and working to achieve Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM) goals at regional, state, and national
levels. Throughout the workforce, geoscientists are in demand, however a
shortage of 135,000 geoscientists has been predicted by 2022. This collaborative
project will establish a career-training program which will prepare students for
the workforce. This will be achieved through partnerships with professionals
throughout academia, government, and industry during which students will gain
insight into potential careers post-graduation, and student-led research
projects where students will be provided with opportunities to develop and
enhance their transferrable skill set. This program has therefore been
purposefully designed to facilitate the efficient and effective training the
next generation of scientists who will enter the workforce. The program has been
designed to systematically recruit 16 students each year across two college
campuses (Miami University Oxford and Miami University Hamilton). Enrolled
students will have the opportunity to undertake a research project of their own
design at a field site. Each student will also have the opportunity to present
their own work to the local, regional, national, and international communities
both in person and virtually. As students progress through the program a peer-
to-peer and student-faculty mentorship program will be established which will
also work to foster student motivation, encourage critical thinking, and develop
communication skills. Results from this program will be disseminated to the
community through presentations and publications throughout the duration of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GEOPATHS:EXTRA Advancing Undergraduate
Geosciences through Integrated Training Experiences (GP-AUGITE) project will
take place on the campus at Miami University, Oxford, OH (main campus, MUO) and
Miami University, Hamilton, OH (regional campus, MUH) with a field site in
Tonopah, NV. This training-focused, student-centered program has been developed
in order to enhance the undergraduate geoscience experience and promote career-
readiness. Through a set of evidence-based approaches this program will
integrate experiential learning, relevant disciplinary research, scientific
communication, and professional development through certification, into the
undergraduate curriculum. The program will be internally evaluated through
proven metrics of self-assessment, and externally evaluated through a
collaboration with the University of Cincinnati Evaluation Services Center. This
program will foster an exciting, dynamic learning environment by systematically
recruiting traditional and traditionally underrepresented undergraduate students
in the STEM fields. The integrative approach aligns to the teacher-scholar model
and demonstrates a strong commitment to the training of a STEM-literate
population, and a career-ready geoscience workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.