* 1801042
* Multidisciplinary Simulation: Educating Advanced Manufacturing and Transportation, Distribution, and Logistics Technicians for a 21st Century Workplace
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Richard Murphy, Orangeburg-Calhoun Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 06/30/2023
* USD 588,711.00

Across the nation, manufacturing and distribution industries have growing needs
for skilled technicians, including those with skills in advanced manufacturing
and in transportation, distribution, and logistics (TDL). Orangeburg-Calhoun
Technical College aims to address this need in its region by enhancing the
preparation of students for TDL technician careers. Courses in advanced
manufacturing and TDL at the college will be expanded to include a simulation
laboratory component. The simulations will include a set of modular real-world
scenarios that combine the business, logistics, production, and security sides
of automated manufacturing. Teams of students will use these problem-based
simulations to interactively troubleshoot, find solutions, and review the
process. This approach will use emerging simulation technologies to better
prepare students for the changing workplace. The project will also introduce
high school students to the types of job opportunities in these fields and
education requirements for these positions. In addition, high school students
will be able to enroll and obtain dual credit for the TDL-related courses.
Recruitment efforts will focus on increasing the number of women and
underrepresented minorities in the manufacturing workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to prepare TDL technicians by exposing
students to emerging simulation technologies in a multi-disciplinary work
environment. Twelve interdisciplinary, real-world simulations will be developed
in the areas of advanced manufacturing and TDL, with input from local industry
partners. These simulations will be used to enhance existing courses at the
institution. A simulation laboratory will be established using a small
production line that is fully networked and equipped with several sensors. In
conjunction with this system, a resource planning system will allow students to
monitor production and control the business processes associated with the
manufacturing and order fulfillment process. This integration is designed to
provide students with the technical skills and disciplinary knowledge, as well
as an understanding of the business side of manufacturing. A Middle College
Pathway in TDL will be added so that high school students can obtain
transferable credit for completing these courses. Workshops for postsecondary
students and teachers will be conducted to promote awareness of career options
and industry needs in advanced manufacturing and TDL technology areas. Outreach
activities will include a focus on increasing participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in these fields. The college location enables it to
engage rural student populations in its advanced manufacturing training and
outreach. The project aims to increase the number of skilled technicians and to
strengthen the regional workforce by connecting supply chain issues, production
applications, and network security in a coordinated program that emphasizes
real-world simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.