* 1801418
* Collaborative Proposal: GP-IMPACT: Ambassadors for STEM Training to Enhance Participation (A-STEP)
* GEO,RISE
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Rodolfo Dirzo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 12/31/2023
* USD 36,840.00

Geoscientists work on the front lines of issues affecting human communities
worldwide, requiring an educated public positioned to help decision-makers
understand Earth's complex workings and ensure the safety of its billions of
inhabitants. Expanding diversity and inclusivity in the geosciences is critical
as decision-making informed by geosciences is a matter of both social justice
and critical national need. Recent research on social vulnerability,
particularly the vulnerability of communities to extreme natural events based on
social factors such as income, race, ethnicity, and housing, finds that
communities of color are often among those most vulnerable to these natural
events. To address this challenge head-on, the Ambassadors for STEM Training to
Enhance Participation (A-STEP) program will provide a transformative seagoing
experience to cohorts of students from underrepresented communities who will be
equipped with both solid science background and science communication skills.
This experience will broaden perspectives on the role of the oceans as a driver
of global and environmental change and is expected to empower ambassadors to
communicate that change within their own diverse communities. The project will
leverage transits of U.S.-operated marine research vessels to train diverse STEM
and non-STEM students in science communication. Under the guidance of
instructors and science mentors, these students will become effective
ambassadors to disseminate exciting and relevant geoscience information across
broad audiences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The goals of the A-STEP project are to:
(1) Raise the profile of geosciences and geoscience-related careers among under-
represented groups nationwide; (2) Produce a series of engaging multimedia
products to contribute towards this goal; (3) Draw from scientific ocean
drilling and related research to develop educational storyboard modules aimed at
K-12 audiences showing the impacts of global change on marine and terrestrial
systems; and (4) Contribute to increased diversity of knowledge across
geoscience-related fields and career choices by drawing greater attention to the
relevance of climate and environmental change for all citizens.&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, cohorts of 16 students annually from talented pools of STEM
and non-STEM majors will join scientists and science education/communication
professionals on short transit cruises on the JOIDES Resolution and UNOLS
vessels. Students will learn first-hand in the scientifically-rich environment
of an oceanographic cruise the significance of data gleaned from marine
sediments, marine organisms, marine pollution, water chemistry, weather and
climate patterns, and seafloor dynamics. Subsequently, these newly-minted
ambassadors will be deployed across their communities and the nation to transmit
the importance and relevance of geoscience information and careers, create
innovative products and presentations about their experiences, and make linkages
between climate and environmental change and people's daily lives. A-STEP
cohorts will become a rich nationwide resource for inspiring the next generation
of geoscientists. As ambassadors tasked with promoting STEM knowledge and
careers, program participants will bring meaning and value to information,
demonstrating how climate and environmental change is affecting all citizens,
urban and rural. Citizens with few direct connections to science and scientists,
who unfortunately are disproportionately African American, Latino, and Native
American communities, are often more vulnerable to misinformation and will
especially benefit from interactions with A-STEP
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.