* 1801666
* RET Site: Research Experiences for Teachers in Neural Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Satish Nair, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 06/30/2024
* USD 598,785.00

The 3-year NSF RET site on Neural Engineering at University of Missouri-Columbia
(MU) focuses on the rapidly growing field of neural engineering that aims to
address the global challenge of not only understanding the functioning of normal
and pathological brains, but also devising approaches to address neurological
limitations and dysfunction. The field requires a workforce trained across the
physical and life sciences, and such training should begin at the K-12 level by
incorporating engineering approaches, including the use of models, into STEM
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multidisciplinary MU team with neuroscience
faculty from Engineering, Biology, Psychology and Medicine, will host 10
teachers/year spanning all grades, for a 6-week duration during the summer, from
primarily rural districts around Columbia, MO. The goal will be to recruit 90%
of the teachers from rural or Title-1 schools. Teachers will spend the majority
of the 6-week period in relevant labs engaging in research activities under the
mentorship of a professor and graduate students. The program will increase
research competency of teachers in core neuroscience concepts and in engineering
approaches, that are linked to national education and technology standards,
respectively. Teachers will work on neural engineering projects and will develop
curricula for K-12 classrooms. In addition to research skills, during weekly
classes, teachers will also learn modern technological tools that will influence
their classroom teaching. They will also explore the neurobiological
underpinnings of learning and its link to improving student experience via group
readings from an influential book "Make it Stick" providing a common scientific
theme unifying the seemingly diverse neural research projects for the teacher.
Year-long follow up will focus on assisting teachers with their needs including
incorporating engineering approaches, curricular modules and technological tools
into their classrooms, and with planning their conference presentations. The
curricular modules developed by the RET program teachers will be submitted to
the NSF-supported peer-reviewed portal
TeachEngineering.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.