* 1801605
* GP-IMPACTS: Nevada's GeoGateway Program: A collaboration between Nevada State College, College of Southern Nevada, and the Desert Research Institute
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Paul Buck, NSHE Board of Regents on behalf of Nevada State College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2022
* USD 351,431.00

The American Geoscience Institute and the U.S. Bureau of Labor project a
shortfall of 90,000 geoscientists by 2024 and that by 2020, Nevada (NV) will
need 260 more geoscientists, 50 more atmospheric and space scientists, 340 more
environmental scientists, 70 more hydrologists, and 210 environmental science
technicians. The Yale Project on Climate Change concluded that the majority of
Clark County residents, 70% of NV's population, has a poor understanding of
climate change issues. Increasing student exposure to geoscience education and
increasing the number of geoscience prepared graduates entering the workforce in
NV and the U.S. is the primary program goal. Field-based, experiential learning
and research experiences are two high-impact practices generating deeper
learning and higher retention. The merit of the proposed project rests on
integrating practices that increase student interest and engagement in
geoscience-related degrees and careers. The GeoGateway Program (GGP) has the
broadest impact in increasing introductory students' scientific literacy and
access to geoscience education through lesson plans based in real-world
environmental change data and other experiential, field-based opportunities. The
number of students transferring from the College of Southern Nevada (CSN), NV's
largest community college will increase because the colleges' articulation
agreement includes mentoring and enhanced advising for students majoring in
Environmental and Resource Sciences (ERS), a major including high geoscience
content. Gender demographics at both colleges demonstrate growing numbers of
underrepresented minority females, especially Hispanic females, entering science
fields. Students majoring in ERS will complete a significant research project or
internship in collaboration with the Desert Research Institute (DRI), a
specialized environmental research arm of the Nevada System of Higher Education,
or other local organizations to further scientific knowledge of living
sustainably in the dry southwestern U.S. This knowledge is critical for the
communities in the region because as millions relocated here, climate change
exacerbated the severity of droughts, fires, and other arid climates features.
GGP graduates will be job-ready for geoscience jobs or to enroll in related
graduate programs created to support state and national geoscience
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GeoGateway Program (GGP), a structured pathway
linking academic and research institutions in southern NV to train the region's
new generation of geoscientists, will recruit and engage students taking
geoscience-related coursework. Two-year Associate of Science (AS) graduates will
channel into NSC's four-year ERS program. The GGP leverages commitments and
staff from CSN and the DRI by accessing infrastructure already supported by NSF,
the Nevada Climate-ecohydrology Assessment Network (NevCAN). Within four years,
the GGP will reach more than 530 CSN and 680 NSC students through jointly-
programmed introductory curriculum, guest lectures, field trips, and film
screenings designed to generate 25% growth in ERS majors and a 25% increase in
ERS graduates. CSN students graduating with an AS degree will directly transfer
all relevant coursework into the NSC ERS degree, enter the GGP and participate
in a Special Topics research project, receiving critical supplemental advising
and mentorship from faculty and a near-peer GGP Ambassador. The large pool of
potential undeclared NSC ERS majors will be recruited into ERS. By the end of
the GGP, program partners will have strengthened the community college pipeline
into a four-year degree program to help meet the nation's need for
geoscientists. Other outcomes include the effectiveness assessment of the
jointly-coordinated programming and participation in research or internships, by
measuring geoscience knowledge gained and level of participant interest in
pursuing geoscience-related degrees/careers, and the impacts of increased
faculty advising and use of peer mentors, especially on recruiting and retaining
underrepresented minorities and female students in science
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.