* 1801727
* RET Site: Cross-disciplinary Research Experiences on Smart Cities for Nevada Teachers: Integrating Big Data into Robotics
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Kostas Alexis, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 581,073.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at the University of Nevada
Reno aims to deliver a unique holistic research experience to K-12 teachers of
Nevada in relation to future smart cities and the cutting edge topics of
robotics and big data, as well as their intersection. The overarching goal is to
enable a critical mass of teachers in Nevada to be able to help their students
develop a passion for these domains, strengthen their critical thinking, and
broadly nurture an interest to excel in STEM fields. Research in the respective
domains is currently of paramount importance in order to address the multitude
of open challenges to achieve truly autonomous driving and the realization of
smart cities. The relevance and significance of cross-disciplinary research in
robotics and big data cannot be overstated in the context of STEM education and
its potential is daily growing. This site will attract K-12 teacher participants
to STEM education by providing tangible research experiences and appropriately
designed knowledge modules, in turn enhancing the STEM education for their
students and further designing and deploying transferable research and education
tools for the school environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
nurture an interest and passion for robotics and big data research to K-12
teachers of all levels, especially from the perspective of their intersection
for smart cities. The RET Site will provide a tangible experience through a)
educational activities on the fundamental principles of autonomous driving,
machine learning, and big data, b) a custom-designed, miniaturized, and
transferable test-bed of smart cities called "Robocity", and c) hands-on
activities on an instrumented electric bus and a drive-by-wire Lincoln MKZ
autonomous car. Through the envisioned activities, it is anticipated that Nevada
teachers will be actively engaged and gain knowledge and research experiences in
robotic perception and machine learning, control, path planning, big data
analytics, and big data system design. To enhance the quality of STEM education
in local K-12 schools at all levels, a team with both senior and young faculty
has been assembled to support the development of curricular modules and provide
a set of mechanisms that allow research to be seamlessly transferred to the
school environment. The project will engage a thorough plan for project
evaluation and a participant recruitment process that focuses on
underrepresented groups and respective student populations. To ensure that the
developed skills acquired by teachers are transferred to the classroom, the PI
team will engage in follow-up activities with the RET participants to support
the installation of Robocity. The PI team will also offer demonstrations and
tangible exercises at schools, as well as workshops at the University of Nevada,
Reno.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.