* 1801315
* RAPID:  Hurricane Maria:   ASSESSING LANDSCAPE RESILIENCE TO A CHANGING DISTURBANCE REGIME
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Maria Uriarte, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2019
* USD 174,799.00

The intensity of hurricanes is anticipated to rise with rising temperatures and
individual storms can have dramatic impacts on the carbon dynamics in forests. A
strong, single hurricane can convert significant amounts of living forest carbon
into dead biomass, and much of that carbon will return to the atmosphere through
natural decomposition and soil carbon losses. This acts as a positive feedback
to a warming climate. Severe storms also change species composition making the
forest vulnerable to subsequent hurricanes. The majority of studies on impacts
of hurricanes on ecosystems, however, have been conducted at the plot level and
over a limited range of environmental conditions. As a result, our understanding
of the factors that impact forest vulnerability to hurricanes and post-storm
recovery at the landscape scale is extremely limited. This research will
investigate the effects of Hurricane Maria on forested landscapes in Puerto Rico
using a combination of a remotely sensed satellite products, data from field
plots, and mathematical models. The proposed research will generate data and
knowledge essential for the development of forest management practices that are
resilient to climate variability and change. Data will be made publicly
available and shared with government agencies. One technician, one graduate
student, and ten field volunteers will be trained in ecological research. A
RAPID response is required to prevent loss of data due to vegetation
decomposition and to link remote sensing data to ground observations of damage.
Re-growth after storms is swift; the remote sensing signal lasts approximately 1
year following a storm, until post-storm recovery generates new leaf biomass.

Hurricanes represent the dominant natural disturbance in temperate and tropical
forests in coastal regions of the North Atlantic. Severe storms also favor
recruitment of early successional tree species that are particularly vulnerable
to subsequent hurricanes, acting as a positive feedback that exacerbates
ecosystem vulnerability. The spatial distribution of wind damage across the
landscape depends on storm meteorology, physical landscape heterogeneity, and
the attributes of individual trees and aggregate stand structure. Disentangling
the contribution of each of these factors to observed damage can be difficult
because tree species differ in their vulnerability to storm damage and, at the
same time, are distributed in a non-random fashion with respect to landscape
factors. Understanding ecosystem vulnerability to severe storms over large
spatial extents requires approaches that can tease apart the contributions of
landscape and local factors. The proposed research will rely on recent advances
in remote sensing tools including optical and hyperspectral images and Light
Detection and Ranging to generate novel insights into the landscape and local
factors that lead to spatial heterogeneity in storm impacts across broad spatial
extents. Investigators will address the following questions: 1) how do landscape
characteristics such as topography, slope, aspect, geology, and forest age and
fragmentation influence wind damage and biomass loss after a severe hurricane;
2) what is the selective pressure of hurricane damage on forest composition; and
(3) how does landscape heterogeneity influence biomass recovery?