* 1801136
* Increasing Women in Engineering and Industrial Technologies Programs
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Tony Bean, Rowan-Cabarrus Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2024
* USD 224,093.00

Manufacturing in the United States is expanding regionally and nationally at the
same time that low-skill, labor-intensive manufacturing jobs are being replaced
by highly technical, automated processes. To meet this increased demand for
highly skilled manufacturing technicians, community college manufacturing
programs must evolve to meet these changing industry environments and attract a
wide diversity of students. Women have traditionally been greatly
underrepresented in manufacturing careers, but they represent the largest pool
of untapped talent needed to address the manufacturing skills gap threatening
America. Working collaboratively with industry partners and building on research
findings that identified reasons why many women are not interested in
manufacturing careers, this project at Rowan-Cabarrus Community College (RCCC)
in North Carolina will create the Women in Engineering and Industrial
Technologies (WE IT) program. The program will utilize the strong partnership
between the college, three K-12 school districts, and the more than 35 partner
employers of the North Carolina Manufacturing Institute to develop a replicable
model to increase interest among women in engineering and industrial technology
programs. It has been informed by and builds on effective practices designed to
increase of involvement of women that include, but are not limited to, the
Institute for Women in Trades, Technology and Science (IWITTS), National
Alliance for Partnerships in Equity (NAPE), the Dream It, Do It campaign
launched by the Manufacturing Institute, and the Asheville Buncombe Community
College ATE Women in Technology program. Program evaluation will monitor
progress and determine the most effective practices. Project results will be
disseminated through TeachingTechnicians.org, NC-NET (an online source for the
58 community colleges in NC), and presentations at regional and national
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goal of increasing
enrollment of women in college engineering and industrial technology programs,
the project will focus on changing perceptions of both potential students and
career influencers (i.e. parents, counselors, advisors, teachers, faculty and
administrators). Career influencers will take part in industry tours and Taste
of Industry events held on the College campus, and a combination of faculty and
staff will present to the district-wide Parent-Teachers Association (PTA).
Potential students will be targeted through a variety of programs including an
Industry Speaks series for high school students and an internal awareness
campaign focused on current Rowan-Cabarrus students. Each semester at least 15
sections of college English will include exploration of technical careers. The
second goal of the project is to increase completion rates among women in these
programs. Women enrolled in these programs will have the opportunity to be WE IT
Ambassadors, participate in the WE IT Navigators group, and have open lab
events. The WE IT program will also provide increased partnerships and
communication networks between faculty/staff, students, parents, administrators
and industry allowing this program to be institutionalized by leveraging
resources available to each partner. The three K-12 school districts play a
vital role in the program, and the Career and Technical Education (CTE) Director
from each district is committed to sustained, active
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.