* 1801017
* Acquisition of a gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer system at Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences, Brown University
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2019,02/29/2020
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 02/29/2020
* USD 96,747.00

This award will provide a new gas chromatograph-mass spectrometer (GCMS)
instrument for sensitive analysis of volatile and semi-volatile organic
compounds at the Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary sciences. It
replaces a nineteen year old existing GCMS. This instrument is crucial for
research by multiple PIs with a history of well-funded NSF projects, for
training graduate students and postdocs, undergraduate students, as well as
visiting scientists. All four PIs have ongoing research projects that require
use of GCMS for identification and quantification of organic molecules extracted
from geological and environmental samples. PIs and graduate students also
actively participate in broader impact activities such as teaching at local
GK-12 schools with diverse under-represented populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The instrument to be purchased will be used to identify
and quantify a wide range of important geological biomarkers including
alkenones, sterols, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, long chain alkyl-diols
etc. These biomarkers in sediment cores provide critical insights to past
temperature changes, human activities, natural fires and biological
productivity. The existing GCMS instrument is three generations behind the
state-of-the-art and has suffered from major decline in sensitivity and
increasing maintenance costs, which has significantly affected training and
research of students and postdocs. The new GCMS will overcome these problems and
greatly enhance the research and training activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.