* 1801402
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Enforcement of Geofencing Policies for Commercial Unmanned Aircraft Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ming Li, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2021
* USD 230,000.00

The adoption of services and applications that rely on Unmanned Aircraft Systems
(UAS) is expected to continue its acceleration for the foreseeable future. Such
services and applications include search and rescue, crop monitoring, real-time
traffic monitoring, critical infrastructure inspections, and others. As UAS
continue to proliferate, aviation regulatory agencies around the world are
facing a challenging dilemma in terms of safely integrating UAS operations into
their respective national airspace systems and enforcing their compliance to
relevant regulations, including enforcement of no fly-zones. Current UAS lack
effective on-board flight restrictions that would prevent them from entering
critical airspace, e.g., airport runways and nuclear power plants. Furthermore,
it is essential that the safety and privacy of members of the public be
safeguarded from accidental and non-accidental UAS incursions. This project aims
to address these critical needs by developing offensive and defensive measures
for detecting, identifying, and bringing down UAS that violate
controlled/restricted airspace in an automated, controlled, and reliable
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three phase approach to thwarting a UAS
encroaching on restricted airspace will be used: (1) detect the incursion using
passive radar that exploits signals of opportunity and radio frequency (RF)
communications/emissions from the encroacher itself; (2) deploy one or more
defender UAS, capable of learning the motivations and behaviors of the
encroacher, to pursue the UAS and gain and maintain proximity to it even should
the encroacher take evasive action; and (3) have the defender UAS launch
offensive measures that manipulate/compromise the sensor and actuation signals
the encroacher relies on to stay airborne.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.