* 1801199
* Nanostructured 2D-transition metal dichalcogenides
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Matthias Batzill, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 404,175.00

Two-dimensional (2D) materials are those that extend in one plane like a piece
of paper, but are only a single molecular layer thick. Thus, essentially all
atoms in a 2D material are located at the surface and interact with their
environment. This ability to form reactive surfaces makes 2D materials
interesting for promoting chemical reactions, such as those driven by
electricity or light, processes known as electro- or photocatalysis,
respectively. In perfect 2D materials, the lack of broken bonds at the surface
of the single molecular layers often makes them quite chemically inert. Useful
chemical functionalities arise from crystal imperfections that are challenging
to create in a reliable and controlled manner. In this project, Professor
Matthias Batzill and his group at the University of South Florida are designing
2D materials with atomic-scale crystal modifications. The researchers then
correlate the structural and electronic properties of the 2D materials with
their chemical functionalities. Their research may lead to novel concepts for
making novel or improved multicomponent 2D materials for electrocatalysis. The
research in this project is strongly interdisciplinary and teaches students
chemistry concepts that prepare them for jobs in industry or academia. Moreover,
this project strengthens international collaborations and encourages students to
gain international research experience by fostering student exchanges with
collaborating institutions abroad. Students will collaborate with the University
of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) as well as at Elettra and
Soleil synchrotrons in Italy and France, respectively. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;With funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and
Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Chemistry Division, multi-component and
nanostructured transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are investigated to
determine fundamental principles for the creation of catalytically active sites
in these materials. Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is employed to synthesize model
systems with well-defined crystal modifications. Regulating growth conditions in
MBE enables control over edge density, composition, and phase boundaries, as
well as intrinsic and extrinsic defects. The structure, defects, and interfaces
are characterized with atomic resolution by scanning tunneling microscopy and
spectroscopy. Photoemission gives additional insight into electronic states and
band alignments that promote charge transfer processes. These structural and
electronic properties of nanostructured TMDCs are correlated to chemical
properties by a combination of vacuum characterization of adsorption and
reaction of probe molecules, as well as photocatalytic and electrocatalytic
investigations under realistic reaction conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.