* 1801552
* RET in Engineering and Computer Science SITE: Research Experience for Teachers on Cyber-Enabled Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Niki Pissinou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 02/28/2022
* USD 600,000.00

This award renews a Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site focused on
cyber-enabled technologies. Each summer, thirteen high school Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) teachers from Miami-Dade County
Public Schools will participate in summer research activities with faculty at
Florida International University. The research projects center on emerging
cyber-enabled technologies such as cloud computing, social networks, and cyber
security and privacy, all topics of current interest and importance. The
participating teachers will translate their research experiences and knowledge
into classroom practice by developing instructional modules and course materials
that they will introduce in their classrooms and share with other teachers in
their school districts. These activities all contribute to the formation of a
community of practice in partnership between the teachers and the faculty
mentors that has the potential to significantly enhance STEM education in the
participating school districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RET Site revolves
around a core multidisciplinary research team exploring theoretical design,
networking, application, and software issues for next-generation cyber-enabled
technologies. It augments core research themes missing from current solutions
including optimization methods and software for robust, secure, context aware,
reconfigurable, and adaptable cyber-enabled technologies. This integrated
approach should help the teachers understand the context and scope of their
research activities and interact with others as a cohort. The primary goals of
the proposed RET site are to (1) build long-term collaborations between
Kindergarten-through-12th grade (K-12) STEM teachers and the research community;
(2) increase K-12 teachers' knowledge of cyber-enabled technologies; (3) build
K-12 teachers' technology competency through research and professional
development programs; and (4) assist teachers in developing class curriculum
based on their experience. This project will help develop a core group of
teachers who can bring cyber-enabled technologies into their classrooms and
excite high school students about applications of cyber-enabled technologies and
the many possible related career paths of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.