* 1801829
* CAREER: Structure-specific Nanoscale Dynamics Studied by Nonlinear and Magneto-optical Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 10/03/2017,08/31/2019
* Kenneth Knappenberger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lin He
* 08/31/2019
* USD 63,798.00

This CAREER award by the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
program supports work by Professor Kenneth Knappenberger at Florida State
University -endowed to develop advanced spectroscopic techniques for the
investigation of the size-dependent and structure-specific optical properties of
gold nanostructures ranging from quantum-confined clusters (< 2 nm) to plasmon-
supporting particles (> 2 nm). Specifically, the PI, along with graduate
students, will develop femtosecond time-resolved magneto-optical techniques to
study both the electronic structure and excited state-dynamics of size-selected
gold nanoclusters. The PI will also develop a nonlinear microscopy platform
capable of single-particle measurements. These data will inform on plasmon modes
that result from hybridization of gold nanostructures in both small aggregates
and lithographically formed arrays. Advances made in these two areas will be
merged to describe plasmon-mediated electric-dipole transitions, and the
nonlinear imaging facility will be extended to a magneto-optical platform
capable of state-resolved plasmon-enhancement measurements.

The award will allow Professor Knappenberger to develop advanced measurement
technologies to investigate systematically the nanoparticle structure-function
interplay. This research will impact several technical areas: solar-energy
conversion, national security, trace-level analysis and high-contrast biomedical
imaging. Moreover, new facilities, capable of providing temporally and spatially
resolved magneto-optical data, will be established. As a result, the group will
establish a unique expertise that can be applied to problems in many areas of
science and technology that require spin and oxidation state information.

This program will educate both undergraduate and graduate students in an
interdisciplinary environment at Florida State University and will benefit from
close interactions with the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory. Also, in an
effort to improve understanding and stimulate interest in science and technology
among a diverse group of high school students, Professor Knappenberger will work
closely with a high school teacher to introduce new instrumentation into an
image-based chemistry curriculum. Finally, as an extension of the investigator's
classroom teaching, a series of instructional visual materials will be developed
to describe proper use of scientific instruments to a diverse audience.