* 1801446
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Large-Scale Data Driven Anomaly Detection and Diagnosis from System Logs
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Robert Ricci, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,100,000.00

Detecting unusual and anomalous behavior in computer systems is a critical part
of ensuring they are secure and trustworthy. System logs, which record actions
taken by programs, are a promising source of data for such anomaly detection.
However, existing practices and tools for doing log analysis require deep
expertise, as well as heavy human involvement in both defining and interpreting
possible anomalies, which limits their scalability and effectiveness. This
project's goal is to improve the state of the art around log-based anomaly
detection by developing a framework called DeepLog through (a) advancing natural
language processing techniques to extract structured information from a wide
variety of log files to support analysis across different data sources and
across time, (b) developing new methods to model legitimate workflows and log
event sequences over time, (c) adapting machine learning methods to identify
deviations from those workflows that represent potential anomalies, and (d)
creating tools for system administrators to help them diagnose possible security
issues more effectively and efficiently. The work will be integrated into a
freely available software package to benefit both other researchers and
practicing system administrators and used to support both classroom and
research-based educational activities at the investigators'
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Toward log parsing, the team will adapt named
entity recognition methods to parse unstructured logs as well as structured logs
where the structure is not pre-defined by, e.g., regular expressions, into
structured key-value pairs of log event types and parameters. This data can be
seen as a multi-dimensional feature space whose contents are constrained by the
execution of the underlying programs and thus reflects a hidden structure that
defines the set of valid, non-anomalous execution sequences. To help articulate
this hidden structure, the team will develop long-short-term-memory (LSTM)-based
neural network models that use both the key and value elements to extract
semantically meaningful subsequences of program behavior from data extracted
from system runs known to be normal. Once these models are developed using
known-good training data, they can be applied to anomaly detection by flagging
for consideration new log entries that are unexpected given the current state of
the system, logs, and model; they can also be used to infer the underlying
workflows and hidden structures described earlier. These models will be improved
through that online learning methods, administrators' feedback about the
seriousness of reported anomalies, and generative adversarial training models
which create execution sequences that, though anomalous, hew closely to the
hidden structures embedded in the logs and the LSTM-based
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.