* 1801564
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Towards Mechanized Proofs of Composable Security Properties
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Assaf Kfoury, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,199,484.00

Securing computing systems is a formidable task that becomes harder as systems
become more complex, widespread and intertwined with our daily lives. This is
especially true for protection mechanisms that use cryptographic schemes and
protocols. This interdisciplinary project strives to combine two complementary
approaches to analyzing the security of complex protocols. The first is
modularity: The ability to deduce the security of a complex system from the
security of its simpler components. The second is mechanization: the use of
computer tools in which mathematical proofs are formalized on the computer,
eliminating the errors that may lurk in paper-and-pencil proofs. More broadly,
the project is working to foster deeper connections between the cryptography
community and the programming languages and formal methods community. In
particular, it is training graduate students from both sides of this divide in
the methodologies of the other side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
project is combining the universally composable (UC) security framework with the
EasyCrypt cryptographic proof assistant, so as to obtain a proof assistant and
related tools and methodologies enabling security proofs that are rigorous and
cryptographically sound, as well as mechanized and modular. In order to find
common ground between the UC framework, which was not designed for automation,
and the EasyCrypt mechanized proof assistant, the project brings together an
interdisciplinary team with expertise in theoretical cryptography, programming
languages, and the design and implementation of proof assistants. The project is
bridging the gap between the coroutine-based execution model of the UC framework
and the traditional procedural execution model of EasyCrypt, developing a
domain-specific extension of the EasyCrypt programming language for representing
UC protocols and security specifications, and implementing the UC composition
operation and theorem within EasyCrypt. The project is progressing through a
series of stages, first developing an EasyCrypt architecture supporting UC, and
testing this architecture by hand via simple case studies, and then gradually
moving toward greater ease of protocol expression and proof automation. The
tools and methodologies developed during the project are being evaluated via a
series of increasingly complex case studies, working up to real-world systems
that combine algorithmic and systems security, such as the Signal messaging
system, the OpenStack cloud management framework, and secure multi-party
computation systems. Outreach events such as hackathons and tutorials are being
used to increase the impact of the developed technology to students and the
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.