* 1801342
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Bridging the Gap between Protocol Design and Implementation through Automated Mapping
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Stephane Lafortune, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2022
* USD 256,000.00

Computer networking and the internet have revolutionized our societies, but are
plagued with security problems which are difficult to tame. Serious
vulnerabilities are constantly being discovered in network protocols that affect
the work and lives of millions. Even some protocols that have been carefully
scrutinized by their designers and by the computer engineering community have
been shown to be vulnerable afterwards. Why is developing secure protocols so
hard? This project seeks to address this question by developing novel design and
implementation methods for network protocols that allow to identify and fix
security vulnerabilities semi-automatically. The project serves the national
interest as cyber-security costs the United States many billions of dollars
annually. Besides making technical advances to the field, this project will also
have broader impacts in education and curriculum development, as well as in
helping to bridge the gap between several somewhat fragmented scientific
communities working on the problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the
project will follow a formal approach building upon a novel combination of
techniques from security modeling, automated software synthesis, and program
analysis to bridge the gap between an abstract protocol design and a low-level
implementation. In particular, the methodology of the project will be based on a
new formal behavioral model of software that explicitly captures how the choice
of a mapping from a protocol design onto an implementation platform may result
in different security vulnerabilities. Building on this model, this project will
provide (1) a modeling approach that cleanly separates the descriptions of an
abstract design from a concrete platform, and allows the platform to be modeled
just once and reused, (2) a synthesis tool that will automatically construct a
secure mapping from the abstract protocol to the appropriate choice of platform
features, and (3) a program analysis tool that leverages platform-specific
information to check that an implementation satisfies a desired property of the
protocol. In addition, the project will develop a library of reusable platform
models, and demonstrate the effectiveness of the methodology in a series of case
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.