* 1801715
* Stress Formation and Relaxation in colloidal Dispersions: Transient, Nonlinear Microrheology
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Roseanna Zia, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2019
* USD 144,110.00

PI: Zia, Roseanna&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1605836&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the proposed research is to investigate colloidal dispersions when
forces and stresses acting on them change. Both theoretical analysis and a class
of computations known as Accelerated Stokesian Dynamics simulations will be used
to accomplish this goal. The work could have an impact on the chemical and food
industry, where control of material properties and of complex fluids, like
colloids, is important.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research
is to develop predictive theory and computational models for the temporal
formation and relaxation of viscosity and stress in colloidal dispersions via
the framework of active microrheology, with a focus on connections to particle
microstructure as it evolves in time. Most non-equilibrium microrheological work
to date has focused on steady-state flow behavior, yielding insight into steady-
state non-Newtonian behaviors, relating them to flow-strength induced changes in
the relative contributions of hydrodynamic, Brownian, and interparticle forces.
However, understanding of how such relative contributions evolve in time-during
flow startup and cessation-lags behind. Such understanding is key to resolving
important questions such as the origins of stress "overshoots" during flow
startup, and whether structural evolution and rheological evolution reach steady
state simultaneously. The results of the proposed research are of fundamental
scientific interest and will impact applications as diverse as intracellular
flow, drilling fluids, and impact-resistant materials. The PI hypothesizes that
the relative contributions of hydrodynamic, interparticle, and Brownian forces
to the stress and viscosity in colloidal dispersions are not instantaneously
formed upon flow startup, and thus that the climb to steady state rheology may
lead or lag formation of steady state structure. The proposed work will combine
theoretical and computational rheological studies. Theoretical studies will
center on formulation and solution of time-dependent Smoluchowski equations,
which will then be utilized to compute suspension viscosity and stress as it
evolves in time, for any range of interparticle repulsion (i.e., strength of
hydrodynamic interactions), particle size ratio, and attractive potentials. The
educational plan will improve the participation of underrepresented students via
mentored learning utilizing guided, hands-on experiments. The PI will develop
fluid mechanics modules for classrooms and outreach at Cornell University,
rheology conferences, and quarterly "Science Days" at National Academy
Foundation high schools for underrepresented minority students.