* 1801420
* GP-EXTRA: Connecting Links to Ocean Science and Earth Science Graduate Academic Programs (CLOSES-GAP)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Lee Slater, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2024
* USD 429,634.00

The Collaborative Links to Ocean Science and Earth Science Graduate Academic
Programs (CLOSES-GAP) provides a pathway for undergraduate students at two
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and an institution with the highest
campus diversity (as identified in 2015 by U.S. News and World Report) to engage
in an academic bridge program in the geosciences. According to the NSES 2015
statistics, Hispanics, African Americans, and American Indians or Alaska Natives
are disproportionately represented in all STEM fields. The representation in
geoscience fields, however, is the lowest of all surveyed disciplines. CLOSES-
GAP is a comprehensive partnership between University of Maryland Eastern Shore,
Delaware State University and Rutgers University Newark and a research
university (University of New Hampshire) to enhance mechanisms to recruit under-
represented students into the geosciences. Taken in concert, program elements
allow CLOSES-GAP student participants to build skills important for graduate
program matriculation and success. Additionally through this project the
participating institutions will strengthen collaborative working relationships
for engaging together in sustained research and student mentoring
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CLOSES-GAP is a comprehensive program
consisting of several interconnected components that offer a suite of supports
and opportunities. Specifically, students will be recruited during their junior
year and receive research training and mentoring during the following summer and
throughout their senior year. The organizers will address two major priorities
of the GEOPATHS program by 1) offering students in biological oceanography, or
other related non-geoscience programs, opportunities to explore research
opportunities available in physical oceanography and near-shore geoscience; and
2) providing participants with foundational skills in basic geoscience research
and science communication skills. The goal will be to provide CLOSES-GAP fellows
with experiences that give insight into the diversity of research options in
marine geosciences, and to provide research opportunities that leverage UNH's
world-class ocean mapping facilities and personnel, including the residential
facility at the Shoals Marine Laboratory, 6 miles off the coast of New
Hampshire. Additional mini-courses, facilitated or created by the project team,
will coach fellows on research skills, graduate admission and fellowship
applications. Students will enter the program in the summer following their
junior year, and be supported through the following academic year by pairs of
advisors at both their home institution and UNH. Their participation will
culminate in presenting their work at a national or regional science conference.
Equally important to the summer research camp are the mentoring expertise and
comfort that comes with familiarity of the fellows' home institutions. Before
and after attending the UNH research camp, participants will complete online
mini-courses in basic research skills such as statistical analysis, as well as
often overlooked competencies such as data management and academic/research
ethics. We will also focus on developing a "research community" in each
participant cohort, highlighting the importance of interdisciplinary research
groups in contemporary geosciences and marine sciences. Upon returning to their
home institutions after the research camp, the focus will shift to data analysis
and communicating their findings to a variety of audiences, in a range of media
- from traditional professional conferences and publications to social media. At
the core of the program is a holistic approach to participant support that
combines unique research opportunities with highly-supportive mentoring at both
UNH and their home institution. The CLOSES-GAP program will strengthen an
alliance between four institutions and will recruit 30 undergraduates from
underrepresented groups to participate in a program focused on preparation for
graduate school and, ultimately, careers in the geosciences. Across the
alliance, this program will also improve the capacity of geoscience faculty, and
their respective departmental and institutional affiliations, to tailor
recruitment approaches to non-majority audiences, and to support
underrepresented students in successfully applying to graduate programs. In
addition to these direct and immediate impacts, the CLOSES-GAP team will
disseminate their findings to the larger geoscience community through
traditional, academic means (publication and conference presentation), as well
as through the creation of guiding resources for future
partnerships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.