* 1801760
* GP EXTRA: GETUP- Geoscience Education Targeting Underrepresented Populations
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Marek Matyjasik, Weber State University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 324,640.00

This project will assess the effectiveness of multifaceted pathways to increase
recruitment, engagement, and ultimately graduation rates and career placement of
Earth Science majors, focusing on underrepresented Latinx and female groups at
Weber State University. The pathways integrate varying combinations of early
outreach to high school students, university courses taught in collaboration
with local high schools, a summer bridge between high school and university
classes, community engaged learning, early introduction to undergraduate
research, and support of student cohorts through degree completion. Two
different cohorts of students will be recruited each year of the project, cohort
1 from classes taught in local high schools who receive early intervention in
preparing for college and participate in the summer bridge program, and cohort 2
from general education classes taught on campus. Both cohorts will then follow a
similar pathway of courses, conduct summer research, and receive mentoring from
teachers and classmates. By comparing retention rates, changes in student
attitudes, and professional socialization for the different pathways, we will
assess what combinations of activities and timing best prepare students for
geoscience careers. This project will help address the projected shortfall in
geoscience workforce nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The GETUP (Geoscience
Education Targeting Underrepresented Populations) project will develop and
assess the effectiveness of a multifaceted approach to increase recruitment,
retention, and ultimately graduation rates and career placement of geoscience
majors, focusing on underrepresented Latinx and female students at Weber State
University (WSU). Although the number of Latinx students attending WSU had
risen, participation in STEM fields lags, and despite a growing demand for
qualified geoscientists, many students entering WSU are first-generation college
students who do not have family traditions in STEM fields. To overcome these
challenges, this project will develop pathways to geoscience careers that
integrate varying combinations of early outreach to high schools, early
collaborative research, student cohorts, community engaged learning, and
multiple pedagogies to support varied learning styles. Specific activities
include: a Geoscience concurrent enrollment class taught in collaboration with
high school teachers that incorporates project-based learning activities and
promotes early recruitment; a summer bridge program that helps with a transition
to college; community-engaged learning in an environmental geoscience course; a
summer research program where students conduct collaborative projects centered
around a newly developed Great Salt Lake field observatory; and student cohorts
who take a structured sequence of core classes, including a new sophomore-level
class that emphasizes work-force skills and career planning. Student successes
and attitudes will be assessed at multiple points to evaluate what combinations
and timing of activities best enhance recruitment, retention, and professional
socialization of underrepresented groups. Two pathways will be compared: one in
which students enter the pipeline earlier in high school and have a summer
bridge experience; and a second where students are recruited from college
courses. Results will be disseminated via publications, workshops, and a
dedicated webpage, and materials will be made available to other universities
for enhancing recruitment and retention efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.