* 1801720
* NSF/EAR-BSF: Resolving slow slip transients before and after the 2011 Tohoku-oki earthquake with geodesy and seismicity
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Roland Burgmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2021
* USD 272,414.00

Tectonic plate motions produce stress accumulation at convergent plate
boundaries, which is released by slip on faults. Some faults slip rapidly during
earthquakes, generating waves, traditionally analyzed by seismologists. Other
faults slip at much slower rates and aseismically, without generating waves. An
episode during which the fault slips at rates that are about 100 times the long-
term tectonic loading rate for periods of up to several weeks is commonly
referred to as a slow slip event (SSE). SSEs are often accompanied by weak
seismic activity and analyzing them requires data from sensitive geodetic and
seismic networks. SSEs are thought to play an important role in the initiation
of damaging earthquakes, and it is therefore important to elucidate the physics
that controls their behavior. Advances in geodetic instrumentation have enabled
the detection of SSEs occurring before several large earthquakes, among which
the March 11, 2011 M9.0 Tohoku-oki earthquake is the best-recorded event in
history. The spatiotemporal seismo-geodetic network coverage of northeast Japan
provides a unique opportunity to study the complex activity leading up to this
megathrust earthquake and in its aftermath. Precursory observations reported
thus far are very diverse, ranging from a decadal slip acceleration observed by
GPS to a final foreshock sequence two days before the main shock. This project
will develop a more precise picture of seismic and aseismic slip interactions in
the decades before the Tohoku-oki earthquake. The researchers on this project
have developed an innovative method which enables the detection of low-amplitude
SSEs using geodetic and seismicity data. The results from this research will
inform efforts to improve short-term earthquake hazard assessments in all
convergent plate boundaries. This project is an international collaboration with
researchers in Japan and with a new faculty member at the Tel Aviv University in
Israel, through the binational NSF-BSF program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to analyze the details of aseismic transient slip in the decades
leading up to, as well as following the great March 11, 2011 M9.0 Tohoku-oki
megathrust earthquake. By using a geodetic matched filter technique, we seek to
detect lower-amplitude transient events in geodetic time series than the ones
observed with previously developed techniques. The researchers will use existing
and new methods to simultaneously analyze geodetic and seismological
observations, as they are likely to provide complementary information about a
common physical phenomenon. The methodology will be applied first to the Nankai
trough, where many slow slip events have already been described, as a
calibration and as an experimentation in combining GPS and tilt-meter data in a
novel detection technique. Secondly, they will search for transient activities
in the Tohoku area, with a focus on two areas, offshore Sanriku and beneath the
Boso Peninsula. Offshore Sanriku, repeating earthquakes have shown oscillations
in slip rates that still have to be captured by geodetic observation to
determine their spatial and temporal extent. Beneath the Boso Peninsula, where a
sequence of slow slip events with recurrence intervals disturbed by the Tohoku-
oki earthquake is going on, seismicity and geodetic recordings will be
integrated to detect lower-amplitude transient signals and to improve the
resolution of existing slip models. A primary goal will be to resolve the impact
of the Tohoku earthquake stress perturbation on the cycle and dynamics of the
slow slip events. Finally, the researchers will develop a comprehensive model at
the scale of northeast Japan of the seismic and aseismic cascade of events
leading up to the M9.0 Tohoku-oki earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.