* 1801633
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Understanding Security in the Software Development Lifecycle: A Holistic, Mixed-Methods Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Daniel Lende, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

As software now pervades nearly every aspect of modern life, securing software
is widely acknowledged as a critical problem. Although significant effort has
gone into identifying flaws in software, as well as developing tools, libraries,
and processes for detecting and mitigating these flaws during software
development and maintenance, security problems remain pervasive. There has been
comparatively little effort to empirically assess the effectiveness of existing
tools and processes in realistic settings, and almost no effort to understand
the root causes of professional developers making security errors. This lack of
knowledge hinders the advancement of secure programming techniques that can
effectively reduce the number of security bugs in deployed software. This
research focuses on measuring and evaluating the effectiveness of particular
approaches to securing software as carried out by typical developers. By
combining anthropological observation of industrial development practice with
experimental evaluation of tools and processes, this project will identify new
or underappreciated approaches to improving software security in
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research includes four interdependent
approaches: anthropological observation via long-term embedding in partner
industrial software development teams; conducting and analyzing results from
secure-programming contests that serve as quasi-experiments; controlled lab
experiments; and analysis of open-source software artifacts. The anthropological
approach produces deep insights through zero-proximity observation and
reflection by fieldworkers, and competitions illuminate how differences in
approach (language, tools, etc.) to a substantive problem correlate
(quantitatively and qualitatively) with success or failure. Both of these
approaches will generate hypotheses, which can then be tested via controlled lab
experiments, as well as additional field, contest, and artifact observations.
This combination of approaches leverages the strength of each in order to
maximize both ecological and internal validity, offering the best chance to
understand the real causes of (in)secure software development and offer
effective guidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.