* 1801632
* High-Pressure Synthesis of Missing Pnictide Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2018,03/31/2022
* Danna Freedman, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2022
* USD 428,815.00

Part 1: Non-Technical summary: &lt;br/&gt;Lossless transmission of power means
that all electricity that goes into a material is transported without loss. If
achieved, this would lead to astonishing energy savings, completely transform
energy generation, and significantly improve medical imaging technology. So-
called superconductors demonstrate this lossless transmission of electricity
making them very important for novel technologies. Superconductors also offer
the potential for fundamental scientific discovery. The mechanism by which
superconductors enable this energy saving phenomenon is largely not well
understood. Understanding this mechanism and creating better superconductors is
essential for technological application, because currently superconductivity is
largely a low-temperature phenomenon, with critical temperatures for
superconductors being similar to the extremely low temperatures found on Mars or
even in the coldest regions of outer space. Through this award, funded by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry as well as the Condensed Matter Physics
programs in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, Freedman's research team
engages in a theory-inspired search for new superconductors of a specific type,
which could enable fundamental insight into the mechanism of superconductivity.
Her team uses high-pressure synthesis to access new compounds that have long
eluded chemists. This work enables interdisciplinary training for graduate
students and postdoctoral fellows, where they benefit from the scientific
intersection of solid-state chemistry, physics and geophysics. Preparing
graduate students to collaborate across fields strengthens the next generation
of our scientifically engaged workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical
summary: &lt;br/&gt;The realization of high temperature superconductivity would
be a transformative advance, with implications across NSF directorates ranging
from improved medical imaging to fault tolerant power transmission. Thus far,
the vast majority of new superconductors have been found either by serendipity,
modification of known superconducting systems, or through the investigation of
theoretically unlikely candidates. In stark contrast, the targeted synthesis of
new systems is underdeveloped, owing to the inherent difficulty of predicting
new superconducting materials. To enable rational progress, a clear design
strategy is needed, which necessitates knowing the operative superconducting
mechanism in a given class of superconductors. Freedman proposes the synthesis
of the notably missing subclass of Fe-Bi pnictide superconductors via high-
pressure synthesis. This work is motivated by Freedman's recent discovery of the
first Fe-Bi bond in the solid-state, achieved through the application of high
pressure and stabilized by the formation of Bi-Bi interactions. Through this
award, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry as well as the
Condensed Matter Physics programs in the Division of Materials Research at NSF,
Freedman's team characterizes novel materials both through in situ and bulk
X-ray diffraction and spectroscopic methods. Materials are physically probed via
magnetometry, resistivity, and heat capacity measurements. The aggregate of
these data provides insight into the mechanism of superconductivity, and
possible structure-function correlations. Creating and understanding different
superconductors offers promise for true discovery within this complex field. The
realization of a new class of superconductors would foster collaborations across
the sciences and enable a deeper understanding of superconductivity.
Superconductors also have tremendous potential for societal impact, ranging from
MRI instrumentation to increased power transmission through the electric
grid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.