* 1801222
* EAGER: Experiments to test potential identification biases of environmental DNA in unfrozen archaeological sediments
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2019,06/30/2023
* Mary Edwards, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 06/30/2023
* USD 127,213.00

Human use of natural resources is a critical component for understanding human
prehistory. The goal of this project is to test a new approach that could shed
light on the availability of natural resources and whether or how early humans
in Alaska harvested resources thus understanding past human behavior and
development. In central Alaska, the climate was changing rapidly as the world
transitioned from glacial to modern climate conditions between 20,000 and 5,000
years before present. This triggered the spread of the forest, expansion,
extinction, and/or redistribution of game animals (such as elk, bison, and
moose), and the establishment of salmon streams. Various well-established
methods, such as bone and plant identification, shed light on this past resource
use, however, challenges in the identification or preservation of these samples
can yield an incomplete picture of human activity. Ancient DNA extracted from
archaeological sediments can address these challenges, but the preservation of
the ancient DNA in sediments that are unfrozen for part of the year - sediments
that are typical of many Arctic contexts - is currently untested. This project
will assess new and transformational methodologies on ancient DNA that can add a
new view on the relationship between humans and their environment thousands of
years ago. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this study, ancient DNA results will be
rigorously analyzed to assess preservation and sampling issues that may result
from sediments that are unfrozen for four months of the year - a methodological
challenge that has yet to be tested. The project team will compare ancient DNA
results from archaeological sediments that are unfrozen about four months of the
year, which are typical of central Alaska, with a sediment type that has been
shown to preserve ancient DNA (lake sediments) to assess the reliability of
ancient DNA results from these new contexts. This project has the potential to
revolutionize our understanding of past landscapes and human use of those
landscapes by applying this new approach for archaeologists working in Alaska
and other parts of the Arctic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.