* 1801024
* Dade Enterprise Cloud Computing Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Felix Lopez, Miami-Dade Community College/InterAmerican Campus
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 09/30/2022
* USD 256,451.00

Industry leaders have identified information technology as a target area for
economic growth and development in Miami-Dade County. One of the most in-demand
skills for information technology (IT) technicians is enterprise cloud
computing. However, higher education has not yet developed comprehensive
curricula, educational resources, and information technology training programs
that lead to industry certification in cloud computing. To meet this need and
serve as a model for other community colleges, this project at Miami Dade
College InterAmerican Campus aims to develop and implement a new educational
pathway in cloud computing. The student body at Miami Date College InterAmerican
Campus includes a large, predominantly low-income, minority student population.
As a result, the project has the potential to increase the number of certified
cloud computing technicians from underrepresented minority groups to meet local
and national workforce needs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project objectives
include: (1) Development and implementation of a professional development
program that will train 15 MDC technology faculty members to teach cloud
computing courses utilizing project-based learning methodology; (2) Creation of
an academic pathway that will align a college credit certificate in Enterprise
Cloud Computing to associate and baccalaureate degrees in information systems
technology; (3) Recruitment, retention, and graduation of approximately 25
students each academic year in the newly developed Enterprise Cloud Computing
program; (4) Development of a K-16 pipeline by offering a Cloud 101 summer boot
camp for 40 high school students from traditionally underrepresented
populations. In addition to curriculum development, the project also aims to
advance knowledge about student success and degree attainment in technology
fields and to generate a deeper understanding of factors that lead to improved
retention of (STEM) students at Hispanic-serving institutions. This information
can benefit other institutions that are committed to advancing underrepresented
student success in technology disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.