* 1801986
* TWC SBE: Medium: Collaborative: Dollars for Hertz: Making Trustworthy Spectrum Sharing Technically and Economically Viable
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2017,07/31/2019
* Nelson Sa, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Beck
* 07/31/2019
* USD 15,062.00

The critical role of spectrum as a catalyst for economic growth was highlighted
in the 2010 National Broadband Plan (NBP). A challenge for the NBP is realizing
optimal spectrum sharing in the presence of interference caused by rogue
transmissions from any source, but particularly secondary users who share the
spectrum. This complex problem straddles wireless technology, industrial
economics, international standards, and regulatory policy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary, multi-university collaborative
project studies the many dimensions of the problem from algorithms to law
enforcement. The investigators study (1) ex-ante spectrum rule enforcement
mechanisms (i.e., preventive) such as spectrum access control via policy
reasoners, (2) ex-post spectrum rule enforcement schemes (i.e., punitive) with
policy conformance monitoring that employ cryptographic commitments, (3) ex-post
enforcement schemes that can uniquely identify rogue transmitters, and (4) the
economic viability of spectrum sharing with different enforcement
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides a broad range of education
and industry outreach activities in order to rapidly insert research advances
into curriculum and university-industry partnerships. Specifically, the
investigators will present short courses and tutorials at the annual Virginia
Tech Wireless Symposium and Summer School, and widely disseminate findings
through NSF Industry &amp; University Collaborative Research Centers (I/UCRC) at
the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University.