* 1801884
* NeTS: Medium: Streaming Data Analytics over Programmable Datacenter Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Ang Chen, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 06/30/2022
* USD 1,200,000.00

Today's datacenters play many important roles, not the least of which is to
support big data analytics. Streaming data, in particular, is a prevalent
workload that comes from web clickstreams and applications like financial
transactions. Streaming data analytics presents unique challenges, as the data
arrives continuously at very high speeds, which makes deriving real-time insight
about it difficult. However, datacenter networks are becoming more programmable,
meaning that more of the common components that a data stream might pass through
now have the flexibility to do real-time processing. In addition, new
technologies are enabling the datacenter network topology to be dynamically
configured to connect the components and servers needed to process a certain
stream more efficiently. This project seeks to build a framework and tools that
exploit this emerging programmability to enable real time data processing. It
has the potential to drastically improve the scalability, performance and energy
efficiency of data analytics, and to deliver critical insight and response in
real time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a new data analytics
framework designed to transform the way of performing streaming data analytics
by leveraging datacenter programmability. The set of programmable elements has
expanded to include not only servers, but network interface components, field-
programmable gate arrays, application-specific integrated circuits, and network
topology. The vision of the project is to jointly optimize all components to
achieve a "sweetspot" in the design space for each application. The researchers
aim to develop the scientific foundations and practical techniques to realize
this vision through the following activities: identifying key abstractions that
programmable datacenter networks can provide to support application-level data
analytics, designing a practical streaming data analytics framework to leverage
these abstractions, and developing scheduling algorithms to multiplex the
programmable resources across different applications. Finally, the investigators
will explore efficient and reusable implementations of the framework, which will
be applied to real-world workloads as case studies. The project includes
collaboration with industry practitioners to enable research ideas and system
prototypes to be smoothly transitioned into practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.