* 1801591
* Modeling Bi-Directional Stromal-Cancer Cells Interactions with Engineered 3D Tumor Models
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Hossein Tavana, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2023
* USD 328,426.00

Cancer is a complicated set of diseases. Treatments have focused on the
cancerous cells themselves. These efforts have neglected the cells surrounding
the cancerous ones that contribute to the growth and durability of the tumor.
Researchers also often deal with individual cells or small clusters of them,
rather than a full, 3-dimensional mass of cells. This research will attempt to
correct those limitations. A fully 3-dimensional mass containing the two cell
types most prevalent in breast cancer tumors will be characterized. The results
will be used to create a tumor simulation. Both the model and the experiment
will be used to evaluate potential breast cancer drugs. High school students and
college undergraduates will be included in the research activity, developing a
stronger workforce for the growing biomanufacturing
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will characterize the interactions
between cancer cells and stroma cells within tumor microtissues in vitro. The
information generated will be used to develop a 3-dimensional model of the tumor
that includes cancer cells and stromal cells. The model system will include
triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) cells and cancer-associated fibroblasts
(CAF). The technology is based on aqueous two-phase systems that allow cell
aggregation into spheroids. The spheroids are then embedded into a protein
matrix containing stromal cells. Using the resulting tumor micro-tissues, we
will test the hypothesis that activated stromal and TNBC cells synergistically
co-regulate their extracellular matrix remodeling and that signaling with
activated stromal cells confers drug resistance to TNBC cells. We will also
investigate the efficacy of combination drug treatments of stromal and cancer
cells to block stroma-mediated proliferative and drug resistance properties of
cancer cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.