* 1801563
* GP-EXTRA: Expanding an Innovative Pathway to Replenish the Geoscience Workforce with Underrepresented Minority Non-Geoscience STEM Majors
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Janet Liou-Mark, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2021
* USD 309,911.00

This project at the New York City College of Technology (City Tech) seeks to
expand and to sustain a year-round geoscience workforce preparation and
geoscience career mentoring program for non-geoscience minority STEM students
beginning at the critical juncture of their junior or senior year. The overall
goal of the program is to create a sustainable pathway to the dwindling
geoscience workforce by tapping into this non-traditional pool of students.
Eleven students will be recruited each year to participate in the structured
geoscience workforce model program that consists of geoscience - Exposure,
Preparation, Apprenticeship, and Experience. The initiative will bring together
City Tech, Medgar Evers College and federal, local, and private geoscience
industry partners that include: NYC Department of Environmental Protection, NYC
Department of Transportation, NYC Emergency Management, U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Cary Institute, and Partner
Engineering and Science. City Tech and its partners will collaborate to achieve
the following objectives: 1) create pathways for non-geoscience STEM majors to
pursue careers in the geosciences; 2) provide hands-on geoscience training via
the use of geoscience instrumentation, models, and data sets; and 3) engage
students in transformative geoscience internship programs. The proposed
activities combine year-long geoscience workforce experiences with multi-tiered
mentoring, industry support systems, and a robust geoscience networking
community to produce holistic and engaging stimuli for the workforce development
of the participants. The scientific, educational, and geoscience workforce value
of this project derives from two main sources: 1) a focus on the transfer of
learning from STEM knowledge to real-world geoscience problems, operations, and
workforce development, and 2) the expertise of geoscience practitioners at
federal, local, and private facilities, all of whom are highly trained
geoscience professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the New York City
College of Technology (City Tech) seeks to expand and to sustain a year-round
geoscience workforce preparation and geoscience career mentoring program for
non-geoscience minority STEM students beginning at the critical juncture of
their junior or senior year. The overall goal of the program is to create a
sustainable pathway to the dwindling geoscience workforce by tapping into this
non-traditional pool of students. Eleven students will be recruited each year to
participate in the structured geoscience workforce model program that consists
of geoscience - Exposure, Preparation, Apprenticeship, and Experience. The
expectation through this initiative will be that many underrepresented minority
(URM) STEM students who would otherwise not pursue a geoscience career may now
choose to follow a geoscience career that could not only lead to lucrative jobs,
but could also help to ameliorate the nation's grave geoscience workforce
dilemma. A multi-sector geoscience workforce development infrastructure will
then be developed. To address the project's main research enquiries, the program
was designed with the following goals and objectives: Goal 1: To broaden the
geoscience workforce pathway for non-geoscience minority STEM majors; Goal 2: To
create a multi-sector geoscience workforce development infrastructure. Each
component of the program: Exposure, Preparation, Apprenticeship, and Experience
will be evaluated individually. Additionally, surveys, focus groups, and pre-
post geoscience knowledge and laboratory tests will be used for both formative
and summative assessments of the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.