* 1801658
* GP:EXTRA - Engaging Community College Students in Undergraduate Research
* GEO,RISE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Ardi Kveven, Everett Community College
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 06/30/2022
* USD 333,688.00

The primary goal of this GP-EXTRA project is to increase the number of dually
enrolled high school students at Everett Community College's Ocean Research
College Academy (ORCA) who identify an interest in pursuing a geosciences
baccalaureate degree upon earning their high school diploma. Through targeted,
oceanographic research experiences with private and governmental collaborators
during the summer that continues into the academic year, this project will
increase the number of high school seniors professing an interest in pursuing a
geoscience major in university. Research experiences are effective in attracting
and retaining students in STEM fields, and this project seeks to embed
collaboration and mentoring. Mentoring for and by women increases the likelihood
of changing the longstanding culture in STEM, where competition is valued over
cooperation and collaboration. This approach enhances access for underserved
students in STEM: women, students of color and low income
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the deployment of remote monitoring CTD
instrumentation and deliberate mentoring by the ORCA faculty/staff and
practicing geoscientists from three different employment sectors during the
summer, ten students annually will experience field work, monitoring
instrumentation and management of the data stream. This experience will form the
basis for students to generate further testable questions while receiving
research support by the project team and scientific collaborators during the
academic year along with financial support. Students will demonstrate their
transition to independent researchers through showcasing their research at
geoscience conferences, and regional events. Summer research experiences
represent an effective mechanism to retain undergraduate students once they are
in the STEM pipeline, but less understood is the impact a summer research
experience has on high school seniors as a motivator for declaration of a
specific STEM major. By providing exposure to all aspects of a geoscience
career, with special attention given to the influence of collaboration,
relationship building and mentoring, this project will contribute to an
understanding of how to embed research into dual enrollment coursework and which
aspects are the most impactful. This project also advances knowledge specific to
the Puget Sound which remains an understudied estuary. Local understanding of
complex systems is a result of in-situ deployments, which rarely provide the
long-term data stream that this project will create. Recent, drastic temperature
spikes in the area require year round monitoring. Engaging high school students
underrepresented in geosciences in the hands-on deployment of real-time
instruments, giving them access to utilize and distill the complicated data
stream and share these data with others represents powerful, confidence building
opportunities for students as they increase community connections. The broader
impacts of this project will provide further opportunities for students to
showcase their work, both locally, nationally, and internationally, building
their confidence and the opportunity view themselves as scientists. Engaging
dually enrolled students in authentic research optimizes the intent to maximize
the personal involvement in creating new knowledge. Since data is telemetered
live online, anyone has access to it. This provides pride of ownership by the
students, who will then further engage in problems that require innovative
solutions to benefit society as a whole.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.