* 1801499
* RET Site: Milwaukee Water-Energy Nexus Education Initiative
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Craig Berg, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The objective of the proposed RET Site renewal is to build and support a
sustainable scalable RET network of schools, principals, teachers, and
industrial partners working together to transform STEM education in Milwaukee,
connecting students' passions and aspirations with exciting opportunities to
make a difference through research, engineering, and manufacturing innovation.
It is expected that new curricula and school-wide transformations will have an
impact on 5,000-10,000 students from high-need urban public high schools in the
city of Milwaukee. The aim is to catalyze a sustainable RET network that
empowers teachers to experiment and make STEM learning exciting, grants
principals and administration license to support these experiments (and
experiment themselves), and, through the industrial element of the program,
build the kind of partnerships that would make learning more contextual and help
support program growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This RET Site offers an intensive
seven-week summer experience for 10 teachers per year beginning in late June and
ending in early August. The teachers participate in highly structured, team-
oriented research projects focused on the water-energy nexus research theme and
academic-year curricular development activities. To provide support beyond the
classroom, the program will also engage school principals. The teachers'
professional development will include a Design Thinking boot camp, curriculum
design mentoring, and avatar classroom training. Two RET network conferences
will be held annually in which the teachers present their research projects and
develop academic-year curriculum. During the first semester of the academic
year, the teachers will implement the in-depth six- to eight-week curricular
modules that they developed during the summer. The RET site and its activities
directly align with the Milwaukee Public Schools District's Comprehensive Math
and Science Plan. It will be evaluated in quantitatively terms of participation,
impact on students' knowledge and interest in engineering careers, and their
mastery of core science concepts that are targeted by the Design Based Learning
(DBL) units. By focusing on the water-energy nexus, a topic of broad social
impact that is attractive to high school students, it is hoped that the serious
economic issues in Milwaukee related to the continuous decline in the number of
K-12 students (particularly females and under-represented minorities) who pursue
STEM careers will be addressed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.