* 1801955
* STEM Writing to Read
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Anne Grippo, Arkansas State University Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 09/30/2023
* USD 299,937.00

Technical writing is a crucial skill for Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM) professionals. To help develop and improve that skill, faculty in
the Arkansas State University Department of Biological Sciences will collaborate
with colleagues in the Department of English to design two STEM technical
writing courses. The first one will be for undergraduate Biology majors. The
second one will be for STEM and English graduate students. The undergraduate
writing course will be required of all students concurrent with Biology of the
Cell Laboratory (BoCL). This is a lab class already required of all Biology
majors. It is usually taken in the sophomore year. Graduate students who have
successfully completed the graduate level course will receive further training
in teaching. Each graduate student will be to work one-on-one with BoCL
students. This project is an extension of a successful two-year pilot study
pairing a technical writing course with Genetics Laboratory. Based on this
pilot, the project team expects that BoCL students will improve their technical
writing skills, their critical thinking ability, and their ease in reading and
interpreting the scientific literature. Further, the project team expects that
university STEM and English graduate students will attain communication and
teaching skills crucial to their future careers. If successful, this program may
serve as a model to increase all students' capabilities and progress in STEM. It
has the potential to generalize to other institutions to enhance STEM education
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As is true at many universities, Arkansas State
University undergraduate STEM students' formal writing training has consisted of
English Composition. This course crosses many genres but does not adequately
prepare STEM students for the technical writing they face in their courses and
research. Thus, these students commonly enter graduate school lacking the
science communication skills required for their future research careers.
Additionally, STEM faculty avoid including writing assignments in and out of the
classroom, often because of faculty time constraints and the instructors' lack
of formal training in writing instruction. This grant will develop two STEM
Technical Writing courses. One will be for undergraduate Biology majors (BoCL).
The other will be for STEM and English graduate students (STW). These writing
courses will be analyzed with respect to changes in the way educators work with
students, particularly in writing. They will also be analyzed to determine
whether writing and reading are concurrently improved through this cooperative
effort. Additionally, this project will assess critical thinking. This project
activity is based on the hypothesis that writing instruction can serve as a
vehicle for increasing student understanding and thinking. To evaluate the
success of this effort, students in both classes students will be assessed both
pre- and post-semester. The assessment will evaluate the students' confidence in
writing, knowledge of technical writing, and writing practices. The Critical
Thinking Assessment Test will be used to assess student critical thinking. There
are few existing, strong evaluation tools for STEM reading. Therefore, a test of
critical reading will be developed and validated by project staff. It will be
used to assess increases in critical reading in STW/BoCL students. This project
could serve as a model for other institutions to enhance STEM education and
communication nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.