* 1801951
* Arithmetic of Homogeneous Spaces under Linear Algebraic Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Parimala Raman, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2022
* USD 270,000.00

This award concerns work in Arithmetic Geometry, an important area of
mathematics at the intersection of algebraic geometry and number theory. Recent
progress on the topic of the study of homogeneous spaces has set forth new
questions and conjectures whose study is part of the proposal. There are related
problems accessible to graduate students and they will be engaged via topical
graduate courses, seminars and workshops. The PI and Co-PI plan to organize
workshops in related areas and disseminate the outcome of research to
mathematical community through lectures and seminars. Encouraging and engaging
women graduate students will be part of the PI's
mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and Co-PI plan to investigate
questions related to the study of homogeneous spaces under connected linear
algebraic groups with special reference to function fields of curves over local
and global fields. This study, with reference to classical groups, is closely
related to the study of the Brauer group of the field and the period-index
bounds as well as the study of quadratic forms and the u-invariant. The PI and
Co-PI plan to investigate the obstruction to the Hasse principle for homogeneous
spaces via the Brauer-Manin like obstructions as well as higher reciprocity
obstructions which have already been constructed. They will investigate the
Brauer-Manin obstruction for moduli spaces of twisted sheaves over curves over
totally imaginary number fields to get a hold on the u-invariant of function
fields of such curves whose finiteness is a big open question. They will also
study Serre/Totaro question on the existence of closed points of degree d on
principal homogeneous spaces under absolutely simple simply connected groups
admitting a zero cycle of degree d.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.