* 1801040
* MEETING: Phys-Fest 2, Holden Arboretum, Kansas State University, July 15-19, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Jesse Nippert, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 01/31/2019
* USD 49,000.00

This graduate student training workshop (Phys-Fest 2) is organized around group
collection of plant ecophysiology data. Similar to the first workshop (Konza
Prairie - 2016), a solid grounding in scientific research in ecophysiology will
be achieved on-hands training, collegiality and interactive data collection. A
key need exists for broad training in ecophysiology, as many graduate students
have limited exposure to diverse ecophysiology equipment, techniques, and data
interpretation. Phys-Fest 2 will fill this need through mentored research, close
interaction with faculty instructors, and evening activities designed to teach
effective science communication skills. Phys-Fest 2 will be hosted by the Holden
Arboretum, a species-diverse, mature deciduous forest near Cleveland, OH. Holden
Arboretum contains a suspended canopy walk and an emergent tower, both of which
provide an 'in-canopy experience' to workshop participants. Scheduling this
workshop at Holden provides a unique scientific opportunity, insight into non-
academic careers for students, and opportunities for public engagement with day
visitors at the arboretum. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This workshop (Phys-Fest 2)
will focus on plant ecophysiology and deviate from the typical conference format
of short presentations and posters. Here, participants will collaborate using
replicate pieces of equipment to measure leaf-level and whole-plant physiology
in four broad categories: plant hydraulics, gas exchange, fluorescence, and
thermal/hyperspectral imaging. Measurements will be taken at multiple canopy
heights on replicated trees in conjunction with a distributed instrument array
including NDVI, PRI, leaf wetness, canopy temperature, and microclimate sensors.
This strategy will facilitate in-canopy physiological measurements, such as
monitoring the response of forest tree canopies to diurnal variations. These
measurements will demonstrate fundamental ecophysiological canopy processes,
provide direct linkages to gradients in canopy microclimate, and will be useful
for scaling processes at sub-canopy dynamics in deciduous forests. The
organization of Phys-Fest 2 is specifically designed to promote networking and
meaningful interactions among participants. Two types of training in science
communication in the evenings of day 2 and 3 will be held. Holden Arboretum
staff will provide short workshops on engaging public audiences and in science
outreach and policy. Using the information learned during this training, student
participants will interact with Holden visitors during the day with the goal of
engaging a public audience, and disseminating ecophysiology principles in forest
canopy research. Finally, course accomplishments will be disseminated through
four media outlets at the Holden Arboretum: social media, print, video, and on-
site interpretative materials.