* 1801212
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Reproducing the State: Women Community Health Volunteers
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Vrinda Marwah, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,983.00

How do women community health volunteers succeed in delivering maternal and
child health services? Moreover, what does their success tell us about the
micro-level workings of state power and its capacities to shape the lives of
marginalized groups? This research studies the significance of street-level
bureaucracy, i.e. frontline workers, in negotiating state power, and the inter-
relationship of intimate labor with inequities of gender, class, and ethnicity.
Findings will show how community health workers negotiate, and often overcome,
social and symbolic boundaries in their communities. This has implications for
global health. Community health worker programs are critical for the effective
delivery of health services in low- and middle-income countries, especially for
marginalized populations. By emphasizing the experiences of these workers in
negotiating the dynamics of their communities, this research will generate
policy recommendations about how to better support community health workers in
their role. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will study a) the reasons why
women continue to work as community health volunteers; b) the meaning that this
work has for them, beyond their formal tasks; and c) how caste affects their
experiences with their community on the one hand, and with the health system on
the other. The project will conduct a relational ethnography of Dalit, formerly
untouchable, and dominant caste community health volunteers in the two districts
of Muktsar and Shaheed Bhagat Singh (SBS) Nagar in Punjab, India. The North
Indian state of Punjab presents a privileged case in terms of overall prosperity
and social mobility for Dalits relative to the rest of India. Within Punjab,
Muktsar and SBS Nagar are two districts that have similar percentages of Dalits
in the population, but differ on key indices of economic mobility, such as
literacy. The community health volunteers are pre-dominantly lower caste,
working class women. The project expects that while gender and caste act to
subsidize the state, the state also provides opportunities for these women to
mitigate their marginalization by according them status and access otherwise
unavailable to them. Comparing Muktsar and SBS Nagar will allow for a nuanced
understanding of caste not as static social identity, but rather as reproduced
dynamically in the context of the local political
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.