* 1801365
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Understanding and Discovering Illicit Online Business Through Automatic Analysis of Online Text Traces
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2018,09/30/2018
* Xiaojing Liao, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2018
* USD 134,661.00

Unlawful online business often leaves behind human-readable text traces for
interacting with its targets (e.g., defrauding victims, advertising illicit
products to intended customers) or coordinating among the criminals involved.
Such text content is valuable for detecting various types of cybercrimes and
understanding how they happen, the perpetrator's strategies, capabilities and
infrastructures and even the ecosystem of the underground business. Automatic
discovery and analysis of such text traces, however, are challenging, due to
their deceptive content that can easily blend into legitimate communication, and
the criminal's extensive use of secret languages to hide their communication,
even on public platforms (such as social media and forums). The project aims at
systematically studying how to automatically discover such text traces and
intelligently utilize them to fight against online crime. The research outcomes
will contribute to more effective and timely control of online criminal
activities, and the team's collaboration with industry also enables the team to
get feedback and facilitate the transformation of new techniques to practical
use. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on both criminals'
communication with their targets and the underground communications among
miscreants. To discover and understand illicit online activities, the research
looks for any semantic inconsistency between text content and its context (such
as advertisements for selling illegal drugs on an .edu domain) and for
inappropriate operations being triggered (such as a malware download).
Inconsistencies are captured by the Natural Language Processing (NLP) techniques
customized to various security settings. Further, based upon crime-related
content discovered, the project will study various machine learning techniques
that support automatic extraction and analysis of threat intelligence and
criminal activities. The techniques are evaluated using data collected from
various sources (public datasets, underground forums and others), and the
findings they make are validated through a process that involves manual
labeling, communication with affected parties, and collaborations with industry
partners. This work will help create in-depth knowledge about underground
ecosystems and lead to more effective control of illicit operations of these
online businesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.