* 1801529
* GP-IMPACT: The University of Hawaii Geology, Environmental/Earth, and Ocean (GEO)-Sciences Pathway
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2018,05/31/2023
* John Rand, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2023
* USD 562,454.00

The University of Hawaii GP-IMPACT project seeks to address the challenges of
securing the future geoscience workforce in the U.S. by investigating geoscience
student pathways, especially for diverse student participants. This project
introduces and develops a Geoscience, Earth/Environmental Science, Ocean Science
(GEO) Pathway at the University of Hawaii, that provides students with a clear
academic goal and support services as they navigate their way to their intended
Baccalaureate STEM major. The GEO STEM Pathway incorporates specifically
designed student learning outcomes at all critical junctures of the students'
progress. The pathway is designed for stop-out/move-in, so that students facing
external, unanticipated challenges can leave the program with an academic
credential and an established set of skills attractive to industry and rejoin
the path later, once they are ready. This pathway is more than a recommended
progression of required and elective coursework and academic curriculum. The
pathway employs selected high impact practices in education aimed at native
Hawaiian and other STEM students at critical junctures in the pathway to support
student retention and persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Primary goal of the
University of Hawaii (UH) GP-IMPACT project is to increase the number and
diversity of undergraduate students who enroll, persist, and complete a degree
program in the Geology, Environmental/Earth, and Ocean (GEO) Sciences at the
University of Hawaii. To accomplish this goal the UH will create a formal GEO
academic pathway and college collaboration between UH Manoa School of Ocean,
Earth and Science Technology (SOESTS) and the two largest community colleges in
the State. This partnership will: 1. Develop engaging and sustained academic and
career pathways in Geosciences from K-12 to higher education and between 2- and
4-year colleges. 2. Build capacity for career relevant geoscience programs in
Hawaii; 3. Broaden participation in GEO Sciences by leveraging high impact
practices for engagement of underrepresented groups, particularly native
Hawaiians. 4. Provide opportunities for UH GEO students, faculty, and staff to
engage in effective strategies that ensure learning, support teaching and
strengthen undergraduate research experiences. The Hawaii GEO Pathway consortium
envisions sustained inter-campus and UH system partnerships, a collaboratively
developed and rigorous geoscience curriculum, effective recruitment, retention,
and cohort experiences with strong support services and engaged learning
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.