* 1801534
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Threat-Aware Defense: Evaluating Threats for Continuous Improvement
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Trent Jaeger, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2024
* USD 800,000.00

Adversaries are outpacing developers in the race to find program
vulnerabilities. Where programmers have to find all potential software flaws in
their programs and determine whether they are exploitable across all deployments
to prevent vulnerabilities, adversaries need only find one software flaw that
enables them to achieve their goals in any one deployment. Current techniques to
rid programs of vulnerabilities cannot find all such flaws due to the complexity
of modern software and their deployments. Rather than proving the absence of
flaws, recent vulnerability detection research is exploring more powerful
techniques to automate exploit generation. However, such exploit generation
often lacks a systematic model of modern and emerging defenses, which may be
useful in assessing the utility of defenses. In addition, once an exploit is
generated, defenses to prevent that exploit must be added manually to the
program. As a result, vulnerability detection does not yet pay enough attention
to defenses to assess their effectiveness nor generate additional defenses when
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes a theory and techniques to
improve defenses continuously and iteratively to counter threats that cause
vulnerabilities. A method is developed that searches programs for security
policy violations and extends existing defenses to prevent detected violations
automatically. The main insight is to link the threats and defenses of each
program into one coherent model, called the Program Threat Graph (PTG), to
evaluate proactively whether threats enable adversaries to violate program
security policies given current defenses and automate the improvement of
defenses to prevent such violations. The project explores how to find security
violations given a program's internal and environmental defenses. Security
violations are used to generate both targeted defenses and/or systematic
defenses to block this exploit efficiently and block potentially unknown
exploits that may leverage other flaws under given performance constraints. The
goal of this research is to continuously improve defenses against
vulnerabilities. The approach discovers security violations given a
specification for both current and upcoming defenses, tightening them
automatically and recovering from attempted attacks without disrupting program
functionality. All tools, benchmarks, and analyses developed during this project
are released as open-source. For outreach, the focus is on capture-the-flag
competitions and summer software security courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.