* 1801182
* Water Advanced Technological Education Resource for Individuals (WATER-I)
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Roger Ebbage, Lane Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 537,310.00

The need for a skilled workforce in water conservation technology is vital to
regional and national economies and to a growing population facing rising water
rates in the future. Industry partnerships will help advance a new type of
shared technical education in water conservation. In this new model, colleges
and industry will share the responsibility of educating America's technician
workforce. Currently, few complete Water Conservation Technician programs exist
in the United States. Lane Community College's (LCC) Water Advanced
Technological Education Resource for Individuals (WATER-I) Program aims to
address this need for a Water Conservation Technician workforce. The program
will be designed to increase access to Water Conservation Technician education
for more diverse community-college populations. The WATER-I model will use a
blended-learning delivery method to expand Water Conservation Technician
education to students across the western US, with the potential to expand across
the nation. Students will take LCC's coursework online and complete their course
fieldwork with an LCC-trained utility mentor at their local utility. Regional
utilities and utility professional associations have agreed to provide employee-
mentors for this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;WATER-I leverages an on-line
content delivery approach to reach a broader range of students than currently
served by LCC's Water Conservation Technician program. WATER-I expands online
curriculum to students in rural areas and to other nontraditional students. The
program is motivated by 1) the high demand for a Water Conservation Technician
workforce by industry and consumers; 2) the need for an education method to
reach broader student populations, and 3) LCC's expertise in both Water
Conservation Technician programs and in delivering quality programs outside
traditional classroom settings. To widen WATER-I's geographic focus, WATER-I
staff will transfer the didactic elements into an online environment and develop
fieldwork experiences through regional water utilities; these fieldwork
experiences are similar to internships or cooperative education. With this model
of higher education/ industry partnership, students can receive Water
Conservation Technicians training, regardless of geography or other limitations
to participating in a solely face-to-face program. Multiple postsecondary
institutions, water utilities, and water professional associations have
partnered with LCC to develop WATER-I. The project has the potential to develop
a mechanism for students across the country to access a high-quality water
conservation program and career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.