* 1801147
* Enhancing Network and Cybersecurity Technician Careers in Collaboration with Industry
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Cynthia Wagner, McLennan Community College
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 05/31/2022
* USD 222,274.00

The region surrounding Waco, Texas, has a growing demand for networking and
cybersecurity technicians. In collaboration with industry partners, this project
at McLennan Community College aims to address this need by integrating
cybersecurity into the current Computer Information Systems (CIS) program. The
CIS program includes curriculum leading to certificates and associate degrees.
The project will focus on (a) teaching technical and employability skills at the
college and at regional high schools through dual credit programs and (b)
transforming curriculum and pedagogy to help all students progress through
educational pathways beginning in the high school and continuing through
McLennan Community College. These pathways will enable the revised CIS
curriculum to provide multiple entry and exit points to develop the competencies
and knowledge needed by industry. This alignment with industry needs can help
meet regional needs for a skilled workforce, enhancing future growth in the
community and providing higher paying careers for students. The student
population at McLennan Community College includes a substantial percentage of
low income and Hispanic students, many of whom have limited expectations of a
technology career. Consequently, this program has the potential to broaden
participation of diverse people in advanced technical
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the college to offer an
updated CIS program that can meet the needs of students for cybersecurity
training or certifications. To achieve these results, the project will: (a)
develop coursework that scaffolds learning and supports student advancement; (b)
promote networking and cybersecurity opportunities by using culturally
contextualized student/parent awareness programs and professional development
for high school and college faculty and advisors; and (c) work with industry to
promote career opportunities in networking and cybersecurity. Students in this
program will be able to earn certifications including A+, Security+, Network +,
Cisco CCENT, or CCNA certifications in one or more areas. These certifications
will increase students? employability and make them more qualified as employees.
The project plan builds on the work of three existing ATE Cybersecurity Centers
(CSSIA, CyberWatch and CyberWatch West) and will add to that body of knowledge.
The project?s industry partners have committed to defining the CIS/cybersecurity
knowledge, skills and abilities needed to meet their workforce needs, which in
turn will inform development of the revised CIS curriculum. The industry
partners will also help students prepare for future careers by offering
internships and job shadowing opportunities. As one of the 12 college systems in
Texas selected in the first cohort of the Texas Pathways Project (Texas Higher
Education Coordinating Board's 60x30TX initiative), the project will build on
and coordinate with those state-wide efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.