* 1801710
* RET Site: Exploring Career Opportunities through Water-Themed Engineering Research  (ECO-WaTER)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Claudia Bode, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amelia Greer
* 08/31/2022
* USD 594,001.00

This Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) Site at the University of Kansas
(KU) will immerse high school science and math teachers in water-themed
engineering research. The aim of this program is to deliver activities that
create an engaging context for teachers to learn engineering design through
projects that span environmental, mechanical, and chemical engineering fields.
The research addresses grand challenges, such as removing salt from seawater or
the cleanup of wastewater generated from oil and gas production, topics with
both local and global significance and broad appeal to participants and their
high-school age students. This will help guide the creation of new curricula
that integrates engineering into science and math courses in alignment with the
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS), filling a nationally important gap in
secondary education. In addition, a key goal will be to address calls from
policy and business leaders seeking to better prepare students for 21st century
careers. This goal will be achieved by making career opportunities more visible
to participants and their students, leveraging the industrial experience of the
faculty and nine company partners. The plan for disseminating new educational
resources involves having each participant create two toolkits for their lessons
to share with other teachers, thus attracting more educators to learn about this
RET project and adopt its curricula. Teachers will be recruited from rural and
urban school districts in Kansas that serve high proportions of minorities and
economically disadvantaged students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With KU's rich
history of mentoring high school teachers and partnering with chemical
companies, the project team is positioned to achieve program objectives, which
are to: (1) engage high school teachers in discovery and technology-based
engineering research; (2) integrate engineering into science and math curricula;
(3) prepare and inspire high school students for careers in science and
engineering; (4) nurture long-term linkages between KU, business leaders and the
educational community; (5) provide professional development to educators and
graduate students; and (6) prepare high school teachers to serve as education
leaders and mentors for future teachers. Research projects will address issues
related to clean water, including new methods for detecting water quality and
new advanced materials for separating salt from seawater and for treating oily
wastewater. Other projects will explore ways to reduce the strain on water
resources caused by energy production, including designing more efficient
alternatives to existing processes like cooling units at power plants. An
evaluator will assess training activities and the education benefits. A pre-
summer workshop will prepare faculty and graduate students to serve as effective
mentors for the participants. Participants will gain experience with basic
engineering concepts, research experiences and safe lab practices. Professional
growth sessions will address crosscutting concepts, assessment methods, problem-
based learning, and argumentation. Other sessions will feature industry
careers/pathways and tours of campus and industrial facilities. Resources will
be shared with other teachers and teachers-in-training at workshops, conferences
and through YouTube videos. Faculty and graduate student mentors will visit
participants classrooms to aid lesson implementation. High school students will
learn about careers as part of the curricula and through virtual career
fairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.