* 1801978
* Characterizing Cold Brown Dwarf Atmospheres and Developing Precision Radial Velocity Technologies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Emily Martin, Martin                  Emily          C
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Emily Martin is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the University of
California, Santa Cruz. Using high resolution near-infrared spectra, Martin will
measure the abundances of molecules in the atmospheres of brown dwarfs ---
objects that are intermediate between low-mass stars and giant planets. She will
also design a new precision radial velocity spectrograph that will be useful in
the search for Earth-like planets around nearby stars. Alongside this research,
Martin will conduct a summer workshop to help incoming freshmen succeed in
physics classes and encourage them to pursue physics degrees.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed scientific program takes a two-pronged approach to
advance the understanding of brown dwarf atmospheres. First, Martin will conduct
spectroscopic observations of brown dwarf atmospheres and connect these
observations to advanced imaging observations and atmospheric models. Second,
she will lead the development of a conceptual design for a new, high-resolution
near-infrared spectrograph for Lick Observatory. The new spectrograph will have
a resolving power of nearly 100,000 at H and K bands (1.5-2.4 microns) and will
be capable of working with any telescope with an adaptive optics system. For the
education component of her work, Martin will develop a summer workshop for
incoming students, in which she will use inquiry-based activities to engage the
students, introduce them to local physicists working in a variety of careers,
and connect them to peer mentors within the physics
department.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.