* 1801117
* Advanced Manufacturing and Automation Flexible Delivery
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Pat Jarvis, Truckee Meadows Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2022
* USD 187,626.00

There is tremendous growth in advanced manufacturing in western Nevada, with
production technician careers expected to grow in the region by 15% annually for
the next five years. With large manufacturers such as Tesla and Panasonic
Corporation moving into the Reno area, the need for manufacturing technicians
has become a dominant issue for ensuring the success of this industry and for
the economic development goals of the region. Truckee Meadows Community College
(TMCC) has also identified access to online content as a major barrier for
students whose work schedules or home location interfere with their
participation in traditional, on-campus courses. are working or who live far
from campus. To generate the workforce necessary for the continued prosperity of
the region, TMCC will create easy to use, flexible courses that it hopes will
appeal to incumbent workers, lower skilled workers, and workers with non-
traditional schedules. This approach may enable students who are unable to
attend traditional classes to enroll in the courses necessary to complete
programs. In turn, these programs have the potential to provide these students
with employability skills, access to a stackable degree program leading toward
the completion of an Associate of Applied Science with Production Technician
emphasis, and upward mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are
to: 1) provide an educated workforce using industry-validated curriculum to meet
regional needs; 2) provide students easier access to course material online; and
3) use a scheduling application to reserve lab stations for student use. To
achieve these goals, TMCC proposes to: 1) conduct DACUM analyses with industry
employees; 2) provide students easier access to course content online using
uniform course design and Quality Matters standards; and 3) research and install
a lab scheduling application that will allow distant learners to reserve lab
stations before commuting to campus. Additionally, TMCC students will have the
opportunity to participate in the Tesla and Panasonic Registered Apprenticeship
Programs. The project results will be disseminated at regional and national
conferences. In addition, the flexible scheduling model is expected to be
adaptable to other industries nationally supporting both traditional students
and those incumbent workers seeking upskilling or re-
skilling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.