* 1801492
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Theory and Practice of Cryptosystems Secure Against Subversion
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Chase Wu, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 09/30/2022
* USD 299,969.00

The discipline of cryptography provides the basic digital tools used across the
globe to ensure data privacy and authenticity. With the broad deployment of
these tools--often invisibly embedded in commercial software or hardware--an
unconventional but devastating type of cyberattacks have emerged. These attacks
involve deploying a cleverly subverted version of a cryptographic tool that
appears to function normally, but in fact deliberately reduces security in a
covert way that is known only to the subverting party. Such an attack can be
carried out by the author of a software package, the manufacturer of a hardware
device, or a third party who has contrived to interfere with the deployed
product. Recent high-profile incidents of this kind have highlighted the threat
associated with these attacks. This project is a comprehensive study of security
in this setting, including development of formal models that permit rigorous
reasoning about security, design and analysis of new cryptographic tools that
resist subversion, and explicit recommendations for hardening the existing
cryptographic tools in widespread use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
organized into three main threads. The first focuses on establishing
cryptographic security models that expand on classical cryptographic models to
adequately reflect malicious subversion attacks: in general, these models call
for the design of cryptographic tools to be explicitly coupled with
specification of black-box testing procedures so that the combination can
guarantee security despite subversion attacks. The second effort pursues
development of fundamental cryptographic primitives that achieve security in
these new models and application of these primitives as building blocks to
construct larger systems and protocols that retain security despite subversion.
Finally, to transition these theoretical tools to practice, the project
undertakes a practical effort to re-architect existing infrastructural tools,
such as the IPSec, SSH and TLS protocols, to harden them against
subversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.