* 1801745
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Local Structures and Politics of a Developing Short-Term Rental Market
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Edward Walker, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2019
* USD 11,994.00

In 2008, on the heels of the financial crisis, a set of crowd-sourcing platforms
(Airbnb, Uber, Lyft, etc.) emerged forming what is now estimated to be a multi-
billion dollar industry, often described as the sharing economy. Because
companies in the sharing economy span a range of services, and because their
platforms have become hugely popular, local actors and organizations are now in
a political struggle over the implications for other markets and regulatory
policy. Such contentious politics have brought into question the viability of
sharing economy platforms as city policymakers consider revising local
regulations to accommodate the platforms or in some cases, banning them wholly.
Most research on the development of new markets focuses either on the social
structures that facilitate a market's emergence or on the politics involved to
adapt it to existing norms and rules. This project synthesizes the two different
perspectives to examine how one of the largest markets in the sharing economy,
the short-term rental or ?home-sharing? sector, develops in the context of other
local structures and politics. Findings from this research will show new
configurations of power emerging from local sharing economy markets. These
findings will also contribute to public conversation and policy discussions on
the sharing economy, market regulation, lobbying and municipal government
transparency.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research combines the richness of
qualitative investigation with the scope of computational and quantitative
methods. Specifically, it analyzes quantitative data from short-term rental
websites, the Census, nonprofit organizations, and hotels for 300 U.S. cities
and metropolitan areas. It will also use new and original data collected by the
researchers, including a dataset on municipal budgets and short-term rental
ordinances as well as interview, historical, and participant observation data
from a case study of short-term rentals in Los Angeles. In doing so, it extends
scholarly understandings of markets to account for the ways in which the local
and organizational contexts in which markets emerge also shape the politics over
their regulation. Additionally, it considers the distinct resource and political
constituency of sharing economy markets--the crowd--in these
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.