* 1801140
* Enhancing the Instrumentation and Control Technician Program: Instrumentation Acquisition
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Alan Zube, Florida State College at Jacksonville
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 09/30/2022
* USD 499,655.00

Instrumentation and controls technicians are important in the nation's advanced
manufacturing industry. These technicians troubleshoot and repair components of
production lines that keep manufacturing processes running smoothly. Currently,
industries in Northeast Florida face a shortage of skilled instrumentation and
controls technicians. This problem is exacerbated by the predicted turnover of
approximately one third of the manufacturing workforce over the next five years
because of retirements. Advanced manufacturing industries regularly redesign and
streamline production lines, including increasing the use of automated
processes. As a result, there is an ongoing expansion of the skills that
instrumentation and control technicians need to do their jobs. To address this
need, Florida State College at Jacksonville (Florida) will develop a new
Instrumentation and Controls concentration for its existing Associate of Science
degree in Engineering Technology. The project team will work closely with
industry partners to: modify the curriculum; obtain industry-standard equipment
for laboratory exercises; and provide problem-based, hands-on learning
experiences for students. The project will examine and contribute to what is
known about hands-on instrumentation training, support effective strategies for
recruiting underrepresented students to the instrumentation and controls field,
and help fill the critical need for these technicians in Northeast
Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and modify five courses
to create a concentration in Instrumentation and Controls for the existing
associate degree program. The courses will include hands-on simulation
laboratory activities that engage students in the types of processes they will
encounter on the job. The activities will give students access to new
technologies, and increased practice to master essential industrial
instrumentation skills. Authentication assessments and proper procedures for
handling sensors and instrumentation will be central components of the
curricular modifications. Laboratory tasks will emphasize the development of
skills required to manage, operate, calibrate, and troubleshoot equipment. These
tasks will also focus on enhancing knowledge associated with experimental,
quality, and safety procedures. The project will foster technician skills
training using a developmental curriculum that includes embedded and stacked
credentials. Students' self-efficacy, sense of belonging, and career awareness
related to advanced manufacturing will be measured. The result will be used to
document the impact of the courses and lab activities on student learning and
preparation for the workforce. Outreach activities will be conducted with area
high schools to promote awareness of and career interest in instrumentation and
controls technology. The project will emphasize involvement of students from
underrepresented and underserved populations, to encourage diversity of the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.