* 1801022
* Digitization PEN:  Connecting Rust Belt dynamics to the Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis Project utilizing the Carnegie Museum herbarium
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jacob Heberling, Carnegie Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 173,614.00

Urbanization represents an extreme form of ecosystem transformation, leading to
changes that redefine our conception of nature. However, scientific
understanding of our increasingly urban world is limited by the availability of
historical data documenting these ecological changes. This project partners the
Carnegie Museum of Natural History (CM) with the Mid-Atlantic Megalopolis (MAM)
Project, a Thematic Collections Network (TCN) involving 11 institutions in the
urban corridor from New York City to Washington, D.C., to digitize herbarium
specimens from the Mid-Atlantic states. Western Pennsylvania is widely
recognized as an urbanized area that was transformed from an industrial
powerhouse (and one of the most polluted metropolitan areas in the 19th and 20th
centuries) to an emerging center for sustainability and technological
innovation. This partnership will fill a "Rust Belt" data gap by including urban
areas in Pennsylvania that have undergone remarkable environmental and
ecological change over the past two centuries. CM specimens will enhance the MAM
Project by adding nearly 190,000 herbarium specimens, increasing the total
number of MAM specimens by more than 25%. In addition to making these valuable
specimens more accessible through public databases, targeted activities will
directly connect digitized data to scientists and the public, contributing to
ongoing programs in invasive species management, education of nature in the
city, and museum exhibition. Taken together, these activities will improve
scientific and public understanding of urban environments, highlighting
sustainability and the future of this increasingly common biome in the current
era of global change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project connects an
unrepresented, but important, Mid-Atlantic urban region to the MAM Project.
Digitization of each CM specimen will result in a high-resolution image and
georeferenced point, enabling biogeographic, floristic, and phenotypic analyses
through space and time. Data capture, efficient workflow development, and data
dissemination will follow best practices, utilizing the existing project
infrastructure of the MAM project and iDigBio. Data on non-native species will
be made available to PA iMapInvasives program to track the introduction and
spread of harmful invasive plants in the region. Further, this project will
integrate specimen images into museum exhibits, with the construction of a new
exhibit highlighting specimen-based research, the importance of digitization,
and the ecological and economic value of plants in cities. In collaboration with
museum educators, specimen images will be used in the development of an online
toolkit of free science activities for local school teachers that explore nature
in urban settings. Weekly blogs will feature specimens of local interest,
focusing on the urban plants of Pittsburgh. Collaborating with MAM partners,
workshops will be held for local botanical clubs and citizen scientists in the
Pittsburgh region to the assist in digitization, specifically joining the
efforts of established projects focused on shifts in flowering times across the
Eastern US and the development of a virtual flora of the Mid-Atlantic.
Collectively, the project will provide research-ready data to enable a better
understanding of human-mediated changes at multiple biological, geographic, and
temporal scales, as well as predictions for the future ecology of urban areas.
All data resulting from this award will be available through the national
resource (iDigBio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.