* 1801019
* Optics, Photonics, and Lasers Technical Education Curriculum Development
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Brian Monacelli, Irvine Valley College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 500,000.00

Photonics, precision optics, and lasers are high-tech devices that interact with
light. Almost all modern consumer electronics contain some photonics technology.
Photonics are also important in new technologies such as virtual reality and
augmented reality that are used in education, space, and military applications.
Across the United States, the yearly number of graduates from community colleges
in the photonics field is far lower than the demand for new photonics
technicians. To help meet this demand, Irvine Valley College will team up with
six other colleges and universities in the western region of the United States
to create and promote more pathways for students to successfully pursue
technician careers in the photonics industry. The team will work with photonics
industries to develop new course materials that will be openly available. New
digital badges that represent desired skills or abilities in photonics will also
be created so that technicians with these skills can by more easily identified
by prospective employers. This project will assist in growing and strengthening
the nation's photonics technician workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to prepare highly-trained technicians for the photonics
workforce through collaboration among Career and Technical Education (CTE)
faculty and industry professionals throughout the western region of the United
States. The main objectives are to: 1) establish a curriculum development
framework for open-license, online educational resources to support the training
of new or incumbent photonics technicians and faculty members; 2) develop and
pilot the open educational resources, including courses, course materials,
modules, textbooks, and streaming videos; and 3) create, pilot, and facilitate
the use of industry-standard digital badges for photonics technicians; and 4)
facilitate a western regional network of photonics faculty and industry. The
developed curriculum will be openly accessible through a Creative Commons
license, and the digital badges will be created through Concentric Sky's Badgr
platform. The approach will be shared across states via the partner colleges:
Oregon Institute of Technology in Portland, OR; Lake Washington Institute of
Technology in Kirkland, WA; Spokane Community College in Spokane, WA; Gallatin
College in Bozeman, MT; Idaho State University in Pocatello, ID; and Pima
Community College in Tucson, AZ. Project results and best practices will also be
disseminated throughout the nationwide NSF ATE network and other national
venues, to support national development of photonics degrees and certifications
for technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.