* 1801244
* RAPID:  Hurricane Irma: How do ecosystem perturbations interact to influence long-term resilience mechanisms?
* BIO,DEB
* 12/15/2017,11/30/2019
* Evelyn Gaiser, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2019
* USD 178,159.00

High-energy storms like Hurricane Irma, which recently struck the Florida coast,
can damage ecosystems by rapidly delivering excessive rain, wind, and surges of
water and materials. Such disturbance effects can have lasting consequences that
can be difficult to anticipate because they interact with other short- and long-
term changes occurring in nature, including prior events and chronic alterations
driven by land- and water-use changes. Whether or not an ecosystem recovers
rapidly, slowly or not at all from an extreme event may depend on exposure,
resistance, and resilience to prior disturbances and chronic changes. This
research will study the impacts of Hurricane Irma on carbon and nutrient cycles
and animal populations, and how the impacts of such a severe disturbance are
influenced by the legacies of previous storm events and long-term saltwater
encroachment that predated the storm. New knowledge gained from this work on
recovery trajectories will improve understanding of the longer-term impacts of
storms like Irma on ecosystem services provided by coastal ecosystems; including
storm buffering, carbon dioxide removal, biodiversity conservation and
freshwater provisioning. The investigators will also use the information gained
from this work to create K-12 classroom activities and media outreach programs
that will enhance public understanding of the value of coastal environments, and
the impacts of hurricanes.

This study will use the context of the Florida Coastal Everglades Long Term
Ecological Research (FCE LTER) program to measure the impacts of storm surge,
winds and rains from Hurricane Irma that passed over the Everglades on Sept 10,
2017. A field campaign will be conducted to measure the storm's impact on the
distribution of nutrients, vegetation, soils and aquatic animals on the
landscape. By examining impacts on areas that have had different histories of
exposure to prior storms and chronic encroachment of saltwater that have been
well-documented by the FCE LTER program, researchers will be able to determine
how prior conditions influence the magnitude and duration of the storm's
effects. By quantifying these impacts in the context of ongoing research, this
study will also allow scientists to understand how the storm influenced the
ability of the ecosystem to withstand future changes. A model that predicts how
well coastal forests protect inland areas from storm surges will also be
produced. Findings will be compared to other locations with long-term research
programs impacted by tropical storms in 2017 and the results distributed through
publications, multiple media outlets, and K-12 classroom activities.