* 1801921
* Hidden in plain sight: Uncovering low-surface-brightness galaxies and their host dark matter halos
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Johnny Greco, Greco                   Johnny         P
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 06/30/2021
* USD 288,500.00

Johnny Greco is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellowship to conduct a program of research and education at the Ohio State
University. Greco will perform a systematic search for faint, diffuse galaxies
known as low-surface-brightness galaxies (LSBGs). Using a software that he
created and optimized for the detection of LSBGs, he will aim to increase the
number of LSBGs in new and existing optical observational surveys. Greco will
produce a public catalog of many thousands of previously unknown LSBGs spanning
a wide range in properties, and he will perform detailed observations of some of
these LSBGs. Results from this study will allow astronomers to understand how
LSBGs form and how they fit within the cosmological context. Alongside this
research, Greco will create educational projects designed to encourage high
school girls to pursue careers in science and computer programming.

By building an unbiased sample of LSBGs, the proposed research will elucidate
formation mechanisms of giant LSBGs, which will provide important constraints on
theories of galaxy formation and evolution. Furthermore, as systems
predominantly composed of dark matter, LSBGs provide the most stringent tests of
our current cosmological model. By combining rotation curves, globular cluster
studies, and possibly a stacked weak-lensing analysis, the proposed research
will constrain the dark matter distribution in these galaxies on both small and
large scales. Working with an outreach program at his host institution, Greco
will use his expertise in astronomical image processing and coding to design
software and student projects to stimulate the interest of high school girls in
science, and he will serve as a mentor to high school students interested in
astronomy research.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.