* 1801224
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Unraveling the Deep History of Avian Neurological Complexity: Implications for the Origins of Flight and Organization of the Modern Avian Brain
* BIO,DEB
* 06/30/2017,03/31/2021
* Amy Balanoff, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 03/31/2021
* USD 43,864.00

Despite advances in knowledge of brain function, the relationship between brain
evolution and ecological diversity remains poorly known. A prominent example is
that of birds. Taking to the air enabled the dinosaurian ancestors of birds to
exploit a range of ecological niches that now underlie the remarkable modern
diversity of the group (approximately 10,000 living species). A significant part
of this evolutionary success may have stemmed from the development of a
relatively large brain, which has been considered necessary for coordinating the
various, nuanced components of powered flight. This study complements the NSF
BRAIN initiative by using a cross-disciplinary approach to understand the
complex neurological evolution of birds and their dinosaurian relatives. To that
end, an array of new techniques and new applications of existing technologies
are employed to document the major changes in the brain associated with the
origin of powered flight. This study also will establish a model of brain
expansion complementing that already available for mammals. The outcome will be
an unprecedented database of avian brain anatomy that includes not only imagery
of morphological systems but also their relation to data generated through brain
function.

The relationship between neuroanatomical, cognitive and behavioral evolution
remains poorly understood, especially in deep time and across the vertebrate
tree of life. This study addresses this relationship using a cross-disciplinary
investigation of the evolutionary link between the large brain of living birds
and the morphological changes that mark the transition from cursorial (running)
dinosaur to flying bird. Initial steps use innovative imaging methods and novel
staining techniques to generate the first data on what areas of the brain birds
use while flying, and how this activity differs from that of other behaviors.
These data will serve as a framework for a broad analysis of encephalization
(increasing head size) within living birds and along the lineage where avian
flight originated. Shared landmarks will be used to subdivide the endocranial
cavity into functionally relevant partitions that allow testing for volumetric
size changes between individual neural structures, including those most active
during flight. This study also will use geometric morphometrics (anatomical
comparisons) to assess covariation between neuroanatomical partitions and thus
the presence of functionally and/or evolutionarily integrated regions of the
brain. In short, the proposed study will generate data on how birds use their
brain and apply those data to better understand the ancient relationship between
brain evolution and the origin of the highly derived avian body plan.