* 1801475
* RAPID: Resilience of Caribbean octocorals following Hurricanes Irma and Maria
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Howard Lasker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2019
* USD 126,722.00

Disturbance and subsequent recovery have been key factors in the dynamics of
coral reef populations, but in the Caribbean, there has been a steady decline in
the abundance of hard corals accompanied by increased abundance of algae. This
characterization overlooks the observation that at some sites for which there
are quantitative data, the abundances of octocorals (sea fans and sea plumes)
have increased. Closer inspection of those data reveals that octocorals have
also declined at times, but unlike hard corals, they recovered and are now more
abundant in at least some locations than 30 years ago. The change in abundances
of these organisms would appear to due to the greater resilience of octocorals.
The damage inflicted by Hurricanes Irma and Maria on the south shore of St.
John, U.S. Virgin Is. provides a window into these processes. Abundances of hard
corals on these reefs have been monitored for the past 30 years and the
octocorals have been followed for the past 4 years. Colonization of the newly
opened space on the reef will be studied to determine if further shifts in
abundances can be expected and to understand the basis for the greater
resilience of octocoral populations. Characterizing the resilience of octocorals
relative to hard corals will have implications for the fate of Caribbean reefs
in a world subject of increasing levels of stress. This will be of importance to
policy makers and managers, because hard corals and octocorals provide
substantially different ecosystem services. In addition to its impact on our
fundamental understanding of reef processes, the grant will support the training
of graduate students.

Coral reefs have been recognized to be disturbance driven systems for over 50
years and disturbance has been considered to be important in maintaining
diversity of reef communities. However, the past 30 years has been characterized
by declines in the abundances of scleractinians, often associated with acute
events such as hurricanes and bleaching events. A knowledge of the effects of
disturbance and subsequent recovery that occurs during these events is critical
to understanding the changes in reef structure that have occurred in the last 30
years. At sites for which there are data, changes in the relative abundance of
scleractinians and octocorals appear to coincide with disturbance followed by
octocoral recovery and a lack of scleractinian recovery. This change must
reflect changes in larval supply, settlement, and/or survival, and those
differences should be greatest following disturbance. The effects of Hurricanes
Irma and Maria on the south shore of St. John provide the opportunity to
characterize recruitment following disturbance and identify the processes that
may limit successful recruitment on contemporary reefs. Data are already
available on the abundance of octocoral and scleractinian species over the past
4 years, and annual censuses have provided data on octocoral recruitment and
survival and species level characterizations of octocoral abundances.
Recruitment and survival are also being related to spatial complexity of the
habitat at the scale of mm and cm and the effects on hurricane driven changes in
that spatial complexity will also be assessed. The frequency and intensity of
disturbances will at the least continue at historical or greater levels. The
comparison of data from before and now after disturbance will provide a powerful
assessment of the resilience of octocorals and scleractinians and the role of
recruitment and recruit survival in their relative resilience. Thus the effects
of Hurricanes Irma and Maria provide a window on the nature of future reefs.