* 1801164
* Creating Learning Opportunities for Undergraduates in Developing Technologies: Expansion Project
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Dane Schupbach, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2022
* USD 568,374.00

The use of cloud technology and virtualization is a growing trend both
nationally and locally. Employers are increasingly moving their information
technology data to the cloud. This project will develop educational resources in
Cloud Computing Technology to address a critical industry need. Due to the
emerging and evolving nature of cloud technology, institutions of higher
education have not yet widely created curricula and supporting labs to
effectively educate technicians who can manage, troubleshoot, and support cloud
infrastructure. The project aims to advance knowledge in cloud technologies,
including virtualization, storage, network/cybersecurity, programming, and
automation. It plans to implement a new cloud infrastructure that will support
secure remote access to a live cloud environment. This access will enable
interested faculty from other institutions to learn how to create and use the
environment. The project will also strive to engage K-12 students in STEM
learning through outreach activities. Through dissemination, these cloud
curricular resources will have the potential to expand educational and career
pathways, prepare students for high-skill/high-demand occupations in information
technology, and promote the development of STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to advance
the national knowledge base of virtualization and cloud technology curriculum
and hands-on lab activities to meet industry needs. A secondary goal is to
strengthen the STEM pipeline in information technology through K-12 outreach and
the development of transfer pathways. This project will create a robust Cloud
Computing Environment that features a fully functional OpenStack Cloud. Within
that environment and an existing virtualized cloud lab environment, students
will be able to create cloud instances for programming language environments,
learn how to migrate cloud instances from this private cloud to a public cloud
provider, develop and deploy applications to the cloud, and be introduced to
software development and operations concepts and skills. In addition, students
will learn to use scripting languages to maintain and secure software-defined
datacenters and evaluate operating system and data storage models to design
efficient applications. The project will build on prior work with an
Infrastructure as a Service cloud development model to add curriculum related to
Platform as a Service and Software as a Service models. Broad dissemination of
the curriculum, labs, and other materials developed by the project, including a
User's Guide to facilitate adaptation, have the potential to improve technical
education at postsecondary institutions on a national
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.