* 1801188
* Filling Skill Gaps through the Geo-Spatial Engineering and Technologies Program
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Humberto Gallegos, East Los Angeles College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2022
* USD 587,208.00

Surveying, also called geomatics, has been traditionally defined as the science,
art, and technology of determining the relative positions of points above, on,
or beneath the Earth's surface. Recent technological advances in such areas as
Geographical Information Systems (GIS) and Global Positioning Systems (GPS) have
provided surveyors with new tools for doing this work. In addition,
environmental measuring and monitoring is increasingly critical as the
population grows, land values appreciate, natural resources decrease, and
stresses degrade the quality of our land, water, and air. Surveying and mapping
technicians, or geospatial engineering technicians, are a critical part of the
geomatics workforce that will provide these critical measurements. This project
focuses on developing robust career pathways and academic programs to educate
land surveying and/or geospatial engineering
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will: 1) develop an academic
transfer pathway program to provide a career and technical education (CTE) that
enables secondary school and community college students to properly use advanced
forms of field equipment and software for land surveying and/or geospatial
engineering applications; and 2) assist land surveying and/or geospatial
engineering technicians to successfully pass the State of California
examinations. High school boot camps and a "land surveying-CAD bash" event at
four primarily Hispanic secondary schools will recruit students into the
program. In addition, a career opportunity internship pipeline will be
formalized with the City of Los Angeles, Bureau of Engineering, Surveying
Division's volunteer program. This career opportunity internship pipeline is
expected to increase the numbers of female and Hispanic surveying and/or
geospatial engineering technicians entering the work
force.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.