* 1801039
* Recruitment and Retention of Women in Engineering and Engineering Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Mobin Rastgar Agah, Norwalk Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 224,999.00

Because men make up more than two-thirds of the manufacturing workforce in the
United States, women are an untapped resource of talent to help US manufacturers
become more globally competitive. Working collaboratively with industry partners
to address the regional demand for gender-diversity in engineering and
engineering technology (E&amp;ET) occupations, this project at Norwalk Community
College in Connecticut aims to to attract more females to the college E&amp;ET
education programs. Building on research findings, the project will focus on the
following student-centered objectives: (1) designing and implementing strategies
for recruiting and retaining female students in E&amp;ET programs; (2) retaining
female students by implementing high-impact practices within courses and through
student support programs; and (3) designing and delivering a contextualized
Intermediate algebra course that includes research based methods for increasing
success rates of female students. Because the college has recently been
designated a Hispanic Serving Institution, the project will strive to increase
in the number of Hispanic female students, further supporting the
diversification of the science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
workforce. A comprehensive evaluation will be completed to help determine which
strategies work best and for whom. This project may provide a model that other
community colleges and employers can use to increase workforce
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new recruitment and retention strategies
will build upon earlier ATE projects that have been conducted at peer
institutions and use resources that have been developed to address the gender
gap in E&amp;ET programs. Panel discussions with local business and industry
partners will aim to raise awareness of the program on campus and encourage
faculty to enhance their course curricula. Using online training and campus
workshops, faculty will learn about tools and techniques for supporting diverse
learners and how to apply these techniques to their courses. The project will
design and pilot a contextualized Intermediate Algebra course, because most of
the college E&amp;ET students start at that level, and it is a required course
for undecided students. Female students enrolled in that course will be
encouraged to pursue a degree in E&amp;ET. The course will include female
friendly examples, group work in class, and team projects where women can
develop a sense of community and ownership over their learning. This course will
be a model for other faculty members who aim to incorporate context- and female-
supportive practices in their curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.