* 1801048
* Flight Deck Virtual Maintenance Trainer Project
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Barry Franco, Trident Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 08/31/2022
* USD 556,634.00

With more than two million airline passengers daily, it is critical that the
nation has skilled technicians to build and maintain safe, reliable aircraft. To
meet the acute need in the aeronautical industry for well-trained technicians,
Trident Technical College will enhance its hands-on training and create course
materials that other institutions can adopt. In this project, at least nine new
avionics labs and 29 modified aeronautical labs will be developed to improve
courses that lead to certificates and associate degrees. The project will work
closely with industry partners while developing the curriculum, to ensure the
relevance of this training. As a result, the quality of the courses will
increase, with the potential to increase employment opportunities for students
completing the program. The project aims to help students master the technician
skill sets needed in the aeronautical industry, and to prepare students to
pursue the necessary Federal Aviation Administration certification for
employment. Outreach activities will serve a broad and diverse population of
students, with the goal of promoting their interest in aeronautics and
technician careers. This project will strengthen the training of technicians in
a field critical to national aviation safety, as well as engage students in
aeronautical and STEM fields of study to support a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to enhance the preparation and
abilities of students in aeronautical programs at Trident Technical College. It
will offer courses and hands-on training with state-of-the-art, industry-
standard equipment and a simulation-based maintenance training tool. The project
aims to develop rigorous curriculum materials that foster an environment of
student learning and success through hands-on experiences. Students will be able
to interact with, test, and troubleshoot actual aircraft components and avionics
systems to fully understand the requirements of working on a flight deck.
Partnerships with industry will be strengthened through collaboration on
developing and reviewing the student learning objectives, curriculum, and
laboratories. The curriculum and hands-on labs will be shared on the ATE Central
online repository. Outreach efforts will include promoting the interest of K-12
students in learning about aeronautical and STEM careers. The broad
dissemination of the curriculum and lab activities developed in this project
will potentially benefit technical education at postsecondary institutions
nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.