* 1801166
* Biotechnology Unified Education Network of Opportunities Project
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Regina Overath, Texas Southmost College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 06/30/2023
* USD 225,000.00

This project plans to build a Biotechnology Unified Education Network of
Opportunities (BUENO) in the Lower Rio Grande Valley that will offer a clear
path for undergraduates into careers in biotechnology-based STEM fields. The
project includes three major activities: 1) curriculum and educational materials
development; 2) professional development for educators; and 3) program
development and improvement. The main goal of the BUENO Project is to build the
first biotechnology program in the region to enhance the employability of
technicians in biotechnology-related fields. The BUENO Project has the potential
to provide a framework that can be duplicated at other minority 2- year and
4-year community colleges and universities. Moreover, through the partnership
between Texas Southmost College and local school districts, the Project can
build sustained efforts to align college readiness and the college curriculum in
biotechnological fields of study. This alignment can help to ensure preparation
of employees to meet the community's workforce demands.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Through the BUENO Project, Texas Southmost College aims to increase
student learning by developing a new biotechnology program of study, providing
professional development for teacher improvement, and offering the most up-to-
date curriculum and educational materials possible. Data collected as part of
the evaluation plan will be critical for identifying strategies and activities
that can be modified to improve project outcomes and student learning, as well
as student and instructor competency and confidence, especially at a Hispanic-
Serving Institution. Furthermore, the BUENO Project contribute new curricular
materials that will be especially useful at minority institutions, as well as
insight concerning which activities and interventions are most effective in
promoting the success of Hispanics and veterans in biotechnology and related
STEM fields. These contributions will add to the body of knowledge about
effective science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.