* 1801678
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  The Emergence of Cost-Benefit Analysis in US Policymaking
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2021
* Aaron Horvath, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2021
* USD 11,540.00

This project investigates the processes by which ideals of good government and
use of cost-benefit analysis evolved in the U.S. from the late-19th century to
the second half of the 20th century. The ideal of rational government
administration has been historically variable. Before 1870, the national
government was largely undeveloped and local governments were in the pockets of
political machines. Over the next century, calls for moral rectitude and
bureaucratic integrity gave way to calls for effectiveness and efficiency, which
eventually led to a regime of optimization and the adoption of cost-benefit
analysis as the core of administrative decision-making. This project
investigates this history and tests its argument on two case studies. The
findings from this research will inform and illuminate efforts to use modern
technologies of rationalization to deal with current
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses archival research, text
analysis, and interviews to explain the historical processes by which cost-
benefit analysis and its attendant assumptions came to be adopted by government
in the U.S. For the first part, the text of documents such as the Congressional
record, scholarly journals and presidential speeches is analyzed, plus
historical informants active in this process from the 1960s to the present are
interviewed. In the second part, two cases, areas of public policy that began
similarly but had divergent outcomes, are examined longitudinally and compared.
The method for the second part involves text analysis of portions of the
Congressional record and interviews of representatives of key
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.