* 1801792
* Mapping Matter in Strong Gravity: Spectral-Timing of Black Holes and Neutron Stars
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Abigail Stevens, Stevens                 Abigail        L
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 08/31/2022
* USD 342,142.00

Abigail Stevens is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to carry
out a program of research and education at Michigan State University and at the
University of Michigan. Stevens will study the X-rays emitted when black holes
and neutron stars interact with low-mass stars, focusing on very rapid changes
in emission called quasi-periodic oscillations (QPOs). Stevens will study how
the energy spectrum and timing of X-rays changes during QPOs. This is a probe of
how matter behaves close to black holes and neutron stars, and it will help
astronomers to better understand the strong gravitational and magnetic fields
found nowhere else in nature. Alongside her research, Stevens will establish a
middle school outreach program in the Lansing Public School District. There she
will develop and lead activity-based interactive astronomy lessons on the topics
of the Sun, the Solar System, and supermassive black holes and
galaxies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stevens will use phase-resolved spectroscopy of
different types of QPOs and pulsations in low-mass X-ray binaries (LXMBs), which
contain a compact object, a low-mass stellar companion, and an accretion disk of
stellar material around the compact object. She will use a spectral-timing
technique developed during her PhD thesis, as well as comprehensive physical
models, to compare the geometry of the emitting region in black holes with that
in neutron stars and determine the changing inner configuration of LMXBs in the
strong-gravity regime. This work will lead to better understanding of intense
gravitational fields, viscous astrophysical plasmas, and very strong magnetic
fields. Stevens will also work with outreach facilities at her host universities
to conduct astronomy enrichment in local area middle school
classes.&amp;#8195;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.