* 1801926
* Proton coupled electron transfer in ribonucleotide reductase
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Raquel Lieberman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 05/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

With this award, the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division is funding Professor Bridgette Barry at the Georgia Institute of
Technology to investigate proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) reactions in
the protein, ribonucleotide reductase (RNR). This enzyme speeds up the
production of deoxyribonucleotides, which are building blocks of DNA, and thus
plays a pivotal role in cell division. The deoxyribonucleotides are formed from
ribonucleotides by a process that involves transfer of negatively-charged
electrons over a long distance. The transfer of the electrons is coordinated
with the transfer of positively-charged protons. Professor Barry studies how
protein motions or dynamics facilitate and control these proton-coupled electron
transfer (PCET) reactions in RNR. The intellectual merit of this project lies in
the generation of fundamental chemical insights into PCET reactions, which are
ubiquitous in biology. Professor Barry participates in a joint teaching and
research effort in collaboration with Professor Lisa Hibbard at Spelman College,
an Historically Black College or University (HBCU) for women. In addition, Dr.
Barry is initiating a collaboration with the Center for the Visually Impaired in
Atlanta to begin STEM tutoring of high school and middle school students with
vision impairments. This effort serves as the basis for innovation in the
freshman chemistry curriculum at Georgia Tech. The goal is to further and more
broadly enhance the participation of visually impaired individuals in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project compares different
members of the Class 1a RNR enzymes isolated from bacteria and human cells, with
the goal of defining conserved PCET mechanism(s). Enzymes from this class are
composed of two types of subunits, alpha and beta. They employ a tyrosyl radical
(YO.)-diferric cofactor situated in the beta subunit as a radical initiator for
substrate reduction in the alpha subunit. This process occurs through reversible
PCET over a conserved pathway of tyrosine residues situated in the alpha and
beta subunits. Remarkably, the radical transfer pathway spans 35 angstroms.
Professor Barry tests the hypothesis that radical transfer across the alpha/beta
interface changes the conformation of the YO. radical initiator, alters hydrogen
bonding to YO. and the diferric cluster, and changes the conformation and
hydrogen bonding of other tyrosines on the PCET pathway. Two techniques, namely
reaction-induced FT-IR (RIFT-IR) and UV resonance Raman (UVRR) spectroscopy,,
are employed. The UVRR and RIFT-IR spectra are assigned by isotopic labeling,
solvent isotope exchange, site-directed mutagenesis, and site-specific
mutagenesis using unnatural amino acids. Spectral results are interpreted by
comparison to Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations on tyrosine-
containing peptides and on models of the tyrosyl radical-differic cluster.
Molecular dynamics simulations of the subunit in the tyrosyl radical and
tyrosine singlet states are also used to simulate redox-linked conformational
changes. This project advances the fundamental understanding of enzyme mechanism
and aids in the development of biomimetic strategies for energy
conversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.