* 1801626
* RET Site: Integrated Nanomanufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Thomas Bifano, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2024
* USD 516,596.00

The primary objective of this renewal RET Site: Integrated Nanomanufacturing,
hosted by the Boston University Photonics Center (BUPC), is to immerse teachers
in a six-week summer program that focuses on interdisciplinary research
experiences. Through the interdisciplinary research, teachers are immersed in an
exploration of the design, fabrication, and application of nanometer-scale
components in optical, electronic, mechanical and biomedical systems. The
teachers will strengthen their capacity in science and engineering practices
through their participation, enabling them to engage their students with
engineering concepts within the sciences. Mentored research projects challenge
participants to engage in engineering problem solving, and the knowledge gained
will help participants develop sustainable curricula and activities in STEM
education. RET teachers will return to their classrooms with an improved and
relevant skill set to foster their student's interest in engineering disciplines
and to succeed with the ambitious educational goals of the Massachusetts Adapted
Next Generation Science Standards (NGSS). This RET Site is focused on
underserved schools in the greater Boston area with the goal of recruiting
participants from a diverse group with 80% of the teachers coming from resource-
limited (high needs) schools. Additionally, teachers from schools with high
percentages of underrepresented students in STEM and/or high percentages of low-
income families will be encouraged to participate. The RET Site will work
directly with STEM Nexus from the Greater Boston area and Eastern Massachusetts
to target schools and individual teachers that have interest in STEM but have
limited resources to implement these activities. This site will also engage
local Boston area companies as potential research locations for RET participants
and longer-term partners in K-12 outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrated nanomanufacturing research is an inherently
interdisciplinary intellectual area that is evolving rapidly at the intersecting
frontiers of microelectronics, optical science, materials engineering, and
biomedicine. Three thematic research areas will serve as the foundation for this
RET Site: three broad themes of integrated nanomanufacturing: nanophotonics,
nanostructures, and nanomedicine. While engaged in mentored discovery of new
devices and fabrication at the nanoscale level to explore optical systems,
participants will develop critical skills, awareness and confidence necessary to
advance in academics and research in the future. The summer experience involves
training sessions, hands-on nanofabrication tool training activities, scientific
research in partner laboratories, seminars on classroom integration, and faculty
pedagogy discussions. Participants will also be introduced to the idea of
Societal Engineers, a core concept at Boston University to develop engineers who
can connect their training to integrate content and applications reflecting how
science and engineering is practiced in the real world. This is the basis of the
case study curriculum developed and piloted from the initial RET Site at local
schools in Massachusetts, with the renewal promising to disseminate the
curriculum widely and develop more focus on physics and
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.