* 1801512
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Countermeasures Against Side-Channels Attacks Targeting Hardware and Embedded System Implementations of Post-Quantum Cryptographic Algorithms
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Krzysztof Gaj, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

Quantum computers are believed to have a potential to perform specialized
calculations beyond the reach of any supercomputer in existence today,
threatening today's major public-key cryptography standards. Post-Quantum
Cryptography (PQC) is devoted to the design and analysis of cryptographic
algorithms that are resistant against any known attacks using quantum computers,
but by themselves can be implemented using classical computing platforms, based
on current semiconductor technologies. This project aims to develop effective
methods of protecting the implementations of emerging PQC schemes against
powerful side-channel attacks based on exploiting power consumption of
cryptographic devices and/or intentional transient faults affecting their
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The algorithms to be investigated represent
several major PQC families and three major categories of public-key cryptography
applications: encryption, digital signature, and key encapsulation mechanism.
The goal of the project is to determine the cost of effective countermeasures
against power and fault attacks in terms of the commonly accepted software and
hardware performance metrics. The research thrusts will (i) investigate the
effects of countermeasures against fault attacks on resiliency to power attacks,
and (ii) propose solutions to achieve combined fault and power analysis
resiliency. The project will involve several significant extensions to
preliminarily-developed experimental platform: Flexible Open-source workBench
fOr Side-channel analysis (FOBOS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Power and fault attacks
are real threats to practical implementation of PQC and may significantly thwart
the successful transition to new standards. This project will investigate
systematic, long-term study of countermeasures against these attacks, which may
make transition to PQC more secure, benefiting Internet users worldwide. The
outreach activities will include motivational lectures at high schools,
promoting and supervising undergraduate research, and organizing a series of
international competitions for graduate students. The knowledge and experience
gained will be integrated into several course modules, developed jointly by all
investigators and shared on-line.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that
multiple algorithms, computer-aided design tools, software programs, and
hardware designs will be developed throughout the project period. Project
deliverables will be made available to researchers and educators in the non-
profit sector, such as universities, research institutions, and government
laboratories. To make it easy to maintain, disseminate, and distribute code and
data from this project, a single server will be dedicated to keeping all the
draft and final copies of the deliverables. This server will be maintained
through the project period and additional five years beyond. The project website
will be continuously available at
http://www.pqcSCA.com.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.