* 1801266
* A Decadal Assessment of Plasma Science
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2018,07/31/2020
* James Lancaster, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2020
* USD 150,000.00

This project will partially support the next decadal survey for plasma science.
Conducted by the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (the
National Academies), the report produced through this project will provide
valuable information and guidance on issues that pertain to plasma science to
federal policy makers in both Congress and the Administration, the agencies and
their programs that support this field, research communities, and the general
public. The report will discuss progress that has taken place in plasma science
over the past ten years and will identify new opportunities and compelling
scientific questions for the field over the next decade. The report will also
discuss the benefits of the technological capabilities enabled by advances in
plasma science for other fields of research as well as in meeting broader
national needs. Portions of the report will be written with the goal to enhance
the public understanding of plasma science and the role that it plays in other
sciences and society at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this project, a
panel of approximately 15 members will be assembled by the National Academies.
Committee membership will include not only a spectrum of plasma science
expertise but also expertise from neighboring research fields with which plasma
science is intrinsically and increasingly interconnected. In the process of
developing the report, the committee will hold multiple meetings and workshops,
including town meetings at professional society meetings, at various locations
in the United States so as to engage the plasma science community in the survey
process. The committee will then produce a report: 1) assessing the progress and
achievements of plasma science over the past decade; 2) identifying the major
scientific questions and new opportunities that define plasma science as a
discipline, noting connections to and the influence on other disciplines; 3)
discussing the nature and importance of the U.S. role in multi-national plasma
research activities; 4) discussing how plasma science has contributed and will
likely contribute to U.S. national needs both in and beyond plasma science,
including economic prosperity and national defense; 5) assessing whether the
present plasma science workforce and training opportunities are commensurate
with future workforce needs; 6) assessing the present role of, and future
opportunities for, universities within large national programs organized around
major research instruments or community assets (i.e., user facilities,
satellites, telescopes, etc.); and 7) assessing whether the structure, program
balance, and level of the current U.S. research effort in plasma science across
the federal and private efforts are best positioned to realize the science
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.