* 1801785
* Sustainable energy transition:  Beyond material analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Annick Anctil, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 302,035.00

Increasing concerns about energy security, grid reliability, and global warming,
combined with a rapid decrease in renewable energy costs, have resulted in an
energy transition in the United States (US) where photovoltaics (PV) and wind
turbines are being deployed, replacing coal generation and providing for
increasing electricity demand. Energy solutions developed today should remain
desirable in the future, and not create new environmental issues. As future
energy deployment goals are established, it is important to investigate
potential unintended consequences of large-scale extraction of materials
required for alternative energy technologies deployment. The overall goal of
this project is to evaluate the potential long-term effects of electricity
production in the US as a result of energy transition. The project will evaluate
the sustainability of energy transition in the United States by simultaneously
considering the environmental and political impact (in foreign countries
supplying materials, taking into account the classical "Resource Curse" effect)
associated with increase in global demand for nuclear energy as well as large-
scale deployment of energy alternatives, in particular wind and photovoltaics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is targeted to provide results including 1)
material requirement and availability for photovoltaics, wind and nuclear
deployment until 2040, 2) consequential life cycle assessment of electricity
generation technologies considering country-specific material extraction and
impact, 3) an assessment and comparison of the geopolitical costs associated
with the production of different forms of energy for renewable and conventional
types of energy and 4) sustainability assessment of energy deployment in the US
until 2040. It will combine industrial ecology principles such as life cycle
assessment, material analysis as well as sustainability metrics including
political stability (in foreign counties) to investigate material required for
sustainable energy deployment. Life cycle inventory data collected from this
work will be submitted for inclusion in the Ecoinvent database and other freely
available ones to encourage researchers to use LCA for energy
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.