* 1801062
* Engaging Students From Classrooms and Camps to College and Advanced Technological Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Sharon Gusky, Northwestern Connecticut Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 08/31/2024
* USD 835,140.00

The forty manufacturers in the Torrington area of Northwestern Connecticut
include smaller, local companies, as well as national and global companies such
as Wittmann Battenfeld and Altek Electronics. In addition, Jackson Laboratory,
the leading bioscience company in the area, is located twenty miles away. These
companies need employees at all levels of skills and knowledge, from technicians
to engineers and research scientists. They rely on an educational infrastructure
to provide a capable, industry-ready workforce. However, there is a gap between
the industry demand and availability of skilled workers, and neither the
technical high school nor the college is currently meeting these needs. For
example, in the robotics and automation areas, industry need exceeds the trained
workforce by almost 68%. According to the 2016 Chamber of Commerce Survey of
Northwest Connecticut, maintaining and growing manufacturing was one of the
highest priorities in the region and the lack of skilled applicants was cited as
being the biggest barrier. This project, Engaging Students from Classrooms and
Camps to College and Careers, brings 7th-12th grade teachers, community college
faculty, students, and industry members together to develop a strong technical
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to increase the STEM interest
and skills attainment of underrepresented and socioeconomically disadvantaged
students in the Torrington School District. It will engage forty-four middle and
high school STEM teachers and their students, using innovative activities to
introduce students to careers as technicians. Teachers will participate in
industry-based externships and professional development workshops. These
activities are designed to help teachers better understand the roles of
technicians. Students will participate in college visits and summer camps,
designed to help them understand career opportunities for technicians. Community
college students will learn about careers as technicians by participating in
externships in industry, and will refine their knowledge and skills by serving
as teaching assistants in camps and classrooms, and as mentors for the middle
and high school students. Through this program, the community college plans to
increase the number of dual enrollment college courses for high school students.
The program will establish a support system for teachers through the formation
of a STEM Community of Practice that includes teachers, college faculty, and
industry members. The project activities are expected to support pathways for
students to careers in the advanced technological industries in the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.