* 1801971
* NSF Center for Aerosol Impacts on Chemistry of the Environment
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Kimberly Prather, University of California-San Diego
* Cooperative Agreement
* Katharine Covert
* 09/30/2024
* USD 20,006,200.00

With the support from the Centers for Chemical Innovation (CCI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, the NSF Center for Aerosol Impacts on Chemistry of the
Environment (CAICE) at the University of California, San Diego, is partnering
with 10 other institutions and conducts highly collaborative research in the
field of atmospheric aerosol chemistry, with a focus on understanding the role
of chemistry in sea spray aerosols. Aerosol particles in marine environments
play a critical role in controlling cloud formation and lifetime, atmospheric
chemical composition, surface temperature and precipitation patterns, and human
and ecosystem health. CAICE research is providing new insights into aerosol
chemistry which will enable more robust predictions on the impact of aerosol
particles on air quality, climate, and the hydrologic cycle. In addition to
illustrating the central role of chemistry in environmental processes that
impacts research disciplines spanning from physical oceanography to marine
biology, CAICE is actively developing new experimental and computational tools
with applications in chemical research involving soft materials, nanomaterials,
small sensor development, and colloidal science. Beyond their research
experience, students involved in CAICE receive interdisciplinary training in
research ethics, effective science communication, and entrepreneurialism,
equipping them with the required tools to address future grand challenges in
science. CAICE research is shared via a spectrum of educational and outreach
activities, including: 1) science communication and outreach through
storytelling, 2) CAICE-developed CLEAR (Collaborative Learning in Environmental
and Aerosol Research) particle counters used in formal and informal education,
and 3) general public outreach events in close collaboration with the UC San
Diego's Birch Aquarium and other public venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary
objective of CAICE involves developing molecular level insight into chemical
processes occurring in the marine atmosphere. CAICE studies are investigating
how chemical heterogeneity, morphology, phase, and molecular composition, at the
individual aerosol particle level, control the properties and reactivity of
marine aerosols. To achieve these goals, CAICE utilizes a unique experimental
ocean-atmosphere interaction facility designed to bring the full complexity of
the ocean-atmosphere system directly into the laboratory to allow investigations
into aerosol formation and chemical transformations in a controlled setting.
These signature experiments serve to guide molecular level investigations
through the distillation of chemical complexity and the identification of
molecular building blocks that can be used to replicate the complex atmospheric
interfaces. To accomplish these goals, CAICE research is divided into three
research themes: 1) Production and characterization of marine aerosol particles:
Replicating the chemical complexity of the ocean-atmosphere system in the
laboratory, 2) Chemical reactions at environmental interfaces: Gas and aerosol
transformations, 3) Molecular level impacts of marine aerosols on water uptake
and ice nucleation. Through highly collaborative research, CAICE is developing a
fundamental and chemically accurate picture of marine aerosol chemistry that
will enable accurate predictions of the impact of marine aerosols on our
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.