* 1801644
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Collaborative: Enabling Long-Term Security and Privacy through Retrospective Data Management
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Elena Zheleva, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 806,955.00

Online data storage, everything from past conversations to tax returns to
playdate invitations, may be retained at full fidelity for years or decades.
Although the data being saved in online archives does not change, the personal
and social contexts surrounding them do. Those life changes may necessitate
changing or deleting stored data but, unfortunately, the vast quantity of data
in users' online archives makes manual management infeasible. The goal of this
project is to develop methods and tools that enable users to manage the data
they have accumulated over many years, leveraging user-centered design and
machine learning to partially automate the process. These tools will enable a
better understanding of retrospective privacy in the context of modern long-
lived online archives. They will also empower users to more effectively manage
the risks embedded in these archives. The findings shared with the research
community will advance discovery beyond this project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
understanding of user conceptualizations of security and privacy over time, as
contexts change, has been stymied by a lack of broad, carefully collected
datasets within this domain. This project will collect anonymized datasets, with
users' permission, that enable further research in this area. The team is
conducting one of the first longitudinal studies of how desired security and
privacy decisions change over time. The project will also gather qualitative
insights about users' perceptions of risk and utility for long-term data, as
well as the acceptability of retrospective management mechanisms. Furthermore,
it is not currently understood how temporality impacts the use of machine
learning techniques for privacy, nor how to capture concept drift to ensure that
latent threats can be identified within immense archives. These tasks require
new machine learning approaches and predictive models that can both account for
the temporal dimension and minimize user burden when automating archive
management. Finally, the project will design and implement novel user-centered
interfaces that address the currently unmet need of helping users efficiently
minimize security and privacy risks in their large, long-term online
archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.