* 1801361
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Effects of a Data Initiative on Social Service Provision
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Melanie Terrasse, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

This project examines the implementation of one of the first "no-wrong-door"
client database and referral systems shared by local anti-poverty nonprofit
organizations (NPOs) in a rural county and small city. Federal and state
governments frequently deliver services through non-governmental organizations
rather than public bureaucracies, and social services are turning to technology
and data-sharing as a tool to better track outcomes and collaborate across
organizations. This study looks at this convergence and provides an analytical
description of the implementation process from the perspective of NPO
administrators, staff, and clients. Results will help government policy-makers
and NPO leaders be better informed about the consequences of encouraging NPOs to
adopt collaborative, data-driven solutions for the delivery of social
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study draws on data from nine initial
months of ethnographic observation at four focal nonprofits involved in the
database initiative, and subsequent community observation over a total of 1.5
years. During this time period, this group of NPOs has been proceeding with the
implementation of a shared client management system, in which all organizations
in the database have access to client information and can send referrals to each
other. In addition, community leaders, nonprofit administration and staff, and
social service clients (n = 80 to 110) are interviewed for this research.
Examination of the initiative throughout its implementation will enable this
study to understand the social, economic, and political processes involved in
the development of a shared data infrastructure in the field of nonprofit social
services, and their consequences for service delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.