* 1801078
* Advanced Welder Education
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Parmeshwar Coomar, Monroe County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 05/31/2023
* USD 224,906.00

Monroe County is part of "Automation Alley," a nickname that recognizes the
area?s automotive intensive industries. The demand for skilled trades personnel
in these industries has increased, with 5000 new postings for South East
Michigan region alone. Total employment for these industries is about 113,000
workers (Workforce Intelligence Networks, 2017). Half of these workers are
welders, fabricators, and tool and die makers. This Monroe County Community
College welding technology project is designed to increase the number of
qualified welders who can lead research, development, and innovation in the
advanced manufacturing field. The project will develop new curriculum materials
and implement them in courses conforming to Advanced Level Welder QC 11 training
standards. These standards were revised in August 2017 and further defined by
the Schools Excelling Through National Skills Standards Education Program led by
the American Welding Society. By incorporating the latest additions to the
Advanced Level QC 11 standards, the college aims to produce highly skilled
welders who can support research and development. This training will also enable
students to pursue associate of applied science and/or baccalaureate degree. The
project will include existing articulation pathways between the college and area
universities, and will develop new articulation/transfer pathways to other four-
year schools. The project will also add to the pool of qualified Inspectors in
Non-Destructive Testing, a field in which the college offers the state's only
certificate program. By completing these activities, this project has the
potential to help students advance educationally and occupationally, thus making
a significant impact on the economy of the Southeast Michigan
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a $1.75 million Department
of Labor grant that aimed to improve the welder pool in the region. The college
met the goals of that grant by producing the promised number of graduates. As
part of that grant, the college developed partnerships with nine high school
districts, enabling the college to reach more than 1500 potential students. In
this project, the college will leverage those partnerships by providing
professional development to high school career and technical education program
instructors. As a result, it is expected that Level 1 Entry Level QC 10
standards will be completed at the high schools and the college will focus on
teaching the new and revised Advanced Level QC 11 standards. Direct articulation
agreements will be developed to support this educational pathway. The program
aims to: (a) provide students increased opportunities to earn entry to advanced
American Welding Society credentials, which can improve their employability; and
(b) strengthen the relationship between the college and local employers by
educating a well-educated workforce to meet employer needs at varying levels of
welder expertise and experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.