* 1801940
* Using APOGEE Chemical Abundances to Probe Formation Scenarios of the Milky Way Bulge
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Sten Hasselquist, Hasselquist             Sten
* Fellowship Award
* Harshal Gupta
* 07/31/2021
* USD 289,242.00

Sten Hasselquist is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Fellowship to
conduct a program of research and education at the University of Utah. Using
high quality spectra of thousands of stars observed with the Apache Point
Observatory Galactic Evolution Experiment (APOGEE), Hasselquist will perform a
detailed chemical analysis of the Milky Way's central bulge. Because a central
bulge seems to be a feature of most disk galaxies, understanding how the bulge
of our galaxy formed and evolved will allow astronomers to understand how galaxy
formation and evolution occurs across the Universe. Alongside this research,
Hasselquist will develop and run an inquiry-based high-altitude balloon program
targeted at high school students from groups that are underrepresented in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hasselquist will analyze how the mean chemical
abundance tracks for each element provided by APOGEE compare between the Milky
Way's bulge and inner disk. He will explore chemical abundance correlations in
N-dimensional space, analyzing how these correlations differ between bulge and
inner disk. From these analyses, conclusions can be drawn about formation
mechanisms of the bulge. He will also identify the origin of metal-poor stars in
the bulge by invoking clustering algorithms to quantify chemical abundance
similarities between the metal-poor bulge and the Milky Way's halo or satellite
populations. Additionally, he will use carbon-to-nitrogen abundance ratios to
assign a chemical clock to the Galaxy's stars, allowing for an in-depth study of
the chemical abundance patterns of the Galaxy's bulge with an added time
dimension that is not typically available in large-scale chemical evolution
studies. Working with outreach facilities at his host institution, Hasselquist
will create a program in which high school students gain valuable critical
thinking skills by designing and executing high-altitude balloon experiments to
answer specific scientific questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.