* 1801096
* The Necessary Skills Now Network: Integrating Employability Skills Development into   Technician Education Across STEM Disciplines
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,03/31/2024
* John Sands, CORD
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 03/31/2024
* USD 599,424.00

For several decades, employers in high-tech fields have complained that entry-
level employees often lack "employability skills," which are also called "soft
skills." These skills are the non-technical skills necessary for success in the
workplace, including working in teams, problem solving, verbal communication,
written communication, dependability/work ethic, and planning/organizing.
Reports have called on colleges to redesign courses and curricula to address the
deficiency in employability skills, and many projects have been launched to do
so, often with a focus on a particular discipline. As a new Advanced
Technological Education (ATE) Coordination Network, the Necessary Skills Now
Network will foster the collaboration of community and technical college faculty
with business/industry partners to integrate employability skills into
technician education programs across the STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Necessary Skills Now Network will assist
community and technical colleges in sharing resources, exploring new teaching
methods, and collaborating with employers to help students improve their mastery
of employability skills. The Network will (1) create an active "community of
practice" to exchange ideas, promising practices, research, and employment
trends; (2) provide faculty development workshops and courses to support the
adoption of effective teaching methods, instructional materials, and learning
environments; and (3) create an online portal of open educational resources to
improve the development of employability skills among students in technical
associate degree programs. The project is led by the Center for Occupational
Research and Development and three ATE centers: the South Carolina Advanced
Technological Education center (engineering technology), the Center for Systems
Security and Information Assurance (cybersecurity), and the Florida Advanced
Technological Education center (advanced manufacturing). Through the existing,
extensive networks of these partners, the investigators expect to reach over 450
faculty members with workshops, online courses, and on-demand resources and to
engage over 300 colleges and 75 companies in community-of-practice activities.
Conference presentations, webinars, publications, and social media will further
extend awareness of the Network's resources to stakeholders across the STEM
disciplines. The overall goal is to develop an environment in which many
employers and educators collaborate across roles, technology sectors, and
geography to build solutions that will give students the full range of skills
needed for working productively after they are hired.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.