* 1801194
* Alaska Tech Learners: A Collaboration to Teach College Courses in Software Engineering to High School Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Steven Johnson, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 08/31/2023
* USD 600,000.00

This project is a partnership between Prince William Sound College, nine high
schools in seven school districts, and regional employers. The project's long-
term goal is to fill needs in Alaska's skilled technical workforce by providing
Alaskan high school students with introductory courses in software engineering.
To accomplish this goal, this project will prepare teachers in underserved
Alaska high schools to teach dual-enrollment courses in the software engineering
fields of commercial web design and mobile application development. The courses
will use a cooperative model of instruction that combines the content expertise
of college faculty with the teaching expertise of certified high school
teachers. The courses will meet all five of the Alaska state technology
standards, and thus be relevant for high school graduation as well as college
credit. This project has the potential to enable more school districts to offer
dual enrollment STEM courses. The cooperative teaching model has national
significance because it could be used by any state to meet STEM educational
needs in underserved rural areas. This project also has the benefit of opening
multiple career pathways that currently do not exist for many high school
students in Alaska. The project focuses on partnering with rural Alaskan school
districts, where students are more likely to be Alaska Natives, and to come from
low income families. It is predicted that completing these dual enrollment
courses can increase the competitiveness of rural Alaskan students for local,
high-skill software technology jobs, helping to close the rural Alaska skills
gap in technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
increase the technological competence of teachers and students in all high
schools in Alaska. The immediate goal is to partner with high school teachers
from multiple school districts to provide coursework for high school students
and prepare students for entry-level work as highly-skilled software
technologists. Participating high school teachers will first complete college
coursework in a specific software engineering topic, to build their content
knowledge, skills, and confidence. Each teacher will then teach a dual
enrollment course at their high school. A college faculty member will support
the teacher, providing oversight and assessment of student outcomes for these
courses. This partnership has the potential to create new, high-quality learning
experiences for high school students taking dual enrollment information
technology courses. The project expects that these courses will provide a
pathway to eventual completion of a certificate or associate, bachelor, or
graduate degree in software engineering and related
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.