* 1802832
* NNA: Collaborative Research: MSB-FRA: Peat Expansion in Arctic Tundra - Pattern, Process, and the Implication for the Carbon Cycle (TundraPEAT)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Qianlai Zhuang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2024
* USD 304,493.00

Amplified Arctic warming in recent decades has caused a multitude of changes in
terrestrial ecosystems that have potential for strong feedbacks to the global
system. Arctic vegetation greening may not necessarily result in increases in
carbon sequestration in Arctic tundra due to complex and uncertain soil
processes. Arctic tundra tends to have a thicker organic soil horizon (peat)
than most other zonal biomes; research shows that peatlands comprise a sustained
carbon sink. If shallow peatlands are widespread throughout the Arctic, the
overall net carbon storage capacity of tundra might be underestimated globally.
However, the factors controlling the formation, distribution, and dynamics of
these peat patches across the Arctic are not well understood. The overall goal
of the project is to understand organic soil (peat) accumulation processes in
the tundra biome and to assess the role of peat in regional and pan-Arctic
carbon budgets at decadal and centennial timescales. The project will examine
potential peat migration/expansion frontiers in a warming Arctic and their
significance in the regional and pan-Arctic carbon cycle. The project will train
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs from diverse socio-economic and
cultural backgrounds in both data analysis and modeling. The public education
and outreach program includes STEM activities involving middle and high school
students and a symposium on Arctic environments. The understanding of
environmental conditions and processes that control the formation and northward
migrations of the green peat frontier will inform Arctic stakeholders in their
use of natural resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary research
team of researchers will integrate (1) new data collection from multiple tundra
sites along the northernmost peat-forming frontiers of the North American
Arctic, together with (2) laboratory incubation experiments, (3) a synthesis of
existing data from the tundra and boreal biomes, and (4) ecosystem-scale process
model simulations. The overarching question is: will the warming Arctic
transform into a peat-rich landscape, as the boreal zone is now, or are there
essential conditions lacking in a warming Arctic that will prevent this? To
address this broad question, the research focuses on two key elements of the
Arctic peat-forming ecosystems: peat patches, and the role of Sphagnum in the
formation, persistence, and rapid rates of carbon sequestration of these
potentially incipient peatlands. Using observational, experimental, and modeling
results, along with synthesis products from a coordinated international research
network, the research team will test hypotheses on (1) the ages, carbon
accumulation rates, and continental pattern of these rapidly forming and
migrating peat patches; (2) the various responses of production and
decomposition processes to temperature and moisture change; and (3) the role of
Sphagnum in modifying microclimate and shifting balance between their
productivity and decomposability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.