* 1802720
* I-Corps: Platform to Help Prevent and Respond to Sexual Assault
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Sharyn Potter, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* cindy walkerpeach
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to deliver a
platform, primarily for colleges and universities, to both prevent and respond
to campus sexual assault. One in five female college students will be sexually
assaulted during their college careers. Only 10% of victims will report the
assaults; the remainder, lacking reporting option information and guidance on
recovery, will struggle with an aftermath that can lead to academic challenges
and abandoned career plans. Among the 10% of reported assaults, many
institutions struggle to respond effectively, leading to negative, high-profile
headlines. More than 300 colleges and universities are currently under
investigation by the United States Department of Education Civil Rights Office
for mishandling sexual assault investigations. While colleges and universities
are federally mandated to address campus sexual assault, they lack evidence-
based methods to prevent and respond to sexual assault. Lawsuits (from victims
and the accused), government fines, college safety ratings, and unchanging
assault statistics have led to a commercial opportunity for a research-informed
platform designed to align campus sexual assault prevention and response tools
and resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project aims to explore the
commercial potential of a research-informed, evidence-based platform to provide
comprehensive, uniquely tailored information to support victims of campus sexual
assault, aid in prevention efforts, and promote student safety. The heart of the
platform is a mobile application with a design informed by qualitative studies
with the target audience, and content informed by 15+ years of sexual violence
research, and by input from practitioners in this field. This platform addresses
sexual assault prevention and response comprehensively by: 1) Providing
research-informed guidance for victims and allies available in a smartphone app
and on the web; 2) Using a decision-tree approach to help victims understand
options and choose a path forward; 3) Delivering interactive assault prevention
tools to help reduce the incidence of assault; 4) Giving schools control of the
content, to help ensure assaults are correctly managed; and 5) Providing an
implementation toolkit, so schools can easily engage students in the platform's
campus adaptation.