* 1802088
* Conferences on Commutative Algebra for Early Career Researchers (KUMUNUJr 2018-2019)
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/29/2020
* Mark Walker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 02/29/2020
* USD 9,192.00

This award supports participation in the 2018 and 2019 KUMUNUjr Conferences, to
be held at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln during April 21-22, 2018 and April
2019. This is part of an annual conference series designed to promote
interaction among junior researchers in commutative algebra and related
disciplines (including homological algebra, algebraic geometry, K-theory, and
coding theory) at Midwestern schools. The conference series is anchored by the
Universities of Kansas (KU), Missouri - Columbia (MU), and Nebraska - Lincoln
(NU). The gathering will provide an opportunity for young algebraists to
interact and establish research connections with each other. This interaction
will help to lay a foundation for fruitful research collaborations as the
participants advance in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the
conference are to foster collaboration among young researchers in commutative
algebra from Midwestern institutions, and to expose commutative algebra students
and postdocs from Midwestern institutions to the current work being done in
their fields at neighboring institutions. The primary impacts of the conference
are its enrichment of the research careers of the participants and the
dissemination of recent ideas in commutative algebra research at the graduate
and postdoctoral levels. In particular, the interaction and exposure to the work
of their peers will benefit students from universities with small commutative
algebra research groups, those who will become faculty at small institutions,
women, and members of groups underrepresented in mathematics. In addition,
participants will take ideas and collaborations initiated at the conference to
the institutions where they eventually establish
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conference web page:
http://www.math.unl.edu/~jpollitz2/KUMUNUjr/2018/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.