* 1802605
* MSB-ECA:  Phylogenetically-informed modeling of the regional context of community assembly
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Diane Alston, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,021.00

Ecologists have made great progress using observations from projects such as the
National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) to understand how communities of
species will adapt to environmental change. This project builds on this progress
by examining communities of species within the context of their evolutionary
history, asking whether close relatives respond similarly (or differently) to
environmental change. This research will focus first on modelling the plants,
mammals, and birds observed at NEON sites, using this information to predict
regions where non-native species could invade and degrade the valuable ecosystem
services that these communities provide. Building on these foundations, this
project will statistically model and predict species? associations, giving
insight into costly beetle pest outbreaks and ticks that can carry diseases. As
part of this work, teaching materials will be developed to help under-
represented groups develop data science skills and make use of the data publicly
available from NEON. Additionally, the project will develop a data science class
for the Native American STEM Mentorship Program at Utah State, focusing on the
use and analysis of NEON data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integrating the cross-scale
drivers of the distribution of biodiversity requires an understanding of both
ongoing ecology and historic evolution. Species? shared evolutionary history
reflects the biogeographical history that shaped them, and can inform us of
constraints on species? ecology in the present. This proposal will integrate
local-scale ecological community assembly with macro-scale regional assembly and
trait evolution. Evolution is the context within which ecological processes take
place: there can be no macro-scale synthesis of ecology without addressing
phylogenetic context. This will be achieved through three major research
objectives: (1) develop and release new datasets of North American plants,
birds, mammals, beetles, and ticks found at and around NEON sites; (2) extend
previous analyses (Phylogenetic Generalized Linear Mixed Models; PGLMMs) of the
evolution of species? environmental tolerances to test macro-evolutionary models
of local-scale competition within the plants, bird, and mammals of the NEON
sites; and (3) extend these models to incorporate cross-guild interactions,
focusing on plant-beetle and mammal-tick associations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.