* 1802638
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Criminal Records and Housing Discrimination: An Audit Study
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* Ryan King, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 9,383.00

The proportion of the U.S. population with a criminal record has dramatically
increased during the past four decades, and research has documented the ways in
which a criminal record creates and reinforces inequalities in employment,
health, and other outcomes. However, less is known about how a criminal record
affects access to housing. This project will identify the prevalence and scope
of criminal record use to disqualify applicants at an early stage of the housing
application process. It will also detect whether there are racial disparities in
the consideration of criminal histories by landlords. It examines if
neighborhood disadvantage conditions the stigmatizing effect of a criminal
record. Finally, it advances understanding of how landlords weigh criminal
background checks and how they implement recent changes in the laws that require
use of criminal histories in these transactions. Project findings will provide
greater understanding of how U.S. housing policy is working, particularly for
those with criminal backgrounds.

This project consists of a field experiment and qualitative interviews. An
email-based audit study of rental housing units will involve contacting
landlords and inquiring to see the rental properties. These emails will signal
race and the criminal history status of the potential applicants. The audit
study will be paired with interviews with landlords about how they use criminal
histories in the application process, and their understanding of recent policy
changes regarding criminal record use in such evaluations. This research will
contribute to a growing body of findings on the durable effects of criminal
justice contact, as well as socio-legal research on how property managers adapt
to and comply with policy changes. It also contributes to sociological theories
focused on discrimination, racial inequality and urban residence.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.