* 1802523
* EAGER: Exploring the Feasibility of System Support for Managing Risk in Cloud Markets
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Prashant Shenoy, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 04/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Cloud computing has become the foundation of our information-based economy,
providing the computing power necessary for advances in transportation, energy,
communication, healthcare, science, and entertainment. Early cloud platforms
were simple, requiring users to choose from a small number of servers "on-
demand" for a fixed per-hour price. However, modern cloud platforms are evolving
into full-fledged markets that offer servers under a range of complex contracts
that expose applications to different forms of risk, such as the risk of price
increases, server revocations, or server shortages. By offering such contracts,
cloud platforms can increase their infrastructure's utilization, revenue, and
energy-efficiency, while cloud users can lower their costs by tailoring their
contracts to match their applications' requirements. Unfortunately, given the
complexity of cloud contracts and the relationship between risk, application
correctness, and performance, developing risk-aware applications represents a
significant challenge. To address the challenge, this project will explore the
feasibility of system support for managing risk in cloud markets by adapting and
extending concepts from economics and finance. A key goal of the project is to
elevate risk management to a first-class systems design principle.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes multiple broader impacts. By enabling
better risk management, cloud platforms can significantly increase their
utilization and energy-efficiency, while also lowering users' costs. The project
will incorporate modules on cloud economics and managing risk in cloud platforms
into undergraduate and graduate seminars, which will relate it to core concepts
in operating systems, networking, and distributed systems. The researchers also
plan to integrate cloud economics topics from the project into seminars on cloud
computing for aspiring college students they regularly give. As part of the
project's data management plan, the investigators will also collect, aggregate,
and archive real-time market data from public cloud platforms and make it
publicly available through a web-based data repository. Finally, the project
will emphasize the recruitment of students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.