* 1802715
* RAPID:  Testing the role of spatial sorting as an important driver of rapid adaptive divergence
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Scott Carroll, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2019
* USD 103,131.00

Traits of organisms that enhance their rates of dispersal can be favored in
populations that are rapidly colonizing new habitats. This is especially true if
the dispersing individuals mate with similar, highly mobile individuals from
surrounding populations. This process, termed "spatial sorting", generates
offspring that are also rapid dispersers, regardless of how those genes affect
the population's fitness in the new habitat. This project will perform the first
large-scale field tests of spatial sorting in generating rapid evolution using
populations of the red-shouldered soapberry bug (Jadera haematoloma), which has
expanded and adapted from native to non-native food plants in the last 60 years.
The rare episodic flooding from Hurricane Harvey has provided a unique
opportunity to roll back the (short) evolutionary clock on soapberry bug
populations by causing some populations to go extinct while others are still
intact. Results from this study can be applied to understanding how invasive
species colonize new habitats and ultimately displace native populations. This
project also will support outreach public education on evolution in colonizing
populations.

One fundamental question is how could J. haematoloma populations evolve so
quickly? The answer to this question may emerge from features of the initial
colonizers. Soapberry bugs exhibits a flight polymorphism, where there is a
long-winged form that is the main disperser with a larger body, and a short-
winged form that does not fly well with a smaller body. Long-wing morphs also
have larger mouthparts that are beneficial on the new non-native host plant.
This project will test whether the observed rapid adaptation from a native host
plant, where smaller mouthparts are favored, to a non-native host plant, where
larger mouthparts are favored, was promoted by spatial sorting as opposed to
natural selection from standing phenotypic variation. To do this, field
observational studies, a manipulative transplant experiment, lab tests of the
genetic basis of dispersal phenotypes, as well as genetic tests for reductions
in genetic variation within populations will be performed.