* 1802745
* Collaborative Research:  MSB-ECA: Resolving controls on lignin decomposition at the continental scale to reconcile classical and modern paradigms of soil organic matter
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Steven Hall, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 08/31/2022
* USD 244,036.00

Lignin is an important component of plant tissues that provides protection from
herbivores and pathogens due to its complex chemical structure. When plant
tissues die and enter the soil, lignin is often among the last components to
decompose and may persist for decades or even longer. Despite the generally slow
decay rates of lignin, recent work has suggested that many soils contain very
little lignin in their organic matter. This apparent contradiction presents a
key challenge for our understanding of soil organic matter formation, a topic
which is critically linked to environmental services including soil fertility,
water quality, and carbon storage. This research seeks to understand the
environmental factors that control lignin decay rates and the ultimate
contributions of lignin to soil organic matter in ecosystems across North
America. The influence of differences in soil microorganisms and minerals on
lignin decomposition across diverse ecosystems will be assessed. The broader
implications of the findings for ecosystem functions and services will be
studied by using a mathematical model. A postdoctoral researcher and graduate
students will be trained, and findings will be communicated to the public and to
land managers with targeted outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research seeks to resolve lingering inconsistencies in soil organic matter,
where the context-specific importance of lignin may have been neglected due to
spatial and methodological sampling biases. Interactions among lignin, soil
geochemical characteristics, and microbial community composition may have
significant impacts on lignin residence times and mineral sorption that emerge
only when examined across continental-scale environmental gradients. Data
collected from National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) sites will be
combined with new experiments to test two hypotheses: (1) Does lignin
decomposition rates and its abundance in soil organic matter predictably vary
with soil geochemical characteristics and microbial community composition at the
continental scale (in contrast to both classical and modern paradigms of soil
organic matter)?; and (2) Can the representations of lignin decomposition and
carbon cycling in a state-of-the-art mechanistic ecosystem model be improved by
inclusion of geochemical and microbial parameters (in addition to the
traditional variables of climate, residue quality, and nutrient availability)?
The NEON data will be combined with field and laboratory incubations of carbon
isotope-labeled lignins and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopic
measurements to test these hypotheses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.