* 1802109
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Impact of Immigration Policies on Refugee Integration Experiences:  A Comparative Analysis
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Robert Adelman, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/28/2019
* USD 11,995.00

This project asks: How does refugee integration and adaptation play out within
different policy contexts? Why do refugees in one host country perceive a better
future for themselves than refugees in another host country? The project
compares refugees in different countries for two reasons. First, governments
vary in terms of refugee integration policies. They allocate different amounts
of resources for the economic, social, cultural, and legal participation of
refugees. Second, the degree of success in the integration of immigrants and
refugees varies by host societies. Examining this topic using an international
comparative study design will allow for the development of a typology of
reactions to refugees, as well as similarities and differences in the mechanisms
of integration. This research will discover what works well and less well in the
countries, and why.

The primary method of data collection in this qualitative project will be via
in-depth interviews with Syrian refugees and other key informants including
representatives of organizations who work with refugees. Interviews will be
conducted with at least twenty Syrian refugees in each country--Canada, Germany,
Turkey and the United States--in addition to about five key informant interviews
per country. Interviews will take place in important refugee destinations in
each country: Toronto; Buffalo; Istanbul; and Berlin. A purposive snowball
sampling method will be used to recruit respondents. All interviews will be
voice-recorded with a digital recorder and fully transcribed. Each transcription
will be analyzed using standard qualitative methods with the help of atlas.ti, a
qualitative data analysis software package, to inductively establish codes and
themes from the data to derive findings and draw conclusions.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.