* 1802024
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--High Frequency Hydroclimate Extremes and Synoptic Climate Drivers in Western North America at the End of the Little Ice Age
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Erika Wise, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 230,502.00

Understanding extreme climate events like floods and droughts, which have major
impacts on society and ecosystems, has become particularly important in light of
potential future changes in climatic extremes. Paleoclimate data have played a
critical role in placing recent hydroclimate extremes within a longer-term
context, but biases in paleoclimate proxies remain a major challenge for the
reconstruction and interpretation of past climate extremes. This is particularly
applicable to the North American West Coast where a limited number of seasonal
extreme precipitation events account for a large proportion of annual
precipitation totals. This research will integrate historical climatology and
dendroclimatology to address pre-instrumental capture of extremes through a
focus on the 1800s, a time period including a range of climate extremes that are
not represented in the instrumental record. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically,
the aims of this project are to: (1) extract 19th century historical data from
archives and repositories to derive subseasonal precipitation and snow frequency
reconstructions; (2) use tree-ring data to assess the ability of existing
records to capture hydroclimatic extremes (with a focus on atmospheric river
events) and seasonally-specific precipitation on the West Coast; and (3)
integrate historical and tree-ring data to create spatial climate surfaces for
extreme events in the 1800s and use reanalysis data, gridded paleoclimate
reconstruction data, and paleoclimate model output to assess synoptic climate
drivers of those extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts
(B.I.) include improved understanding of extreme climate events at a seasonal
level has broad societal implications, as these extremes are costly hazards with
implications for agriculture, water supply, power generation, fire, and other
sectors of society. The information derived from this research is potentially
useful to water managers, climate modelers, and others who are interested in the
characterization of past extreme events, including impacts and driving
mechanisms, as well as future hydroclimate extremes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Further impacts of this project include: (1) education and
training of graduate students in research methods and dissemination, science
communication, and educational outreach; (2) involving undergraduates in hands-
on research experiences, allowing them to work through the scientific process;
(3) contribution of new, spatially explicit climate reconstructions to the NOAA
Paleoclimatology repository; and (4) capitalizing on the excitement of our
research themes to engage future generations of scientists through K-12
educational outreach activities involving a partnership with the Morehead
Planetarium and Science Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.