* 1802628
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Precarious Employment and Health Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,11/30/2019
* Rachel Donnelly, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 11/30/2019
* USD 11,999.00

Adults in midlife are dying at a higher rate than in the past due to drug
overdose, suicide, and liver disease, or deaths of despair. Common explanations
blame economic conditions, suggesting that Americans are facing increasing
stress due to bleak economic prospects, leading to destructive health behaviors
and poor mental and physical health. This project will examine how
characteristics of precarious employment contribute to multiple dimensions of
health, including alcohol consumption, prescription drug use, and depressive
symptoms in midlife adults. The project will study whether these associations
vary by gender and household socioeconomic status, and whether they vary by
state-level social policies. For example, the project hypothesizes that state-
level social policies related to financial assistance (e.g., state Earned Income
Tax Credit) and health (e.g., expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care
Act) shape how precarious employment affects health outcomes. The project will
provide input to social polices suggesting actions for states to take to improve
the health of citizens, as well as intervention points for organizations and
agencies addressing problematic health patterns in the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies both the short-
and long-term health consequences of precarious employment among midlife
workers. The project will analyze the Health and Retirement Study (HRS), an
ongoing, nationally representative sample of adults over age 50 in the United
States. The HRS has been administered every two years since 1992 (12 waves) and
oversamples African-American and Hispanic households. The analytical sample will
include respondents who are currently employed at each wave (approximately age
50 to 65) across four birth cohorts. The project will pay particular attention
to the youngest cohort (age 50-55 in 2010), given recent attention to the
morbidity and mortality of these midlife adults. Longitudinal models using fixed
effects regression and growth mixture modeling will allow assessments of the
relationship between precarious work and mental and physical health outcomes by
state-level and household-level characteristics. The project will inform
theories involving social stress, precarious work, and population health, and
will provide policy guidance at the organizational, state, and national levels
regarding ways to promote better health for this
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.