* 1802493
* Digitization PEN:   Enhancing the EPICC TCN with unique, well curated, but poorly accessible collections at the University of California - Riverside
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Nigel Hughes, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 94,855.00

This is a Partner to Existing Networks (PEN) award to the University of
California-Riverside Earth Science Museum (UCRESM) to partner with the Eastern
Pacific Invertebrate Communities of the Cenozoic (EPICC) Thematic Collections
Network (TCN). The EPICC TCN is digitizing collections that document the
response of coastal invertebrate communities to long-term environmental changes
across a wide and continuous range of latitudes since the extinction of the non-
avian dinosaurs. This PEN will digitize about 40,000 marine invertebrate
specimens and will contribute data on fossils from boreholes drilled by private
industry, bulk specimens from Pleistocene marine terraces, specimens
representing the northern extent of the Bay of California, and type specimens of
fossils from across Southern California. Throughout the course of the project,
undergraduate students will be heavily involved. They will be given training and
experience in museum studies earlier in their academic careers than is typical,
giving them a boost for future career development opportunities. Many of the
students that will be involved are from groups underrepresented in museum
sciences. Since the majority of UCR's student body are low-income and/or from
underrepresented minorities, paid internships will be provided through this
project to provide an avenue for some who would otherwise be unable to enter the
field. The UCRESM includes an exhibit hallway visited by about 25,000 people per
year, including many of the university's tour groups. Funds from this project
will be used to create an interdisciplinary exhibit on the biological,
geographical, tectonic, and environmental changes of California's coastline.
Specimens digitized will be included and students will play an important part in
designing and putting together the exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Small, out-of-
the-way collections such as this are often understudied and inaccessible. This
project will provide high-quality data and images to researchers unable to view
specimens in person. The boreholes represented specimens from far below the
surface that are difficult and expensive to obtain, so those provided by oil
companies fill many gaps in the fossil record. Bulk specimens from Pleistocene
marine terraces provides a less biased look at the diversity of a site than
targeted collections. Specimens from the Bay of California, which once extended
far north of the Salton Sea and its fauna had an unexpected affinity with the
Caribbean, are important for studying the dispersal of taxa between the Atlantic
and Pacific just before the closure of the Panamanian Isthmus. Best practice
protocols for digitizing core data created during this project will be uploaded
to EPICC's website for other core collections to consult. The data from the
project, including high-quality images for 470 type specimens, will be made
available online through iDigBio (idigbio.org) and the UCRESM
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.