* 1802136
* Participant Support for a GSA Thompson Field Forum: Processes controlling the growth and evolution of continental batholiths, Coast Mountains British Columbia Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Harold Stowell, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 12/31/2018
* USD 21,810.00

This proposal provides support for student participation and early career
faculty to participate in a Geological Society of Geological Society of America
Thompson Field Forum entitled." Participants of the forum will examine important
field relationships along a transect across the Coast Mountains batholith
between Terrace and Prince Rupert Canada that will be held August 12 to 17,
2018. Along with the field trip, evening technical sessions will involve talks
and discussion regarding processes of magmatism, continental growth, and
collisional, accretionary, and translational tectonics. The Coast Mountains
Batholith, British Columbia is an ideal location for forum because is one of the
largest magmatic complexes on earth and it exhibits significant along strike and
cross strike variations in structure, compostion, and depths from which the
rocks have been exhumed. In particular, the forum will examine the concept of
high flux magmatic events. A growing body of data from upper and lower crustal
exposure of batholiths around the globe indicate that most batholiths are
comprised of intrusions that are emplaced during relatively brief time periods
(tens of millions of years) known as High Flux Events (HFE). Field stops and
discussions will focus on locations that are important for discerning mechanisms
that trigger these high flux magmatic events. Specific topics to be addressed
during the forum include 1) What are the sources for batholith magmas; 2) What
are the triggering mechanisms for high flux magmatic events; and 3) What is the
magnitude and significance of large-scale translational faulting on batholith
architecture? Support for this forum will provide assistance for ten students
and early career faculty to attend and benefit from this unique activity. The
travel and logistical support for the forum will directly enhance science
education in an important STEM discipline through the participants increased
awareness and ability to integrate field, analytical, and model based science.
Participants will be in an excellent position to disseminate these ideas to the
research community and the general public, and the experience will greatly
enhance their future scientific careers. A publicly available document
describing field stops and related geological syntheses will be produced by the
Geological Society of America.