* 1802531
* The Eighth (8th) International Symposium on Environmental Hydraulics; Notre Dame, Indiana; June 4-7, 2018
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Andrew Kennedy, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

This award provides funding for early career scientists to attend the
International Symposium on Environmental Hydraulics hosted by the University of
Notre Dame in the summer of 2018. The conference will bring together a broad
range of early-career, mid-career, and senior scientists in differing fields
with the goal of stimulating cross-fertilization and establishing commonalities
in work. NSF funding will allow registration fees to be cut for graduate
students, ensuring robust participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 8th
International Symposium on Environmental Hydraulics will be held on the campus
of the University of Notre Dame on June 4-7th, 2018. The goal of the workshop is
to bring together a diverse group of scientists and engineers working in the
area of environmental hydraulics, including relevant topics in environmental
fluid dynamics, on a common platform to present recent findings, exchange ideas,
foster collaborations and welcome junior researchers and students to the broader
hydraulics community. Environmental Hydraulics encompasses a range of topics
including pollutant reactions and transport in air and water, eco-hydraulics,
sediment transport, fundamental fluid mechanics, river and coastal morphology,
natural hazard prediction and mitigation, high performance computational
applications, and many others. The commonality in these topics is the
application of fluid mechanics to the physical/chemical/ecological/built
environment.