* 1802165
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Institutional Change Through the End of Bretton Woods
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Nina Bandelj, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 12/31/2019
* USD 11,958.00

Throughout the postwar period, the Bretton Woods system secured stable exchange
rates between international currencies by way of the U.S. dollar convertibility
to gold at a set price. In 1971, the United States ceased this policy of gold-
dollar convertibility, leaving the international economy governed by flexible
exchange rates shortly thereafter. This project examines the process of
international negotiation over monetary reform that culminated in unilateral
American action in 1971, an outcome that defies existing understandings of how
institutions change from within. The project also evaluates whether the end of
Bretton Woods was driven more by international political interests than the
imperatives of the international monetary system itself. Findings will inform
understanding of the relationship between economic crises and related political
actions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will analyze extensive archival
records that document the decision-making process leading to the end of Bretton
Woods. Using declassified documents from the National Archives in College Park,
as well as several Presidential Libraries, the project will produce an updated
historical narrative of the end of Bretton Woods. There are three objectives: 1)
to extend the most current theories of institutional change to address the
dynamics of policymaking processes; 2) to articulate a mechanism by which
economic policy decisions capitalize on public perceptions of crisis; and 3) to
contribute an update social science history of the end of Bretton Woods. These
objectives will be reached through process-tracing to make causal inferences
based on complex sequences of events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.