* 1802893
* MCB-ECA:  Assimilation of tree-ring and forest inventory data across the interior western U.S.: a hierarchical analysis of patterns and drivers to forecast forest productivity.
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,11/30/2023
* Margaret Evans, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Jason West
* 11/30/2023
* USD 325,706.00

Forests are influenced by climate. They also influence climate because they
remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere as they grow. This project will better
quantify both the influence of climate variation on tree growth and how much
carbon is sequestered each year by forests by using two complementary data sets,
the national forest inventory and tree-ring data. These data come from the U. S.
Forest Service Forest Inventory and Analysis Program. This inventory program
evaluates the current state and future trajectory of the nation's forests from
measurements in a network of permanent sample plots. The plots are revisited and
measurements are made once each decade in the western US. A spatially complete
set of tree cores collected in the forest inventory plots contains information
on the relationship between year-to-year variation in climate and tree growth,
recorded in annual growth rings. The combined data will be used to study forest
productivity across broad spatial scales and make predictions of ecosystem
state, ecosystem services, and natural capital. This study will produce
ecological forecasts relevant to society and informing strategies for climate
adaptation. The project will also provide research experience and professional
development for a post-doctoral fellow and undergraduates, open-source code for
reproducible science, and outreach to schools and the public at the Laboratory
of Tree-Ring Research at the University of Arizona. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There
is considerable uncertainty surrounding the future functioning of forest
ecosystems, especially carbon sequestration, in the face of rising temperatures
and evaporative demand. The focus of this project is the particularly vulnerable
forest macrosystem of the interior western United States. Forest ecosystem
functioning at this large scale will be analyzed by leveraging an existing,
continental-scale ecological observatory network (the permanent sample plot
network of the U. S. Forest Service's Forest Inventory and Analysis Program) and
assimilating into it a new data stream with annual-resolution information on
individual tree growth from increment cores collected in the same forest plot
network. A hierarchical Bayesian multiple regression approach will be used to
quantify the drivers of forest productivity across spatial scales and explain
the effects of individual tree size, forest stand structure, geophysical
conditions, disturbances, climate and their cross-scale interactions on tree-
level and forest stand-level above-ground woody biomass production. Estimates of
the effects of these drivers and their interactions will be used to make
ecological forecasts of future tree- and stand-level productivity under various
scenarios of stand density and stand size structure, including estimates of
forecasting uncertainty. Data assimilation on this large scale will be supported
by the cyberinfrastructure of NSF's CyVerse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.