* 1802453
* MSB-FRA:  Scaling fire size from local process to continental pattern
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Ann Carla Staver, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 1,035,000.00

Fire is a fundamental process in the Earth system, determining vegetation
structure, changing atmospheric dynamics and carbon cycling, and damaging human
infrastructure and livelihoods. One need only think of the recent, extreme fire
season on the US West Coast for an example of how serious the impacts of fire
can be. Predicting where fire will occur and how intense it will be is critical
for both human and ecological systems in the future. Fire modules in global
biosphere models allow forecasts of fire frequency and intensity. However,
incorporating fire into global biosphere models efficiently and accurately
remains difficult because global models run at a coarse scale relative to that
at which many atmospheric, oceanic, and ecological processes operate. One of the
key missing components is realistic fire extinctions. Currently, most global
models force fires to go out after some pre-determined interval instead of
allowing them to burn for days to months. The extreme fires contribute the
majority of the impacts in the Earth system, and capturing their effects is
critical to useful predictions. Improving the understanding and representation
of fire extinction mechanisms in global fire models may improve predictions of
fire occurrence in the Earth system. The broader impacts of this project will be
improvements in fire management at field sites and savannas more broadly, and
training of postdoctoral associates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An incomplete
understanding of fire extinction forces global fire models to rely either on
statistical representations of fire pattern or on local, unscaled assumptions
about fire behavior. As a result, fire models diverge wildly, from each other
and from reality, in their predictions for past, current, and future fire
distributions in the Earth system. In this project, the researcher ask why fires
go out, first in savanna ecosystems, where fires are frequent and therefore data
plentiful, then expanding into other flammable systems (including coniferous and
Mediterranean systems like those in Western North America). Such data feeds into
theoretical generalizations of fire extinction (Phase 1). The team predicts that
fire extent will result from interactions between random heterogeneity in
fuels/landscapes and underlying topographic, weather, or anthropogenic patterns
in the landscape. They will then implement the results of this work into global
fire models, beginning with CLM4-DGVM and SPITFIRE-JSBACH and then proceeding
more broadly via collaborations with the Fire Model Intercomparison Project
(Phase 2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.