* 1802472
* Hybrid Optical Approach for Quantum Information Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* James Franson, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 310,000.00

This project aims to improve quantum information processing with optical
systems. In it the PI will investigate theoretically a hybrid approach to
photonic qbits by combining features of previously studied linear and nonlinear
quantum logic gares. New approaches for quantum communication and quantum
computation are expected to result from the work. This is important because it
will lay the foundation for technologies that can improve national security and
economic competitiveness. It will also advance the field of quantum information
science. Broader impacts of this project include training of a graduate student
in theoretical quantum optics methods and providing research experience for
undergraduate students who will become part of the next generation of
scientists. Public lectures for non-scientists, and several science outreach
activities for high-school students are also part of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information processing with quanta of light
(photonic qubits) is a promising direction for new technologies. However, it is
challenging to make quantum logic gates with photonic qubits. This award is for
a theoretical investigation of a hybrid optical approach that combines the best
features of the linear and nonlinear quantum logic gates previously studied.
Linear optical techniques, such as postselection, heralding, and feed-forward
control will be applied to nonlinear devices to reduce the gate error rates.
Although the resulting devices will be probabilistic in nature, the use of
nonlinear effects can increase the probability of success for photonic qubit
gates. This approach will lead to robust devices with a low error rate and a
high probability of success, as needed for further advances in quantum
information processing. In addition to quantum logic gates, this team will also
investigate hybrid devices that are specifically designed for quantum
communications tasks, such as entanglement distribution. As part of this
project, this team will also investigate new techniques for probabilistic
quantum cloning. This will advance the progress of science by providing a deeper
understanding of quantum information processing with photonic
qubits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.