* 1802344
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Status and Authority in Small Organizations
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Paul DiMaggio, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/29/2020
* USD 12,000.00

We know that status, or how much people defer to one another, and authority, or
whether one individual gives orders to another, operate separately in
organizations. However, much scholarship combines these two social structures
under the notion of hierarchy, making it difficult to detect how each might be
unique. We also do not know how each structure may change over time. This
project addresses these gaps by asking how organizational status and authority
hierarchies co-evolve. The project investigates whether higher status is
associated with exercising authority; whether exercising authority changes a
person's relative status; and what the temporal patterns of these changes tell
us about the mechanisms linking them. The project studies user actions from over
90,000 workers in 1700 organizations over nearly three years. These findings
help us understand the evolution of inequality at work, with a focus on how
authority operates in smaller organizations, where two thirds of net new jobs in
the United States are created. In doing so it will provide policy guidance
regarding how smaller workplaces can be organized to reduce social inequality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project analyzes hierarchies in motion by
asking how status and authority hierarchies co-evolve in small organizations. To
measure these hierarchies, the project uses uniquely detailed anonymized
metadata from five billion user actions taken in a project-and-task-management
software system. These data make it possible to separate the exercise of
authority from other actions for 90,000 individuals in 1700 organizations over
nearly three years. These data are combined with three months of participant
observation at one of these organizations and interviews with managers and
employees at it and eight other organizations. The project provides insights
into expectation states theory as well as organizational theory regarding
status, authority, hierarchy and their evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.