* 1802524
* RUI:  The Chemistry and Engineering of Waste Oils and Blends in their Conversion to Fuel Oils.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Lawrence Pratt, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed research project aims to understand the chemical mechanisms during
pyrolysis of waste oils, as well as mixed waste oil and plastics streams, for
the production of fuels. The interaction between competing mechanisms and the
development of a continuous process for fuels production from the pyrolysis of
waste oil, grease and plastics will be studied with the objective of identifying
operating conditions maximizing the production of high-value products. The
project will improve the access of undergraduate students from underrepresented
minority groups to research and facilitate international collaborations on
environmental sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is
motivated by the need to better understand the mechanism of waste oil pyrolysis
and the effects of the temperature profiles on the product distribution. The
focus will be on studying the pyrolysis of orange grease extracted from
municipal waste to convert it into fuel. The development of brown and orange
greases as a fuel source can have a significant effect on eliminating them from
municipal waste streams. That benefit will be multiplied by adding waste
plastics as a feedstock and studying the pyrolysis of streams consisting of
mixed waste oil and plastics as a source of petrochemicals and fuels. The work
can be extended to other sources of waste oil, plastics, rubber, and other
materials that currently are buried in landfills or pollute the environment. The
fundamental knowledge on chemical reaction mechanisms will enable the
development of a pilot plant by selecting the best reactor types and separation
processes without excessive trial and error. The proposed project will
contribute to the establishment of an energy track in the Environmental Science
program at CUNY-Medgar Evers College, enable international cooperation, and help
prepare students to enter the workforce or start new businesses. The project
will offer opportunities for students to be involved in research and increase
the retention rates of minority students in a STEM
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.