* 1802625
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Therapeutic Alternatives in the Criminal Courts
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2020
* Becky Pettit, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 10,736.00

This study examines the growing use of therapy as an alternative to criminal
prosecution in the United States. Tens of thousands of defendants each year are
now offered a pathway to avoid felony convictions by completing therapeutic
activities and passing drug tests for designated periods of time. By analyzing
the role and consequences of these pretrial diversion programs, this project
will contribute to knowledge about the impacts of the contemporary criminal
justice system. It also will provide information to policymakers, legal
practitioners, and the public as they determine the role that pretrial diversion
should play in criminal justice reform efforts and in the provision of mental
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Despite the growing popularity of pretrial
diversion programs across the U.S., little sociological research has yet
examined their impacts. This research draws on national and local datasets,
document analysis, an original survey experiment, participant observation, and
interviews with attorneys, defendants, and therapists to illuminate the
consequences of diversion nationally and to explore variation between programs.
Three questions are addressed: 1) how effective diversion is as a tool to
promote decarceration; 2) what the implications of diversion are for social
inequality; and 3) what effects diversion has on the lives of defendants.
Findings will contribute to scholarship on contemporary U.S. criminal justice
system reform and on the consequences of using the court system to provide
mental health treatment. In addition, this research will provide empirical
information to jurisdictions seeking to expand diversionary options or to design
new programs, to policymakers in search of effective criminal justice
alternatives, and to groups involved in advocating for penal
reform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.