* 1802226
* RAPID: Impacts of Post-Hurricane Land-Atmosphere Interactions on Convective and Precipitation Processes in the Caribbean Region
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2018
* Fred Moshary, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 11/30/2018
* USD 183,895.00

One of Hurricane Maria's devastating impacts was a significant landscape change
to Puerto Rico from the extreme winds and flooding rains. As the island
recovers, this project will provide funding for a research team to study how
land surface changes may impact storm development and intensification in the
Caribbean. The award will provide funding for the refurbishment and replacement
of some existing research infrastructure, and new instruments to measure the
energy balance of the land surface. Observations will be compared with numerical
model simulations to answer questions about storm initiation and invigoration.
The long-term impact of this study will be an improved capacity to predict
extreme precipitation, which has implications for public safety and water
resource management. The research team will also work with stakeholders in
Puerto Rico to provide scientifically sound information to increase their
resilience to natural disasters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to
improve understanding of the role played by modified land-atmosphere
interactions in storm development and intensification in the Caribbean. The
researchers believe that the land surface changes due to Hurricane Maria could
provide a unique contrasting scenario to accelerate understanding of storm
initiation and invigoration. The team plans to update an existing observational
network to include surface energy flux sensors and to repair some of the
existing equipment that was damaged by Maria. A comprehensive energy balance
site will be established to record sensible, latent and carbon dioxide fluxes.
Two intensive observing periods will be conducted with radiosonde launches and
an aerosol speciation sampler. Varied land surface configurations will be
conducted using the RAMS model and tested against the observations. Four
research questions are at the core of the project: 1) How does the modified
landscape impact the local surface energy and water budgets? 2) How do the
changes in local energy and water budgets impact convection during the rainfall
seasons? 3) In the context of a changed landscape, how do the local land-
atmosphere processes interact with large scale events like Saharan dust
advection that influence cloud formation and rainfall? 4) How will these
geophysical changes impact the recovering local community? Particularly, how
vulnerable are they to flooding and what are the challenges to the agricultural
sector?