* 1802994
* Luminescence-based Pressure and Strain Measurement for High-speed Fluid-structure Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,07/31/2022
* James Hubner, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 358,668.00

The air flow over high-speed aircraft and rockets, particularly at supersonic
speeds, can cause structural vibrations that may be detrimental to either the
performance or the safety of the vehicle. These vibrations arise from large
pressure fluctuations developing from the flow near the surface as well as from
shock waves impinging the surface. The experimental determination of the
location, magnitude and frequency of the pressure loads and their effect on the
structural response are important to validate both theoretical and computational
fluid-structure interaction models. This project will study and develop a novel
approach to measure the combined surface pressure and strain using a fast-
responding luminescent coating and high-speed digital cameras. The use of
luminescence techniques in the science, engineering, and medical fields has seen
substantial growth in recent years. The research will offer a robust learning
environment to expose, energize, and recruit both undergraduate and graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed effort is to integrate
two luminescent-based optical sensors?pressure sensitive paint and luminescent
photoelastic coating?to measure the unsteady, distributed loads and strains on
thin or deformable structures in high-speed flow. A successful effort will lead
to a new tool for researchers and engineers to study fluid structure
interactions in supersonic and eventually hypersonic flow where experimental
data is often sparse. The approach is to exploit commonalities of the two
measurement techniques. The average and the variance of luminescent emission
intensity relative to camera polarization angle of the proposed binary pressure-
strain coating are sensitive to surface pressure and strain, respectively. The
advent of high-powered light-emitting diodes and digital cameras with
micropolarizer lenses has enabled the possibility for this simultaneous full-
field, time-dependent approach. The three year proposed effort would first
characterize and demonstrate the approach in a controlled benchtop environment
in year one, then expand to more challenging flow environments in on-campus
supersonic flow facilities in year two and finally graduate to a demonstration
at Sandia National Laboratories during the final year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.