* 1802885
* Collaborative Research:  MSB-ENSA:  Leveraging NEON to Build a Predictive Cross-scale Theory of Ecosystem Transpiration
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Christopher Still, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2023
* USD 941,494.00

Water is a critical resource that sustains continental ecosystems. Land plants
play a critical role in the cycling of water between the continents and
atmosphere by extracting water from soils and groundwater and releasing it to
the atmosphere as they grow. Existing data suggest that this process,
transpiration, accounts for more than half of the global transfer of water from
the continents to the atmosphere. Surprisingly little is known about how much
water is transpired, how different types of plants and ecosystems govern
transpiration, and how properties of ecosystems are shaped by transpiration.
This award supports an interdisciplinary group of ecologists, Earth and
atmospheric scientists, and engineers to make estimates of plant transpiration
across the United States for the first time and use these data to develop models
and improve predictions of future plant water use. The team will develop new
techniques and datasets benefitting the scientific community and conduct
interdisciplinary graduate student training to prepare diverse, next-generation
scientists to tackle ecological and data science
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team will work with a wide range of
data products produced by the National Ecological Observatory Network, with a
primary emphasis on stable isotope ratios of water vapor and carbon dioxide.
Isotope ratios provide an integrated measure of physical processes controlling
gas exchange between plant leaves and the atmosphere. The suite of sensors
deployed by the Network across the USA provides the first standardized dataset
enabling isotope-based estimation of transpiration across a diverse range of
continental ecosystems. The project team will develop new calibration procedures
and data products from the Network's sensor data and distribute these for use by
the broader research community. These data will be integrated with other data
collected by the Network and information from field campaigns by the project
team, using analysis at a range of spatial scales from individual plots to
continental scales to determine how ecosystem structure and plant regulation of
gas exchange control transpiration. This knowledge will be integrated into and
used to test models for plant water use that reflect the underlying distribution
of functional traits and structural properties within the study ecosystem. The
models will be used to examine the potential sensitivities of transpiration and
ecosystem water use. During the course of its work, the project will develop and
disseminate new measurement and data analysis approaches and datasets of broad
use to researchers, and will support a graduate short course in spatial
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.