* 1802017
* BIGDATA: Collaborative Research: IA: Big Data Analytics for Optimized Planning of Smart, Sustainable, and Connected Communities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/21/2017,08/31/2022
* Wangda Zuo, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* David Corman
* 08/31/2022
* USD 427,414.00

Transforming villages, towns, and cities into smart, connected, and sustainable
communities is one of the most critical technological challenges of the coming
decade. Realizing this vision is contingent upon enabling existing community
infrastructure such as transportation, communications, and energy systems, to
seamlessly integrate sustainable components such as renewable sources, smart
sensors, and electric vehicles. Such an integration will ensure that tomorrow's
communities are truly sustainable and connected by exhibiting desirable
qualities that include: a) zero energy, in that they are self-sufficient in
their energy production, b) zero outage, in that communication links across the
community are ultra-reliable and experience significantly low interruption, and
c) zero congestion, in that the traffic congestion is minimized across the
community. With this overarching vision, the goal of this project is to develop
a new planning framework for smart, connected and sustainable communities that
allows meeting such zero-energy, zero-outage, and zero-congestions goals by
optimally deciding on how, when, and where to deploy or upgrade a community's
infrastructure. These decisions will be driven by massive volumes of community
data, stemming from multiple sources that can include mobility, energy, traffic,
communication demands, and other socio-technological information, to make
informed decisions on how to gradually and organically transform a community
into a fully sustainable and truly connected environment. The scale and
heterogeneity of this problem necessitates the need for innovation in the tools
used to process, analyze, and visualize heterogeneous data, as well as the data-
aware metrics used to monitor the performance of this community infrastructure.
One key element of this research is creation of a virtual testbed that can
accurately reconstruct, simulate, and evaluate the theoretical framework by
leveraging real-world big data sets from Virginia Tech and a zero-energy
community in Florida as well as other sources, such as the DOE. The testbed is
intended to be open access and will be able to support both research at host
institution as well as other users requiring non-proprietary multi-domain open-
data sets. The holistic nature of this research is thus expected to catalyze the
global deployment of sustainable and connected communities. The proposed
research will be complemented by a smart community big data challenge event that
will enable broad community participation. The educational plan includes new big
data-centric courses, as well as a large-scale involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in big data and smart communities research. Broad
dissemination is ensured via open-source software and periodic workshops and
tutorials. K-12 outreach events will be organized to attract under-represented
student groups to big data research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This transformative
research will lay the theoretical and practical foundations of smart, connected,
and sustainable communities by developing the first big data-driven holistic
approach to joint planning, optimization, and deployment of community
infrastructure for systems of critical importance, such as communication,
energy, and transportation networks. By bringing together interdisciplinary
domain experts from data science, electrical engineering, and civil and
architectural engineering, this research will yield several innovations: 1)
Novel big data techniques for faithfully creating spatio-temporal models for
smart communities that integrate data from heterogeneous sources and shed light
on the composition and operation of a given smart community, 2) Novel, data-
driven performance metrics that advance powerful mathematical tools from
stochastic geometry to explicitly quantify the health of smart communities via
tractable notions of zero energy, zero outage, and zero congestion, 3) Advanced
analytical tools that bring forward novel ideas from optimization theory to
devise the most effective strategies for deploying, upgrading, and operating
various community infrastructure nodes, given the scale, dynamics, and structure
of both the data and the community, and 4) A virtual smart community testbed
that can accurately reconstruct, simulate, and evaluate the theoretical
framework by leveraging open non-proprietary real-world big data
sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.