* 1802247
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the nature of deep-focus earthquakes in the Japan, Kuril, and Izu-Bonin subduction zones
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Songqiao Wei, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 330,500.00

About 75% of all earthquakes occur in the upper 60 km of the Earth. The
remaining events, known as intermediate and deep earthquakes, take place over a
depth range of 60 to 700 km and are focused within lithospheric oceanic slabs
descending into the mantle at convergent plate boundaries. The distribution of
these events has provided unique and direct evidence of mantle convection, the
driving force behind plate tectonics that shapes the surface of the Earth.
Though the information derived from deep earthquakes have been essential for
understanding the Earth's dynamic system as a whole, the physical mechanisms
causing these events are still a mystery. In contrast to their shallow
counterparts, deep earthquakes occur at depths where high temperatures and
pressures should inhibit seismic brittle failure. Several mechanisms have been
proposed to explain their occurrence, though differentiating between them has
been difficult partly due to resolution limitations in both seismic velocity
models, which are critical in constraining the geometry and internal physical
properties of subducting slabs, and earthquake source models, which characterize
the spatial and temporal evolution of source regions during seismic failure. The
goal of this study is to improve seismic velocity structure and earthquake
source imaging resolution in the Japan, Kuril, and Izu-Bonin regions, which host
a significant number of deep earthquakes. The improved seismic images will
clarify the spatial relationships between earthquake source properties and the
internal structure of subducting slabs. These relationships will provide a new
set of fundamental constraints for evaluating the viability of proposed deep
earthquake source mechanisms. Through this project, undergraduate students will
have opportunities to work on the proposed research activities, K-12 outreach
events will be organized to encourage girls to pursue STEM field careers, and
public lectures will be given on the work to adults who participate in lifelong
learning programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is still unclear where deep-focus
earthquakes nucleate and propagate within a slab, and as a result, details of
the Earth's dynamic inner workings in the lower half of the upper mantle are
still missing. Addressing this issue critically depends on accurate high-
resolution images of both the slab internal structure and deep-focus earthquake
source properties. Previous seismic image resolution and accuracy at depths
below 300 km were limited from sparse data coverage and theoretical
approximations used in traditional seismic tomography. Classical ray-theory
based tomography images indicate that deep-focus hypocenters coincide with the
highest wavespeed anomalies within the slab, traditionally viewed as the slab's
cold core, where phase transformational faulting, involving the breakdown of
metastable olivine, is considered as a likely cause of deep-focus earthquakes.
However, with an unprecedented seismic data set in East Asia aided by the
advanced full waveform tomography technique, the new images of the Japan, Kuril,
and Izu-Bonin slabs (EARA2014) show that deep-focus earthquakes consistently
occur near the top of high wavespeed regions, possibly indicating that these
events occur near the top of the subducting slab. This intriguing observation
motivated this proposal to further explore and resolve the fine-scale wavespeed
variations and earthquake source properties in these slabs using high frequency
full waveform information. The central hypothesis of this project is that deep-
focus earthquakes nucleate and propagate along the top of the slab, where
oceanic crust and a hydrous serpentine layer are located, i.e. away from the
slab's cold core. In order to test this hypothesis, the following three specific
goals will be pursued: (1) obtain a slab structural model with improved spatial
resolution from the existing model EARA2014 using higher frequency seismic
waveforms; (2) relocate deep-focus hypocenters and image deep-focus earthquake
rupture propagation with the aid of the new tomographic slab model; (3)
establish spatial relationships between the slab internal structure and deep-
focus earthquake locations and rupture properties. If the central hypothesis of
this project is supported by the proposed work, then there will be a paradigm
shift in terms of our understanding of the nature of deep-focus earthquakes, and
consequently, mechanisms other than phase transformational faulting need to be
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.