* 1802336
* Analysis of Discrete Structures and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2021
* Robert Hough, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2021
* USD 159,999.00

This project treats a broad range of problems in the analysis of discrete
structures ranging from classical problems in analytic number theory concerning
the gap distribution between primes and the shape of number fields, to the
mixing behavior of random walks on groups. A central theme is the interaction
between techniques from analytic number theory, probability, and combinatorics.
The principal investigator recently made a breakthrough by using probabilistic
techniques to solve a famous problem of Paul Erdos in combinatorial number
theory, and part of the investigation will develop applications of this result.
The problems studied have applications to cryptography and quantum computation.
Funding is to be used to support the research of a group of undergraduate and
graduate students and to support outreach efforts aimed at high school and
undergraduate students interested in problem solving and beginning
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes problems on automorphic
forms, sieve methods, and the analysis of random walks on groups. The projects
are split between topics in pure analytic number theory, such as the use of
automorphic forms to study the lattice shape of the ring of integers of number
fields, projects which use techniques common in analytic number theory, like the
theory of exponential sums and oscillatory integrals, to study the asymptotic
mixing of Markov chains and other limit problems in probability, and projects
which use more purely probabilistic techniques. A significant part of the
project extends the theory of zeta functions of prehomogeneous vector spaces in
studying low degree number fields. A variety of modern analytic techniques are
to be employed, including the use of automorphic forms on higher rank groups,
partition functions from statistical mechanics, the distribution of points on
nilmanifolds, and the theory of products of random
matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.