* 1802948
* Collaborative: A mobile smart glucose monitoring system
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Gymama Slaughter, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Shubhra Gangopadhyay
* 03/31/2019
* USD 330,000.00

The objective of this research proposal is to develop a class of novel mobile
smart glucose monitoring system (mSGMS) that is able to detect glucose levels
from interstitial fluid without the use of an external power source or a
battery. In a clinical context, the work will provide a new technique for
continuous glucose measurement that is far more effective at detecting transient
changes in glucose levels. The mSGMS will provide faster analysis and better
diagnostic information, with the added benefit of responding rapidly to
abnormalities in glucose levels. The ability to continuously monitor glucose
means it will no longer be necessary to frequently sample blood with some
associated degree of inconvenience and pain. The smart glucose monitoring system
integrated with data transmission-communication modules could potentially
replace continuous glucose monitors (CGMs) used in monitoring blood glucose in
healthcare applications. Educational outreach activities and research
experiences will be developed to engage Baltimore area high school students,
undergraduates, and graduate students in the proposed research. This work will
be of significant use in improving glycemic control and improving the quality of
life with fewer complications and lower healthcare costs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A class of novel stretchable and flexible
mobile smart glucose monitoring system (mSGMS) capable of continuous glucose
measurement that is far more effective at detecting transient changes in glucose
levels from interstitial fluid is proposed. The development of the mSGMS will be
achieved through the following specific aims: (Aim 1) Design, fabricate and test
the smart glucose monitoring system capable of detecting glucose levels. (Aim 2)
Develop a mobile smart glucose monitoring system (mSGMS) that integrates
wireless telemetry and performs data collection, signal processing, data
analysis, and information transmission to patient and caregivers, and (Aim 3)
encapsulate the smart glucose monitoring system. The proposed research is
innovative because the mSGMS generates and accumulates electrical power in a
capacitor via a charge pump integrated circuit (IC) as a result of the oxidation
of interstitial glucose for sensing glucose without the use of a potentiostat
circuit or an external power source, while simultaneously via a DC-DC converter
powering the data acquisition, processing, and data transmission-communication
modules. This research offers tremendous opportunities to overcome the
limitations of commercially available glucose monitoring technologies by
providing a device that allows sensitive and rapid detection of transient
changes in interstitial glucose concentration. The proposed studies will
generate continuous glucose recording in interstitial fluid samples from
patients with type 1 diabetes for long duration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.