* 1802299
* Categories of Sheaves in Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Carl Mautner, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2024
* USD 167,104.00

Representation theory is the study of symmetries in algebra. An understanding of
symmetry allows us to reduce complicated problems to simpler ones. Algebra can
be used to describe a wide range of phenomena and structures throughout
mathematics and the real world, and consequently representation theory has many
important applications. Sheaves are geometric objects that generalize the usual
notion of functions and have proven to be extremely effective in advancing our
understanding of representation theory. This research project aims to uncover
finer information about sheaves and applications of this information to
representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parity sheaves were introduced by
the PI and his collaborators as a tool for studying the representation theory of
reductive groups in positive characteristic. The study of parity sheaves has
also suggested the existence of new structures in categories of perverse
sheaves. The PI will explore these structures in some special, important, cases
and their expected applications in a number of areas including the
representations of Hecke algebras and modular representations of finite groups
of Lie type. The geometric spaces to be studied are nilpotent cones and their
generalizations for symmetric pairs and in gauge theory, as well as
(generalized) flag varieties and toric varieties. The proposed methods include
utilizing cohomological parity vanishing properties, nearby cycles and
hyperbolic localization functors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.