* 1802139
* Primes, Divisors, and Permutations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kevin Ford, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2023
* USD 200,000.00

Questions about properties of positive integers, especially the way in which
integers factor and the distribution of prime numbers, have fascinated people
for thousands of years and have recently found applications in computer science,
information security and signal processing. Goals of the research are to enhance
our understanding of the distribution of prime numbers, properties of divisors
of integers, the distribution of random permutations. An equally important
objective is to more fully understand the deeper connections between these
seemingly dissimilar objects, that is, primes and permutations, thus building
bridges between several areas of mathematics such as number theory,
combinatorics, probability, and group theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
projects aims to develop a new methods, based on probabilistic reasoning, for
establishing the existence of long strings of consecutive composite values in
sparse sequences of integers, in order to gain a better understanding of the
gaps between prime values of the sequence. Of particular interest are the
sequences of values of a given polynomial. Another project will show that there
exist extremely large discrepancies, in a precise quantitative sense, in the
distribution of primes in arithmetic progressions to a given modulus when many
residue classes are viewed together. This will also involve the creation of new
tools for dealing with large deviations of multivariate distributions. The third
project is dedicated toward a better understanding of the the concentration of
divisors of integers and the concentration of fixed sets of random permutations.
The research will improve existing results about the distribution of the maximal
concentration of divisors in dyadic intervals, and maximal number of fixed sets
of any size, and obtain sharp bounds on the largest interval which contains k
divisors of a typical integer, for any quantity k. A common probabilistic model
for divisors and permutations will guide the
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.