* 1802124
* GP-IMPACT: Expanding HBCU Pathways for Geoscience Education
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Edith Davis, Savannah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 621,059.00

Despite meaningful STEM diversity and inclusion efforts, African Americans
remain disproportionately underrepresented in the geosciences. Though national
standards introduce the field as early as the 6th grade, many teachers lack the
proficiency to develop content or to confidently deliver instruction and career
guidance in the Earth Sciences. Historically Black Colleges and Universities
(HBCU) are untapped resources and opportunities to meet these needs. The
Expanding HBCU Pathways to Geoscience Education project proposes to develop and
deploy a deep-dive assessment to (1) impact middle school teacher preparation
curricula and professional development activities toward the goal of (2)
improving African American representation in the geosciences. The systematic
approach will result in an Evaluation and Enhancement Tool that will allow the
user to assess their institutional approach with evidence-based best practices
of HBCUs and other entities in geoscience methods, practices, and outcomes;
administrative leadership; and institutional support with particular emphasis on
pre-service teacher preparation curricula and programs. Evaluation and
Enhancement are two components of the proposed work, which may be used by
institutions to prescriptively address any gaps that are identified. As the 2
stages of the Tool (Evaluation &amp; Enhancement) are developed and then mapped
to each other, this team anticipates that voids will be identified for which
there are inadequate or missing Enhancement Tools to meet the need. For example,
previous collective experience of the HBCU Pathways group indicates that
culturally relevant materials will need to be developed and tested as they are
critical in reaching and attracting students from underrepresented groups. These
materials would help these student groups see the role that they can fill with a
career and/or significant training in the Geosciences. Each of these steps is
essential in systematically determining the path forward for increasing
diversity in the Geosciences so that we may more holistically address the
environmental issues that exist and that will continue to be revealed in coming
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Expanding HBCU Pathways to Geoscience Education
project will develop and test an Evaluation and Enhancement Tool that can be
used by HBCUs and other institutions that reach or aspire to attract and support
African Americans in the Geosciences, including Geoscience Education. Because
geoscience diversity and inclusion efforts over the past half century have
resulted in a less than notable increase, the HBCU Pathways Team will use a
range of critical components to supporting the success of African Americans in
the Geosciences for the development of the Evaluation component of the
Instrument. These include strength of institutional/ programmatic support and
capacity for geoscience curricula and activities, while targeting pre-service
and in-service teachers. Thus, HBCU Pathways will deliver a strategic
multidimensional solution (1) to impact middle school teacher preparation
curricula and professional development activities toward the goal of (2)
improving minority access to the geosciences. This multidimensional and scalable
solution will be developed and tested at 3 institutions in the first 12 months
and 2 additional institutions in the second 12 months. At each stage,
Enhancement Resources will be vetted and mapped to recommend site-specific
prescriptive resources to fortify efforts by institutions to offer hands-on
training, develop geoscience content, and deliver geosciences into HBCU pre-
service teacher preparation curricula and programs. &lt;br/&gt;Core
interdisciplinary teams and additional partners and advisors, will utilize a
theory-driven process of intervention design and evaluation to develop an
effective, sustainable, and scalable institutional and programmatic-level
intervention. The approach will be used to support the development of
interventions by bringing together key stakeholders, particularly Teacher
Educators, Regional School-System Representatives, and Geoscientists from the
start to scrutinize and address proposed approaches to achieving plausible,
feasible, and testable assessment methods and enhancement activities. This will
also be aligned with the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation
standards. Additionally, this focused effort to systematically develop and
complete testing of a scalable, interactive, stakeholder-driven deep dive
process will assist the HBCU and broader Education community in advancing
geoscience education and workforce development by accessing the untapped HBCU
community resources and opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.