* 1802006
* Any Light Particle Searches (ALPS)
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Guido Mueller, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 07/31/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Multiple astronomical observations have established that about 85% of the matter
in the universe is not made of known particles. Deciphering the nature of this
so-called Dark Matter is of fundamental importance to cosmology, astrophysics,
and high-energy particle physics. One of the most exciting quests in particle
physics is the search for new particles beyond the Standard Model of particle
physics. Extensions of the standard model predict not only new particles with
masses above the electroweak scale (about 100 billion electron-volts, eV), but
also so-called WISPs (Weakly Interacting Sub-eV Particles). The most famous WISP
candidate is the axion, which has been introduced to explain the smallness of
Charge-Parity (CP) violation in Quantum ChromoDynamics and which turns out to
also be a prime candidate for a constituent of the dark matter in the universe.
Similarly, axion-like particles, light spin 1 particles called "hidden sector
photons," seem to occur naturally in realistic embeddings of the standard model
into string theory. It is therefore an important and fundamental question
whether any of these weakly-interacting light particles exists. The Any Light
Particle Search (ALPS) experiment will give students and postdoctoral scientists
the opportunity to develop scientific skills from a diverse set of disciplines
spanning lasers and optics, electronics and feedback control systems, vacuum and
cryogenics, computational methods and data analysis algorithm development,
large-scale detector commissioning and operation, dark-matter physics and
cosmology. The required technologies are spin-offs of technologies which were
developed for ground and space-based gravitational-wave detectors. The work
supported by this award would build on these investments and would allow
continued development of high performance optical techniques and devices which
have commercial applications in the laser and optics
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ALPS experiment under development at DESY
in Germany is a 'light-shining-through-walls' search, where photons are
projected to be converted into weakly interacting light particles which pass
unimpeded through an opaque wall and convert (in part) back to photons behind
the wall. The most famous of these particles are axions which require a strong
magnetic field to convert to photons. Other particles which fall within the ALPS
portfolio include hidden-sector photons which couple linearly to the
electromagnetic field and do not require a static magnetic field. The planned
ALPS@DESY experiments are the leading background-independent searches for axions
and hidden sector photons. The improved sensitivity of ALPS would enable, for
the first time, a purely laboratory experiment to probe axion-photon couplings
at a level competitive with, or superior to, limits from stellar evolution or
solar searches. The experiment only depends on the fundamental photon-axion
interaction and not on solar models nor on assumptions about dark
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.