* 1802388
* Collaborative Research: Linking Dissolved Organic Matter Composition to Photochemical Reactivity
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Christina Remucal, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 234,782.00

Contaminants such as pesticides and pharmaceuticals are commonly found in lakes,
rivers, and other surface waters. It is important to know how quickly these
chemicals break down in the environment due to natural processes in order to
assess their potential risks to humans and ecosystems. This research project
studies the role of sunlight in the breakdown of pesticides and pharmaceuticals
in a process known as photodegradation. Photodegradation is driven by the
photochemical reactions of dissolved organic matter (DOM), which is a complex
mixture of organic chemicals derived from plants and microorganisms that is
found in all natural waters. The chemical composition of DOM is highly variable
in different waters, and the different compositions influence how quickly
pesticides and pharmaceuticals break down when exposed to sunlight. Therefore,
this project will develop a framework to predict the relative photoreactivity of
a wide variety of DOM samples collected from rivers, bogs, lakes, and wastewater
treatment plants located in forested, agricultural, and urban watersheds. By
developing predictive models based on DOM composition measurements, this
research will lay the groundwork for predicting the degradation rates of
chemicals in aquatic systems. If successful, this knowledge can be used to
identify and isolate chemical contaminants in the Nation's natural waters,
thereby protecting public health and the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to determine the link between the composition of dissolved organic
matter (DOM) to its photochemical reactivity. While state-of-the-science
techniques such as high-resolution mass spectrometry provide more information
about DOM composition than ever before, it is still not possible to predict the
reactivity of DOM based solely on its composition due to the heterogeneity of
this complex mixture. This research collaboration between the University of
Wisconsin-Madison and the University of St. Thomas will test the hypothesis that
a combination of parameters derived from a variety of analytical techniques can
be used to predict relative photochemical reactivity within a diverse set of DOM
samples. The principal investigators hypothesize that a subset of the data
produced by the different techniques contributes strongly to variance in DOM
reactivity because each technique samples different populations of DOM. In order
to test this hypothesis, river and lake samples will be collected from five
watersheds (St. Louis River, Yahara, Northern Highlands, Minnesota River, and
Mississippi River), as well as samples before and after disinfection at five
wastewater treatment plants. Collectively, these sites represent the range of
natural freshwaters that are impacted by polar contaminants, such as pesticides
and pharmaceuticals. These samples will be characterized by UV-visible
spectroscopy, antioxidant measurements, and both Fourier transform-ion cyclotron
resonance (FT-ICR) and Orbitrap mass spectrometry. Photoreactivity will be
assessed using probe studies to quantify the quantum yields and steady-state
concentrations of reactive species and by experiments with five target
pesticides and pharmaceuticals. Multivariate statistics, including multiple
linear regressions, hierarchical cluster analysis, and principal component
analysis, will be used to develop a novel framework to predict the relative
photochemical reactivity of natural and effluent organic matter based on
composition. Finally, this unique data set will be used to test whether Orbitrap
mass spectrometry is able to provide sufficient information to replace the use
of FT-ICR mass spectrometry in determining the molecular composition of DOM for
reactivity studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.