* 1802730
* Fundamental controls on mid-crustal 'escape' flow in orogenic systems
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Ryan Thigpen, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2023
* USD 270,882.00

In large mountain belts that result from continent-continent collision, the
tremendous accumulation of rock mass that creates the high mountainous
topography must be removed from the system by a variety of mechanisms. In the
shallow crust, this is mostly accomplished by the erosive action of rivers and
glaciers. At greater depths the middle and lower crust can be weakened by
partial melting and then may flow out of the collision zone in a process known
as channel or escape flow. In the Himalayan-Tibetan system, it has been proposed
that crustal escape flow dominates deformation in the lower crust beneath the
eastern Tibetan margin and may even contribute to slip and seismicity along
upper crustal strike-slip faults in northeastern India, northern Myanmar, and
southern China. Understanding if these crustal escape flows are truly present
and how they operate in large mountain belt systems remains as a fundamental
challenge for tectonics research, particularly because they cannot be directly
observed at depth. Critical to our understanding of how escape flow may operate
is the nature of the boundaries that direct such flow and how they dynamically
interact with the channel system, so ideally a study of this type should be
carried out by examining a crustal channel that has had its upper crustal 'lid'
removed. This project is examining a possible crustal escape flow system that is
exposed at the surface in the southern Appalachian Inner Piedmont of North
Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia. In addition, this work is producing a
critical suite of geochronologic and petrotectonic analyses for a classic
eastern U.S. field area that lacks much of this basic data. This project
contributes to the advancement of desired societal outcomes by supporting
advanced field and laboratory training for a graduate student in an important
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM discipline), and is
providing support for an early career investigator. Most importantly, this
project will also support research training and collaboration experience for at
least six undergraduate researchers under the guidance of the principal
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the classic channel flow model quite
elegantly explains a number of seemingly unrelated features in the Himalayan
system, the condition(s) that may have led to deactivation and/or redirection of
the channel at the southern front of the Tibetan Plateau remains as a persistent
enigma for this model. Specifically, it is necessary to understand: (1) what
conditions or mechanistic changes might lead to a switch from an orogen-normal
channel flow dominated system to one that accommodates shortening by critical
wedge-style slip along major thrusts at the front of an orogen, (2) could the
same conditions(s) and mechanisms be responsible for a switch to orogen-parallel
escape flow in large hot orogens that undergo this transition, and (3) what is
the nature of the boundaries that direct such flow and how do they dynamically
interact with the orogen-parallel channel system? To do this, it was necessary
to identify a potential channel system now exposed at the surface. In the
southern Appalachian Inner Piedmont, previous studies proposed the presence of a
Neoacadian (Devonian-Mississippian) crustal escape flow system based on the
observation of a map scale curved lineation pattern and preservation of an
extensive area of pervasive migmatization, sillimanite I-II metamorphism, and
numerous anatectic plutons. This study is addressing the questions above in the
Inner Piedmont using integrated metamorphic and structural petrology, chemical
diffusion modeling, and geo- (monazite and titanite laser ablation split stream
technique) and thermochronology (40Ar/39Ar hornblende and muscovite) combined
with paleopiezometry and quartz fabric-derived deformation temperatures to
establish Pressure-Temperature-temperature-stress paths and system residence
times for representative structural levels across the interpreted channel
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.