* 1802049
* Combined Capture and Reaction in Temperature Swing Adsorption: An Integrated Approach toward VOC Emissions Control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* XINHUA Liang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2023
* USD 394,680.00

This study is focused on applying fundamental principles to design and develop
materials that can successfully capture and destroy gaseous pollutants from
various industrial sources. The use of novel materials that can reduce
pollutants in a single integrated unit has the potential to reduce the energy
consumption compared to current processes. Results of this study will guide the
design and manufacture of high-performance materials for use in industrial
pollution control processes that convert toxic compounds to benign products
while meeting the environmental standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
experimental and modeling effort will be focused on both material and process
design and development. Specifically, the PIs will synthesize hierarchical
mixed-metal oxides (MMOs), deposited with mono and bimetallic nanoparticles
(noble and transition metals), using atomic layer deposition (ALD) techniques.
The ALD-designed hybrid adsorbent-catalyst materials with hierarchical pore
structure are used in the removal of aromatic hydrocarbons, such as benzene,
toluene, and xylene, known as BTX compounds, from air in a TSA system. Such
hybrid materials will act as a selective mass sink for the adsorbate to create
favorable concentration profiles for the oxidation reaction, which will in turn
provide heat to regenerate the hybrid materials during the desorption step, thus
effectively conserving energy through efficient heat integration. The PIs will
also address the design, configuration, process modeling and optimization of the
TSA process to improve capture-oxidation efficiency and enable significant
reductions in the abatement cost through synergistically exploiting the inherent
advantages of each technology. The educational and outreach plan will serve as a
platform for graduate, undergraduate and high school students, especially from
underrepresented groups, to develop interest in cutting-edge scientific
research. The PIs will develop an integrated education and outreach program to
incorporate research outcomes into existing coursework and provide research
experiences to high school students from Missouri through the Summer Research
Academy program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.