* 1802061
* Nanoparticle Loaded Biomaterial Scaffolds For Bone Regeneration
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2019
* Seth Donahue, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2019
* USD 329,643.00

The goal of this interdisciplinary project is to design a materials-based
approach to gene therapy that improves the healing of large bone defects. More
than 2 million orthopedic procedures per year use bone grafts to repair damaged
bone, at a cost exceeding $30 billion. Despite this need, there are limited
supplies of bone tissue for grafts. Recombinant (artificially produced) proteins
can be used as an alternative to grafts, but they are expensive and have
potential adverse side effects. In collaboration with researchers in Northern
Ireland and the Republic of Ireland, this research will develop innovative gene-
activated materials that encourage the body's own cells to produce the proteins
needed for bone tissue repair. This will advance the nation's health and promote
the progress of science by developing material systems that can be used to
promote the healing of many tissues in the body, in addition to bone. The
educational outreach component of this proposal will help students understand
how biological materials behave mechanically and how this knowledge can be used
to develop replacement materials for clinical use. Interactive STEM research
kits will be developed for middle and high school students to enhance
understanding of the measurement techniques used to quantify mechanical behavior
of biological materials, including bone and synthetic materials used to replace
biological materials clinically.

The overall goal of this project is to design a materials-based approach for the
controlled delivery of novel osteoanabolic genetic cargos using non-viral
vectors combined with osteoconductive scaffolds to promote healing of large bone
defects. To achieve this goal, a hybrid material system will be designed and
validated; the system will consist of a peptide vector to deliver genetic cargo
and a collagen/hydroxyapatite scaffold to present the genetic cargo to cells in
the healing space and provide osteoconductive surfaces. The material system will
be validated by assessing its ability to promote bone formation activity in
vitro and bone healing in vivo. The novel therapeutic genetic cargos for local
delivery are parathyroid hormone (PTH), microRNA 26A mimic (miR-26a), and an
inhibitor to microRNA133a (antagomiR-133a). The RALA peptide is a non-viral
vector that will be used to deliver the therapeutic cargos using a collagen-
based scaffold designed specifically for bone repair. The efficacy of the gene
activated scaffolds at promoting osteoanabolic activity in mesenchymal stem
cells in vitro will be evaluated by quantifying gene expression of key
osteogenic and angiogenic markers. The safety of the gene-activated scaffolds
will be evaluated in vivo by assessing the distribution of the genetic cargos in
tissues and organs. The efficacy will be evaluated by quantifying bone formation
in a critical size femoral defect using micro-computed tomography and
histomorphometry.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.