* 1802228
* Moduli Spaces, Tautological Rings, and Theta Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Dragos Oprea, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2023
* USD 265,000.00

The project addresses questions in algebraic geometry. Algebraic geometry
concerns the study of solution sets of polynomial equations several variables.
It is one of the oldest, most developed and active areas of research in
mathematics. It has connections to many sub-fields within mathematics, both pure
and applied, and also to computer science and theoretical physics. Moduli theory
concerns the behavior of geometric shapes as the coefficients of the defining
equations are allowed to vary. The focus of this project is the moduli of
complex surfaces. These spaces have been studied abstractly in the past. This
project will further study these spaces by understanding the set of natural loci
inside the moduli space of surfaces that arise in geometric computations, as
well as its structure. In particular, combining tools from classical algebraic
geometry as well as theoretical physics, the project aims to develop a flexible
machinery to work quantitatively with these loci, and to further apply this
machinery to answer questions arising in the enumerative geometry of surfaces
(that is, questions of the type: enumerate all surfaces that enjoy certain
geometric properties). In addition to research, the principal investigator will
be involved in high school mathematics competitions, will advise undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates, work to increase
diversity in mathematics, and organize seminars and local
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project concerns the study
of the tautological ring of the moduli of surfaces (K3 surfaces, abelian
surfaces, etc.). Some of the projects here concern obtaining structural results,
understanding the size of the tautological rings, and developing an explicit
calculus for tautological classes, expressions for natural geometric cycles in
terms of tautological classes. This also leads to projects of independent
interest, e.g., generalizations of a conjecture of Lehn concerning tautological
integrals over the Hilbert scheme, a higher-rank stable pair correspondence, and
connections with the Verlinde formula for new classes of surfaces. Over the
moduli of curves, K3 or abelian surfaces, the investigator will continue work on
bundles of generalized theta functions. Questions here deal with refined Chern
character calculations and connections with the tautological
rings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.