* 1802240
* Understanding Energy and Electron Transfer in Multi-Metal Coordination Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Valeria Kleiman, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Colby Foss
* 05/31/2023
* USD 561,976.00

The Chemical Structure Dynamics and Mechanism (CSDM-A) program of the Chemistry
Division supports the work of Professor Valeria Kleiman at the University of
Florida to investigate the properties of a class of organometallic molecules
that show promise as solar-energy harvesters or conduits for electron motion
(molecular wires). Organometallic molecules consist of an organic component
(mostly carbon and hydrogen atoms) and metal atoms which play a key role in how
the molecules interact with light. The main focus of this project is to
understand the first steps following absorption of light, how the energy is
transported through the different molecular architectures and how the structure
of the molecules can help enhance and control the energy transport process. This
project involves tuning the electronic properties of the molecules by varying
the kinds of metal atoms used or the nearby organic structures (called
"ligands") to which the metal atoms are attached. By observing how energy and
electrons move through molecules after they are exposed to light, the Kleiman
research team can provide the fundamental information that will be needed to
develop efficient solar energy capture and transport systems based on
organometallic molecules. It is noted that energy and electron transfer
processes in organometallic ssytems occur in very fast time scales (a millionth
of a millionth of a second). Thus, these studies utilize ultrafast laser
spectroscopy tools, including the use of multidimensional spectroscopies
developed in the Kleiman laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims at
fundamental understanding of the excited state dynamical parameters leading to
photoinduced energy transfer, photoinduced-multielectron-redox reactions, and
their competition, as they are modulated by the nature of the metal center and
the organic ligands. A major question to answer is the role of vectorial energy
transfer vs potential delocalization of the excited states. Within this context
the project opens a new venue for the exploration of excited state dynamics and
couplings of cyano-bridged metallo-dimers, oligomers and nanoparticles using
ultrafast broadband Transient Absorption Spectroscopy combined with
2-Dimensional Electronic Spectroscopy to explore the initial steps following
photoexcitation in multi-metal architectures with organic ligands that allow the
modulation of their HOMO-LUMO gaps and state couplings. The investigations will
include assemblies of increased complexity where the photophysics can be
modulated by the orientation of different organic ligands, and where metal
centers are covalently bound through NC bridges whose own orbitals cannot trap
the excitation but can open coupling-channels between different centers. The
broader impact of this project includes the internationalization of graduate
education through the collaboration with a laboratory in the University of
Buenos Aires (Argentina). Additionally, undergraduate, graduate and postdoc
students will learn to use state of the art tools and become proficient in
recent spectroscopy technological advances preparing them for careers in
industry and/or academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.