* 1802207
* Homological Aspects of Exterior and Other Power Operations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Claudia Miller, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2022
* USD 168,000.00

This award supports research into one of the fundamental questions of algebraic
geometry: How does one find measures of a singularity? A singularity is a place
on a curve, surface, or higher dimensional space where it is not smooth, that
is, it has a cusp (a sharp point, a place where it folds or turns abruptly) or
it crosses itself. The understanding of singularities has applications to
computer vision and medical imaging. In general, one wants to find and study
measures of how extreme a singularity is and how these vary under operations
such as deformations. This is done using abstract algebraic techniques as
usually the dimension, or the number of equations, or variable and unknown
coefficients make the spaces completely impractical to visualize. The goal is to
attach invariants to singularities that are measures of the nature of the
singularity. This project studies such invariants in three different ways.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, this project involves the study of the
exterior algebra, modules of higher differentials, exterior powers of complexes,
and related power operations such as Adams operations, sometimes with
differential graded algebra structures playing a role. The homological behavior
of exterior power operations is known to be complicated, yet these algebras and
operations play a central role throughout many parts of algebra and mathematics.
This project focuses on the following research directions (1) Adams operations
and applications to Hilbert-Kunz multiplicities, (2) invariants of singularities
for p-differentials, and (3) resolutions of graded Artinian algebras. For the
first, the main goal is to develop a characteristic zero version of Hilbert-Kunz
multiplicity. For the second, the focus is on studying singularities via their
modules of higher differentials; the goal is to understand symmetries and the
vanishing of invariants obtained from them, such as generalized Tjurina numbers,
by showing how their resolutions are interrelated in the general non-isolated
Gorenstein singularity setting. The third involves applying the resolution of
Artinian algebras to various problems, such as conjectures on Betti numbers and
finding dg-structures on resolutions in order to further understand Koszul
homology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.