* 1802729
* Nonvolatile Gel Electrolytes for Safer Lithium Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Matthew Panzer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2022
* USD 348,096.00

In order to realize safer batteries for hybrid/electric vehicles and also for
future portable or wearable electronic devices, the development of stable,
nonflammable, and efficient lithium ion-electrolytes for high energy density
lithium-ion batteries is a high research priority. This project will examine the
suitability of a new class of gel electrolyte materials that are composed of
molten salts (ionic liquids), lithium ions, and zwitterionic polymers. Expected
advantages of these materials include: ultralow volatility, a leak-proof design,
and good selectivity for lithium ion transport at room temperature. The outcomes
of this work will make an immediate impact in the field of energy storage
research and are expected to facilitate the development of safe and effective,
nonflammable gel electrolyte-containing lithium ion batteries with high energy
densities for real-world applications in the near future. Fundamental knowledge
on lithium ion transport in these gel systems will result from this project. In
addition, this project will provide support for underrepresented minority
students in STEM both at the undergraduate and high school levels to participate
in a research experience related to energy storage themes. Broader impact and
outreach activities will include providing an annual summer research position in
the PI's laboratory and hosting a local high school chemistry class visit and
electrolyte activity day. This project is also funded by the CBET Molecular
Separations Program, NSF 18-1417.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to
develop fundamental understanding and create a coherent framework to describe
the factors that determine the varying physical and electrochemical
characteristics of a novel class of safer electrolytes for future lithium ion
batteries: zwitterionic (co)polymer-supported, nonvolatile lithium cation-
conducting ionic liquid gel electrolytes. These objectives will be achieved
through a comprehensive spectroscopic investigation of various zwitterion-
electrolyte ion intermolecular interactions. Gel electrolytes created via in
situ free radical polymerization using two promising classes of nonvolatile
electrolytes will be examined: lithium-based solvate ionic liquids, as well as
conventional lithium salt/ionic liquid solutions. Zwitterion-ion interactions
will be probed using NMR, FTIR, and Raman spectroscopies, while ionic
conductivity and lithium ion transference number values will be experimentally
determined for all gel electrolytes using AC impedance spectroscopy and DC
polarization measurements, respectively. Compressive stress-strain testing will
be used to determine elastic modulus values of these gel electrolytes. Linear
sweep voltammetry, cyclic voltammetry, and galvanostatic charge/discharge
cycling will be conducted in order to interrogate gel electrochemical stability
and lithium ion battery cell feasibility and performance. One important outcome
of this project is linking knowledge of the liquid solution electrochemical
properties to the gel version for use as an electrolyte
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.