* 1802477
* Moduli and Surfaces in Complex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Sai Kee Yeung, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 07/31/2022
* USD 214,995.00

To understand properties of an object in mathematics or physics, sometimes it is
more enlightening to put all objects of similar nature together and study
properties on the resulted collection as a whole. This is termed as moduli in
algebraic and complex geometry. The concept is used in quantum physics and
string theory as well. The first part of the project is to understand properties
of moduli of some naturally existing geometric objects. On the other hand,
sometimes a geometric object with special properties such as existence of extra
symmetries or special type of singularities provide good models for
understanding of various subjects in science. The second part of the project is
aimed at finding special complex surfaces or higher dimensional geometric
objects that would capture some properties that mathematicians have been seeking
after. Since a wide range of tools are to be used, including computer
implementation, a significant portion of the proposed activities can be used to
train students or collaborate with young scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
concrete terms, the principal investigator proposed to conduct research in
several problems related to complex and algebraic geometry. The first part of
the proposal details possible applications and extensions of some analytic tool
developed recently by Wing-Keung To and the investigator. The new tools allow
them to approach problems related to moduli space of higher dimensional
polarized complex manifolds in a new and efficient way. The project aims at
exploring and understanding moduli of general polarized manifolds in comparison
with analytic, geometric and arithmetic properties of moduli space of curves.
The second part of the project aims at applying the classification of fake
projective planes by Gopal Prasad and the principal investigator as building
blocks to investigate various algebraic geometric or complex geometric open
problems. It includes construction of some unknown examples with small canonical
degree, construction of exotic symplectic manifolds of small invariants, more
geometrical realization of fake projective planes and classification of
arithmetic fake compact Hermitian symmetric spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.