* 1802641
* Collaborative Research: Dynamics of surfactant - amyloid-beta protein interactions during self-assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Ashuwin Vaidya, Montclair State University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 117,404.00

Clumping of protein molecules in a process called "aggregation" is a common
problem in cellular biology. One kind of protein aggregation leads to a specific
structure of the clumps called "amyloids" and is thought to play a key role in
many neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease. Recently, protein
amyloids have also been associated with normal cellular functions. A wide
variety of aggregate structures are formed during aggregation, and many of these
cause a specific biological response. Hence, understanding the mechanisms of
aggregation is critical for human health. Amyloid formation is influenced by
biological surfactant molecules, which associate many amyloid proteins. In the
proposed project, the principal investigator along with a team of collaborators
will use experiments, computer simulations, and mathematical analysis to
understand how surfactants modulate amyloid protein aggregation to form specific
aggregate species. This will transform our understanding of these interactions
which play a role in Alzheimer's disease. This scientific endeavor will also
involve many students, who will not only learn new areas of research but will
also contribute towards data collection and interpretation of
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Self-association of a protein called amyloid beta,
associated with Alzheimer's disease, involves the conversion from its
intrinsically disordered, monomeric form to well-organized, fibrillar structures
in a nucleation-dependent manner. Among the aggregates formed, the low-molecular
weight oligomers have emerged to be physiologically important species. The
oligomers formed need not be the obligate intermediates of the fibril formation
pathway, and they could be formed along alternate "off-pathways", which result
in many distinct structural strains of amyloid beta. Many factors can induce
off-pathway products. Among these factors, interfaces generated by biological
surfactants (SAs) are physiologically relevant due to their perpetual
association with amyloid beta. Recent findings from the principle investigator's
lab indicate that non-esterified fatty acid SAs induce off- or on- pathway
aggregates in a concentration dependent manner. The investigators hypothesize
that concentration-dependent phase transitions of SAs modulate amyloid beta
aggregation pathways to generate distinct oligomers. In this work, a
collaborative team will test the hypothesis with two specific aims: Aim 1 will
investigate biophysically the interactions between amyloid beta and SAs using a
variety of anionic SAs, and Aim 2 will model temporal evolution of oligomers as
a result of amyloid beta-SA interactions using numerical simulations and reduced
order mathematical analysis. An interdisciplinary approach involving
experimental biophysics, simulation and mathematical analysis with a synergistic
feedback between the experiments (Aim 1) and simulations (Aim 2) will provide
insights into the heterotypic interactions between amyloid beta and SAs and will
bridge the existing knowledge gap in the field. Considering that the functional
effects of off-pathway aggregates are related to their respective morphologies,
understanding the physiochemical properties of amyloid beta-SA interactions will
be of paramount significance in deciphering amyloid-related cellular processes.
This work will also help in a better understanding of aggregation pathways in a
larger, more complex network of reactions involving amyloids, which can then be
utilized to design intervention strategies in the future. The proposed project
will have broader impacts on science and education for undergraduate and
graduate students from the three institutions of University of Southern
Mississippi (USM), Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU), and Montclair State
University (MSU) spanning the areas of molecular biophysics, computational
systems biology and mathematical biology respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.