* 1802323
* Applications to Cryptography of the Construction of Curves from Modular Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Christelle Vincent, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2022
* USD 201,849.00

There are two main reasons why, despite the fact that we currently have robust
ways to secure communications with cryptography, scientists must continue to
improve and discover mathematical cryptographic methods. The first is that as
technology advances, there is need for ever faster-performing algorithms that
can be run on chips with smaller memory and/or computing power, such as smart
phones and smart watches. The second is that new technological developments and
newly-discovered vulnerabilities and attacks can at any time make certain
cryptographic methods less secure, making it necessary to have a wide suite of
alternative methods ready to be deployed. This project conducts fundamental
research in mathematics that will support the development of new mathematical
cryptographic methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More precisely, the main goal of
this project is to develop the necessary theoretical framework to, given a
sextic complex multiplication field, write an exact equation for every
hyperelliptic curve of genus 3 whose Jacobian is simple and has complex
multiplication by the ring of integers of that field (if any), adapting
techniques used in the case of genus 2. In addition to this work, the project
aims to characterize the fields K such that there exists a simple hyperelliptic
Jacobian with complex multiplication by the ring of integers of this field K.
The project will also investigate whether a complex multiplication field can
admit both a hyperelliptic and a plane quartic Jacobian with complex
multiplication by the ring of integers of the field. As Jacobians of
hyperelliptic curves of genus 3 are considered to be safe -- whereas Jacobians
of plane quartic curves are not -- and potentially efficient for cryptography
using the discrete log problem, investigating these questions constitutes the
very first step that must be taken before hyperelliptic Jacobians of genus 3 can
be deployed in cryptographic applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.