* 1802503
* Quantum Symmetries: tensor categories, braids, and Hopf algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Julia Plavnik, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 05/31/2019
* USD 116,508.00

This award supports research in an area of mathematics that can be used to model
symmetry at the quantum level. Symmetries are present in our daily life and they
are encoded mathematically by objects called groups. In recent decades, a lot of
attention has been given to quantum phenomena. In this context, quantum
symmetries appear, which are best described by group-like objects called tensor
categories. Moreover, tensor categories are the language of quantum computation
and topological phases of matter. Researchers would like to classify modular
categories (a distinguished class of tensor categories) because of their
applications in condensed matter physics and quantum computing. In particular,
unitary modular categories are algebraic models of anyons, which have
applications in topological quantum computing. This model also has the advantage
of being a fault-tolerance model of anyons, since small perturbations will not
change the physical properties of the quantum
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tensor categories can be thought of as the
categorical version of rings. This notion includes representation of groups, Lie
algebras, and Hopf algebras. The project will consist of three main programs:
classification, construction, and study of homological properties of tensor
categories. One of the aims is to advance on the classification of low-rank
premodular categories and supermodular categories. Another goal of this project
is to understand how the cohomology behaves under standard constructions and use
these results to get new examples of Hopf algebras and categories satisfying
certain properties, such as the finite generation of cohomology for Hopf
algebras and tensor categories, proposed by Etingof and Ostrik. The investigator
will explore generalizations of the support variety theory. These are
geometrical objects that measure projectivity, in the context of finite tensor
categories. The last goal of the project is to search for new constructions of
finite tensor categories, using Hopf algebras, and modular tensor categories,
via gauging the symmetry with a focus on permutation actions on Deligne products
of a given modular category.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.