* 1802944
* Collaborative Research: Ferrates(FeVI, FeV, and FeIV) Oxidation for Mitigation of Pharmaceutical Micropollutants in Source-Separated Urine: Underlying Mechanisms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Ching-Hua Huang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 195,000.00

Although human urine accounts for only 1% of domestic wastewater, it contributes
80% of nitrogen (N), 50% of phosphorus (P), and 60% of pharmaceuticals. While
diverting urine to recover N and P has been proposed as an efficient alternative
to conventional wastewater treatment, removing pharmaceuticals would also be
highly beneficial. Effective destruction of pharmaceuticals in diverted urine
would greatly minimize the energy costs and increase efficiency of removal
compared to conventional wastewater treatment. Urine is a particularly
challenging matrix for the removal of pharmaceuticals. However, recent work
shows that iron (ferrate) containing advanced oxidation technology (AOT) holds
great promise as a treatment alternative. The proposed research is to develop
ferrate-based treatment for pharmaceutical removal from urine. The project is
transformative in that it represents a fundamental re-thinking of conventional
treatment systems for combined pharmaceutical removal and wastewater management.
The proposed technology will complement research efforts on N and P recovery in
diverted urine in a holistic manner to protect public and ecosystem health, and
enhance the water security of the Nation.

The goal of this study is to develop ferrate (FeVI, FeV and FeIV)-based AOT for
destruction of pharmaceuticals and their metabolites in source-separated urine.
The focus of the proposed research is on elucidating the underlying oxidation
mechanisms and optimizing treatment efficiency. To achieve this goal, the
specific research objectives are to: (i) investigate the degradation of selected
pharmaceuticals and metabolites in real and synthetic urines; (ii) characterize
the reaction mechanisms of ferrates with pharmaceuticals, pharmaceutical
metabolites and common urine components; (iii) identify reactive oxidation
products of pharmaceuticals and urine components with ferrates; (iv) develop
kinetic models to predict decay of FeVI and degradation of pharmaceuticals by
FeVI in urine related matrices; (v) validate the research results obtained from
synthetic urine matrices with those in real urine matrices; and (vi) evaluate
the toxicity of oxidized products of pharmaceuticals by ferrates. A range of
educational activities related to this project will also be conducted. They
include teaching and recruiting minority students to participate in research
though partnerships with minority institutions in Texas and a minority-student
summer research program at Georgia Tech, teaching K-12 STEM teachers in science
fair activities, develop teaching modules for undergraduate and graduate courses
based on the proposed research, and broadly disseminate research results via
publications, at national/international meetings, and at venues by the new
interdisciplinary program at Texas A&M.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.