* 1802474
* A Novel Approach to Characterize the Speciation and Toxicity of Metals in Atmospheric Particulate Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Christopher Hennigan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 336,640.00

Airborne particles, or particulate matter (PM), impart numerous detrimental
effects on human health. Metals are present at trace levels in PM, but these
metals are hypothesized to have enhanced toxicity to humans compared to other
constituents that are present in particles at much greater levels. Metals in PM
take different chemical forms, and metal toxicity through other routes of
exposure is affected by these different chemical forms. The aims of this work
are (i) to develop a new method to determine the chemical forms of important
metals in PM, and (ii) to link the different metal species to PM toxicity. This
work will contribute to the training and education of undergraduate and graduate
students in chemical and environmental engineering. If successful, this project
will provide new insights on how to identify and quantify toxic metal exposure
from PM matter in different environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PM is a
ubiquitous component of the atmosphere and influences climate and human health.
PM is comprised of a diverse array of chemical species that reflect the numerous
sources and processes that contribute to PM levels. Although metals typically
constitute a small fraction of PM mass, epidemiological and toxicological
studies have associated metals with a number of human health effects. This
suggests that some metals have an enhanced toxicity compared to other chemical
species found in PM. Previous studies linked metals with the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), providing a likely explanation for their role in
adversely affecting health. Despite the evidence from epidemiological and
toxicological studies, a clear understanding of the toxicity of specific PM
metals is currently lacking. This limitation is due in part to a lack current
measurement methods that can simultaneously characterize the oxidation state and
speciation of the full suite of metals present in PM. These metals can exist in
multiple oxidation states and chemical forms, and the toxicity of metals in PM
is likely related to these characteristics. The aim of this proposal is to
develop a new approach to simultaneously determine the oxidation state and
chemical speciation for a suite of PM metals that are linked with enhanced
toxicity: V, Ni, Zn, Cu, Fe, Cr, and Mn. This approach will use a combination of
direct measurements and thermodynamic equilibrium modeling to determine the
speciation of metals in PM. The metal speciation will be combined with ROS
activity measurements to provide unprecedented insight into the chemical species
in PM most likely to induce oxidative stress. Once this approach is validated in
the laboratory, it will be applied to characterize the toxicity of PM metals in
an urban environment. Metal speciation is strongly affected by both the pH and
oxidation-reduction potential (ORP). This study will significantly advance
understanding of metal speciation in PM because it will directly account for the
pH and ORP in atmospheric particles. This represents the first study to link
metal speciation in PM with these two controlling variables. The new approach
will ultimately be developed for widespread application to future studies,
including potential applications to archived PM data sets. This also represents
the first study to link ROS activity with simultaneous determinations of metal
oxidation state and speciation in PM. This research will provide significant
insight into the sources and processes that influence PM
toxicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.