* 1802953
* Growth of Hybrid Polymeric Nanostructures  for Enzyme-Free Amplified Protein Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Yong Wang, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2022
* USD 318,696.00

Proteins play essential roles in the body. However, because they have typically
are found in low concentration, they can be very challenging to detect.
Overcoming this challenge will not advance basic research and greatly improve
the quality of diagnosis and the discovery of new therapeutics. The objective of
this project is to develop a novel biosensing nanotechnology to amplify the
signals of target proteins. The proteins that cannot be detected using
traditional methods would be detected with this new technology. Students at
different levels will be trained through hands-on research experience.
Nationwide underrepresented students through diverse outreach activities at Penn
State will be recruited to this program. The new knowledge to be generated
through this program will be integrated into the classes offered to
undergraduate and graduate students. Moreover, the knowledge will be broadly
disseminated through high-profile journal publications and conference
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein examination is pivotal
to virtually all fields related to biomedical sciences and clinical diagnostics
as well. However, existing methods for in situ protein imaging and sensing often
suffer from problems such as weak signal intensity, pigment/nanoparticle
deposition and slow diffusion of bulky agents. The objective of this project is
to explore a novel method for enzyme-free signal amplification in protein
imaging via in situ growth of biomolecular nanostructures. The success of
exploring this new method will address the critical unmet needs faced by
existing methods for protein detection. In the proposed new method, each protein
target will be represented by a supramolecular imaging nanostructure that
carries a large number of fluorophores. Notably, the nanostructure will be grown
in situ for imaging without the need of using any enzyme. Thus, it will not only
provide signal amplification but also avoid potential enzyme- or nanoparticle-
associated problems. The proposed research is designed with three tasks: 1) to
understand how the compositions and structures of DNA molecules determine the
formation of DNA nanostructures; 2) to synthesize and characterize hybrid DNA-
based supramolecular nanostructures; and 3) to evaluate the effectiveness of
this method in protein imaging. The accomplishment of this project will make
broad impacts. Firstly, it will advance the methodology of protein sensing,
benefiting a variety of biological and biomedical research areas that require
highly sensitive protein imaging. Secondly, the fundamental understanding of DNA
polymerization will provide a knowledge basis for the development of various
DNA-based biosensors and materials. Thirdly, as clinical biopsies often have
very small volumes, this enzyme-free signal amplification imaging method also
holds great potential of improving clinical diagnostics. The broad impacts will
be further strengthened by the development of human resources at different
levels with active recruitment of nationwide underrepresented students through a
diverse array of Penn State outreach programs, the publication of papers in
high-profile journals and the dissemination of knowledge through invited
seminars and conference presentations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.