* 1802876
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Monitoring on Immigrant Lives
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2022
* Stefan Timmermans, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 02/28/2022
* USD 11,794.00

As of 2015, more than 1.8 million immigrants were in removal proceedings,
awaiting their turn to appear in immigration courts. However, Immigration and
Customs Enforcement (ICE) cannot detain all 1.8 million immigrants
simultaneously, mostly because ICE's budget only funds 34,000 detention beds on
a given day. Therefore, immigrants who do not qualify for mandatory detention
are enrolled in the Intensive Supervision Appearance Program (ISAP), which
enforces the use of a Global Position System (GPS) ankle monitor. We know that
some U.S. immigration policies are associated with immigrant ill health, but
scant research exists on how being visually marked and placed under constant
surveillance affects physical and mental health as well as health care access.
This research will show the impact of the GPS ankle monitoring on the mental and
physical health of immigrants. Project findings will help inform immigration and
public health policies. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In the U.S. today, immigrants who
do not qualify for mandatory detention are enrolled in Alternative to Detention
Programs (ATDP) and must wear a GPS ankle monitor. The project uses ethnographic
observations in multiple settings and in-depth, semi-structured interviews with
immigrants wearing the GPS ankle monitor. Although these people are no longer in
detention, they are still under surveillance via the ankle monitors. The project
will document the social, material, mental, and physical effects of the GPS
ankle monitors, such as anxiety and difficulty finding housing. This research
project makes a theoretical contribution to studies of Latino immigrant
populations, while also documenting the effects of surveillance on
individuals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.