* 1802538
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial Inequality in Birth Outcomes - Testing Classes of Proximate Mechanisms
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2020
* Jason Beckfield, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2020
* USD 11,661.00

Low birth weight and preterm birth have lasting and negative implications for
healthy child development, which influences their later educational and
socioeconomic attainment. These birth outcomes also occur more frequently in
some neighborhoods than in others, but we do not understand the mechanisms
through which neighborhood characteristics may be influential. This project will
analyze a wide range of mechanisms that vary by neighborhood and may contribute
to adverse birth outcomes. These mechanisms include access to prenatal care,
such as transportation time to hospitals or neighborhood social connectedness,
as well as sources of stress such as public disorder, public conflicts or
private conflicts. The project will control for a wide range of individual level
determinants, including prior maternal health. It will also analyze a large
sample of pregnancies from the same hospital, thus controlling for health care
delivery, which can also implicate low birthweight and preterm birth outcomes.
The project will provide implications for how neighborhood factors can influence
birth outcomes, thus suggesting how social policies may be constructed to reduce
birth outcome variation. This study will be the first to determine whether and
why birth outcome inequality persists including both individual and neighborhood
level determinants, holding sorting into hospitals constant.

The project will use a novel dataset comprised of a cohort of 4,324 women who
were recruited by their first trimester and who delivered live singleton births
at the Brigham and Women's Hospital in Boston, MA., between the years 2006 and
2015. The project will use multivariate analysis to determine whether spatial
inequality in birth outcomes occurs net of a wide range of individual
determinants. The project will use clinical measures of maternal health status
and exact addresses to capture neighborhood characteristics. Transportation
times are computed using Google Maps API in R. Contextual sources of stress are
merged with individual-level pregnancy data from two sources: (1) the 2006, 2008
and 2010 BNS (Boston neighborhood) Surveys, with linear imputations on non-
survey years; and (2) annual reports from the City of Boston's 911 database and
311 databases. Contextual variables are merged with the pregnancy data in order
to form a spatial weights matrix and data are analyzed using hierarchical linear
modeling. Lastly, the project incorporates bio-markers of angiogenesis, which
are available at three points in pregnancy for a subset of the data, to perform
causal mediation analyses.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.