* 1802662
* 2018 Frontiers of Engineering Symposia (US FOE and Japan-America FOE)
* ENG,EFMA
* 04/15/2018,03/31/2019
* Janet Hunziker, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Garie Fordyce
* 03/31/2019
* USD 110,000.00

The Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) Symposia, organized by the National Academy
of Engineering, provide emerging engineering leaders from academia, industry,
and government laboratories the opportunity to share research insights to
facilitate an interdisciplinary transfer of knowledge and research
methodologies. The nature of emerging technologies and how they fit together to
create products and processes that drive economic growth in an increasingly
competitive environment have heightened the need for engineers to understand
each other's disciplines and enhance the value in that interaction, particularly
among those developing and using these new technologies. The symposia serve as a
catalyst to spur engineering innovation and foster collaborative networks of
researchers within the United States and between engineers from the United
States and partnering countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide
partial support for two Frontiers of Engineering (FOE) symposia, to be held in
2018, organized by the National Academy of Engineering (NAE) for early career
researchers: the Japan-America FOE to be held in Tsukuba, Japan on June 18-20,
2018 and the US FOE to be hosted by MIT Lincoln Lab in Lexington, Massachusetts
on September 5-7, 2018. The 2018 US FOE symposium will focus on Quantum
Computing, Resilient and Reliable Infrastructure, Theranostics:
Diagnostics+Therapy, and Technology for Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster
Relief. The 2018 JAFOE symposium will focus on Advanced AI, The Water Treatment
Revolution, Bionics and Prosthetics, Smart Structures and Materials.
Approximately 100 outstanding young engineers for the U.S. symposium and 30 from
each country for the bilateral symposia will participate. Each two and one-half
day symposium will include plenary sessions, technical tours, break-out
sessions, and opportunities for developing collaborative research partnerships.
Sessions will consist of presentations on cutting-edge research, innovations,
and emerging research opportunities in engineering fields relevant to the
symposium. FOE symposium papers, abstracts, presentation videos, and slides will
be made available on the FOE website (www.naefrontiers.org
).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.