* 1802576
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Employment of Native Americans with Criminal Records
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2019
* William Wilson, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 11,970.00

Understanding the effects of concentrated disadvantage is of both theoretical
and socially practical importance. Unemployed Native Americans with criminal
records living on reservations constitutes a particularly acute situation of
concentrated disadvantage. This project will investigate the effects of this
condition on employment. Specifically, it will depict the job search process for
tribal fathers with criminal records as they look for work post-incarceration.
It will describe how these men provide for themselves and their families in the
absence of formal employment and how living on vs. off-reservation can shape
these processes. Findings from this study will be of use to policy makers,
criminal justice officials, employers, and tribal governments who endeavor to
support these men as they seek formal employment and attempt to reintegrate back
into society. They will also be of use for the design of policy to ameliorate
the effects of concentrated disadvantage in general.

For this study, 30 tribal respondents from the Yurok and Hoopa Valley
reservations, 15 living on reservation and 15 off reservation, will be
interviewed. The research will address the question of how tribal fathers with
criminal records manage the process of finding work. Those men who look for work
post-incarceration face the double disadvantage of discrimination in the hiring
process and a slack local labor market. They may also have access to resources
unique to reservation residence that further weaken labor force attachment. In
collaboration with the Yurok Tribal Court, this project will provide an account
of the job search strategies of tribal fathers with criminal records, how they
provide for themselves and their families in the absence of formal employment,
and how living on vs. living off-reservation can shape these processes. The
research questions pursued and the findings uncovered in this novel
investigation will provide direction for the study of unemployment on
reservations across the country.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.