* 1802129
* Collaborative Research: Digitization PEN: Filling in knowledge gaps with key herbaria for understanding vascular plant diversity in the Atlantic coastal plain
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* April Wynn, University of Mary Washington
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 19,811.00

The Southeast Regional Network of Expertise and Collections (SERNEC) is
developing one of the most comprehensive data sets of plant diversity in North
America. Through SERNEC, more than 4.5 million herbarium specimens from the
southeastern U.S. will be digitized for online access through a project portal
and the iDigBio Specimen Portal. In this Partner to Existing Network (PEN)
project, three additional herbaria at the College of William and Mary, Old
Dominion University, and University of Mary Washington will contribute digitized
and georeferenced herbarium records from southeastern Virginia to these efforts.
Plant diversity in this region is of interest because of the high degree of
turnover due to southern species reaching their northern limit and northern
species reaching their southern limit in southeastern Virginia. These records
join the SERNEC data set that contribute information about plant diversity in
the North American Coastal Plain, an area rich in rare, unique species. The
SERNEC data set is a one-stop resource for taxonomic and ecological research and
botanical education and aids in the revision of state checklists of plants and
specimen curation. Student interns will have opportunities to develop
professional skills in team work, communication, and goal-setting, as well as
exploring potential career options in museum management. Citizen-scientists
aiding in digitization will have opportunities to interact with project
personnel and learn about the importance of natural history collections in
education and research and local plant diversity. Educational materials
developed for K-12 classes will enhance botanical literacy and illustrate plant
diversity, structure and geographical range in the Southeast.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Images and associated label data for approximately 118,000 vascular
plant specimens in the three herbaria will be captured digitally and accessible
online at the SERNEC Symbiota Portal and the iDigBio Specimen Portal. If
lacking, georeferenced coordinates for the collection location of each specimen
will be determined and added to the database. These activities expand the use of
software packages that were enhanced for use in the SERNEC project, including
Symbiota, GEOLocate, and Zooniverse. Original data, including images and text,
will be retained long-term at institutional repositories of the herbaria
involved in this project. Specimen digitization will be conducted by
undergraduate student interns at each of the institutions and citizen-
scientists, including the Virginia Master Naturalists and volunteers working in
Notes from Nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.