* 1802855
* Collaborative Proposal: MSB-FRA: Scaling Climate, Connectivity, and Communities in Streams
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2019,11/30/2021
* Katie Costigan, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2021
* USD 308,466.00

Half of the Earth's streams are intermittent: they occasionally dry or stop
flowing. Since the 1980s, researchers who study streams have developed theories
about how stream ecosystems work. Each theory is different, but they all focus
on a single physical aspect of streams that is thought to best explain how
stream ecosystem structure and function vary from one place to another. Physical
factors that have been considered include stream size, floods, and climate.
However, the body of work informing the development of these theories, and the
body of work supporting them, is based on research from streams that flow
continuously, or "perennial streams." Given that half of the Earth's streams are
intermittent, there is a need to develop a new theory for streams that explains
how drying acts as a control on stream ecosystem structure and function, how
intermittent and perennial streams are different, and how those differences vary
from region to region. This project uses macrosystems ecology as a foundation to
develop and test such a theory that can be applied to all the Earth's streams. A
smartphone app will map wet and dry stream reaches in conjunction with
international research partners (1000 Intermittent Rivers Project), and citizen
science organizers, and educational partners to create new teaching tools. The
research may help inform decisions on water use where streams and intermittent
and human populations are increasing. Seven graduate student will be included on
the diverse research team.

This research project is comprised of three components. The first is a three-
year field study of intermittent and continuously flowing streams in 10
different regions across the southern, central, and western US led by
researchers at five different US universities that will collect streamflow and
biological data. The field study will be focused on investigating how
macroinvertebrate communities in intermittent and perennial streams differ in
species composition and abundance, and how these differences vary according to
climate. In 9 of the 10 regions, the researchers will use National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) collected data, and sampling will follow NEON
sampling protocols to generate NEON-compatible data. The second component will
develop fine-scale hydrological models of the study watersheds using the Coupled
Routing and Excess STorage (CREST) model. These models will predict where and
when streams dry in these watersheds, and researchers will model streamflow
patterns under different scenarios related to sea surface temperature
oscillations and other changes. The third component of the project will generate
spatial models that integrate the empirically collected ecological data in the
field with the hydrological model outputs. This part of the project will
investigate how large-scale climate oscillations (e.g. El Nino Southern
Oscillation) influence regional drying patterns differently, and how shifts in
spatial drying patterns influence stream ecosystems.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.