* 1802812
* RAPID:  Priority effects, functional differentiation, and negative density dependence as drivers of post-hurricane seedling dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Nathan Swenson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Betsy Von Holle
* 12/31/2019
* USD 199,564.00

Natural disturbances to forested ecosystems have severe impacts on their
composition and functioning. These impacts can ultimately influence the quality
of the services that these ecosystems provide to humans (e.g. water quality).
Therefore, measuring the rate of forest recovery from disturbance and whether
this recovery is predictable are of fundamental importance. The research focuses
on the immediate response of the El Yunque National Forest in Puerto Rico to
Hurricane Maria. El Yunque is the only tropical rain forest in the United States
National Forest System and roughly 20% of the population of island relies on El
Yunque for water. The research has two primary objectives. The first is to
measure the rate and predictability of tree seedling establishment in the year
following Maria. The second is to measure how soil fungal pathogens influence
seeding establishment following Maria. The research provides a unique
opportunity to experimentally investigate how a vital ecosystem responds to a
major disturbance. Two graduate students and one undergraduate student, all from
underrepresented groups in science, will be supported by this project.
Additionally, the PI will offer an R programming short course at the University
of Puerto Rico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Community structure and dynamics are
controlled by random and deterministic processes. Determining the relative
importance of these processes is of general importance, but particularly
important when attempting to predict the response of communities to natural
disturbance. This research will first test the hypothesis that community
dynamics are functionally deterministic following natural disturbances, but the
identity of the species that establish is less predictable. Specifically, the
successful establishment of one guild over another is predictable, but which
species from that guild will be the representative in the community is less
predictable. Next, the research tests the hypothesis that within species
negative interactions will be exacerbated post-disturbance due to large numbers
of individuals recruiting in the seedling layer. To examine the nature of these
negative interactions, the research will consider the phenotypic similarity of
individuals and the presence and identities of fungal species in the soil. The
research objectives will be met by performing a series of replicated field
experiments in El Yunque National Forest, on plots that were established and
surveyed in the summer of 2017, before Hurricane Maria. The experiments will be
replicated across low elevations in the El Yunque National Forest that vary in
their gamma diversity, allowing the research to determine whether gamma
diversity influences community predictability.