* 1802961
* Collaborative Research: The Pressure Shielding of Aerodynamic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Stewart Glegg, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 159,549.00

The surfaces of devices such as a wind turbine blade, of an airplane wing, of a
propeller or fan are all designed to manage the flow of air in a beneficial way.
However, turbulence that inevitably accompanies the flow produces pressure
fluctuations on a surface that can result in undesirable vibration or sound.
This research effort is directed at understanding how treatments placed just
above a surface might be able to substantially reduce the pressure fluctuations,
without negatively impacting the beneficial effects of a surface on the flow.
The work will involve coordinated wind tunnel experiments at Virginia Tech, and
theoretical studies at Florida Atlantic University. As well as advancing science
and engineering in the area of fluid dynamics, the effort will be focused on the
research training of PhD and undergraduate students. In particular the
experiments will be integrated with required undergraduate laboratories at
Virginia Tech, impacting several hundred students over the course of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this work is to establish
the fundamental scientific basis for surface treatments that reduce turbulent
surface pressure fluctuations, while maintaining the wall-normal transport of
momentum and low drag that is required in most fluid dynamic applications.
Recent studies have definitively demonstrated that pressure shielding is
possible. The purpose of this work is to provide a quantitatively usable
fundamental understanding of the mechanisms behind these effects, and the
mathematical methods needed for their prediction. The research program is
focused on the application of pressure shielding treatments to two fundamental
flows; the shear-free boundary layer formed adjacent to a wall in homogeneous
turbulence, and a conventional flat plate turbulent boundary layer. These flows
have been chosen since they cleanly separate some of the major mechanisms
expected to be responsible for pressure shielding. They are also geometrically
simple and well characterized, since analytical or experimental models of the
complete correlation structure of these flows exist. Large scale experiments on
these configurations with and without treatment, will be performed at Virginia
Tech. Parallel mathematical modeling will be carried out at Florida Atlantic
University. Through this closely linked study we expect not only to extract the
fundamental nature of the pressure shielding, but also to build mathematically
well-founded analytical tools needed for its prediction. A key goal is to
provide research education to a diverse group of students drawn from a broad
range of academic levels. The planned work includes specific tasks to be
conducted by groups of undergraduate and high school students across both
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.