* 1802161
* Nonarchimedean Analysis, Geometry, and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Kiran Kedlaya, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 06/30/2022
* USD 330,000.00

This project consists of a number of applications of non-archimedean (p-adic)
analysis and geometry to problems in arithmetic algebraic geometry, of both
theoretical and computational nature. Offshoots of the awarded research include
new techniques in the theory of p-adic differential equations, which has
previously found applications to computer science; for instance, one of the PI's
algorithms for computing zeta functions is widely cited in the cryptography
literature. The proposed activities include training of graduate students in
several capacities, which promotes enhancement of the US knowledge base;
increased access to enrichment activities for low-income students in New York
City and Los Angeles; new training opportunities for US undergraduates seeking
careers in mathematics education; development of open-source software for
mathematics research; and work on interactive open-source curricular materials,
including the introduction on a new course on mathematical software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is hardly an overstatement to assert that
the theory of perfectoid spaces since 2010 has triggered a revolution in
arithmetic geometry, with rapid advances coming at a previously unknown pace;
however, deep improvements in the foundations of the subject are vital in order
to sustain this rate of progress. Further work is also needed to fully realize
the potential of perfectoid spaces to deepen our understanding of the
relationship between geometric and representation-theoretic objects indicated by
the Langlands correspondence; in particular, this will require deep insights in
order to globalize the hitherto local constructions of p-adic Hodge theory.
Separately, computational advances driven by p-adic analysis have had, and will
continue to have, a transformative effect on the study of arithmetic-geometric
objects and their associated L-functions, by opening up vast new territories for
empirical observation. The net effect is to bring number theory back to its
roots as an empirically driven subject, thus leading to a new generation of
theorems based on experimental predictions (echoing the historical development
of such results as quadratic reciprocity and the prime number
theorem).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.