* 1802026
* Effects of preexisting and evolving weaknesses on the kinematic evolution of strike-slip restraining bends in the Eastern California shear zone
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* James Spotila, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 297,943.00

This project is advancing understanding of how barriers between faults influence
the spatial and temporal occurrence of major earthquakes in the United States
via a focused geologic study in southern California. The fault boundary between
the Pacific and North American tectonic plates cuts directly through California
and poses extreme hazard to its dense population and economic infrastructure via
earthquake shaking, ground rupture, and triggered landslides. This boundary does
not consist of a single fault, however. In southern California, roughly half of
the fault activity occurs along the San Andreas fault, whereas the remainder is
distributed across a broader fault system. About 25% of the activity occurs
along the 125-kilometer-wide Eastern California Shear Zone, which has produced
recent damaging (magnitude&gt;7) earthquakes and appears to be in an intensified
phase of activity. This shear zone is enigmatic, in that earthquakes are
produced via simultaneous or sequential motion on multiple faults that cut
across gaps which would have otherwise been expected to be barriers. The zone
also exhibits discrepancy in measured rates of motion, as measurements spanning
decades using space-based techniques are 2 to 3 times faster than long-term
measurements based on geologic offsets. This discrepancy may result from
measurement errors, undocumented deformation, or changes in motion rate through
time. As a result of these problems, the future earthquake risk of the region,
which includes major national defense installations (e.g. Marine Corps Air
Ground Combat Center - MCAGCC), as well as how future ruptures may interact with
or even trigger events along the remainder of the plate boundary (e.g. near Los
Angeles), are not well understood. This project is advancing understanding by
documenting the evolution of complex fault connections and quantifying the
magnitude of internal tectonic deformation that occurs in-between the major
faults of the southern Mojave Desert. This effort involves cutting-edge mapping
using high-resolution topography, dating of measured offsets using various
geochronometers, and testing of how preexisting weaknesses in the crust may be
influencing enigmatic patterns of faulting. Ultimately the project will
reconstruct of how faults have evolved and interacted, leading to improved
forecasting of what to expect from major earthquakes in southern California as
well as an improved framework for understanding how fault barriers control
earthquake size that can be applied to the entire United States. This project
will also benefit society by improving public scientific literacy via internet-
based video outreach and strengthening the STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
testing conceptual treatments of crustal strength in the context of the origin
and evolution of nascent strike-slip faults of the Eastern California Shear
Zone. One conceptual view considers strength as an evolving quantity, which may
decrease with accumulating displacement as faults smoothen or increase
autogenically as geometric complexity grows due to distributed deformation.
Another perspective considers how crustal anisotropy (i.e. preexisting
structural weaknesses) influences the initial geometry and kinematics of fault
arrays. Several characteristics of the Eastern California Shear Zone may relate
to initial or evolving strength, such as variability in fault trend, a
prevalence of prominent, self-similar restraining bends between fault segments,
and complex deformation partitioning, none of which can be clearly related to
total fault slip, age, orientation, or spatial position. This project is testing
the role of strength in fault development by documenting the evolution of
faulting and folding (i.e. integrating or complexifying) through twelve key
transpressive zones (e.g. the remarkable but previously unstudied Calico-Hidalgo
fault stepover and associated borderlands) and comparing active deformation to
patterns of crustal rheological variations via bedrock mapping. Kinematic
interpretation of fault bends is based on high-resolution topography and
neotectonic mapping, structural analysis, geophysical subsurface imaging,
documentation of penetrative strain between fault strands, and chronologies of
deformation using comprehensive Quaternary dating. This project is directly
contributing to understanding of transpression, the influence of mechanical
anisotropy on continental deformation, segmentation and integration of strike-
slip faults (including "earthquake gates," which may present barriers to rupture
and influence seismic hazards), the cause of the discrepancy between geodetic
and geologically determined slip rates, local earthquake hazards, and California
tectonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.