* 1802533
* Metabolic Pinching for the Formation of Pyruvate- and Acetyl CoA-Derived Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mark Eiteman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Cells can produce products ranging from fuels to pharmaceuticals. This is
usually accomplished by overproducing enzymes involved in the product pathway.
This pulls more material onto that path, decreasing the amount leading to cell
growth. The cell tries to pull more material towards growth pathways. If it is
not successful, the cell can stop growing and possibly die, ending all
production. This project proposes to look at more balanced approaches to
providing sufficient material for moderate cell growth while funneling a
majority of the material and energy towards making products. The old approach
can be described as an on/off light switch, while the new approach can be
compared to using a dimmer to slightly adjust each pathway up or down. This will
involve modifying the enzymes involved at the entrance to the production
pathway. The research is complemented by educational and training opportunities
for high school students and undergraduates. This will lead to a workforce
better prepared to actively participate in the growing biomanufacturing
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bioproduct formation involves
redirecting a substrate towards the target product and away from biomass
generation. Operational strategies rely on an external sensor of metabolism.
Dynamic, genetic control relies on the external or internal concentration of
some triggering compound. Dynamic control might ultimately increase the
metabolic burden by virtue of additional gene expression. It has also not been
demonstrated to increase yield and productivity compared to operational and
static approaches. This project will investigate a strategy to pinch metabolism
by altering the intrinsic activities of key enzymes in central metabolism in the
absence of trigger compounds. If successful, we think this approach would serve
as a useful component in the toolbox of biochemical product formation.
Specifically, the objective of this project is to alter kCAT and KM of pyruvate
dehydrogenase component E1 and citrate synthase in Escherichia coli. This should
increase the intracellular pools of pyruvate and acetyl CoA, increasing the flux
through competing pathways. We will then experimentally assess strain variants
for growth, metabolic flux distribution and the production of several
biochemical compounds derived from pyruvate and/or acetyl
CoA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.