* 1802312
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: Capturing California's Flowers: using digital images to investigate phenological change in a biodiversity hotspot
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Peter Bowler, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2022
* USD 47,941.00

Flowering time is an important biological phenomenon, affecting human societies
through its effects on agricultural crops, pollinators, pests, and biodiversity.
Given the sensitivity of flowering times to climatic conditions, a thorough
understanding of how plants respond to changing environments is necessary for
predicting the consequences for pollinators, herbivores, parasites, and plant
populations. A record of historical flowering times is found within the nation's
herbaria. This award establishes a thematic collection network (TCN) dedicated
to understanding flowering time shifts in the California flora. California has
the most diverse native flora of any state in the U.S., containing more than
one-third of all U.S. plant species. The state is a biodiversity hotspot due to
the high number of endemic species that are also threatened. The Capturing
California's Flowers (CCF) TCN will record flowering times from and create
images of over 900,000 herbarium specimens from the oldest records, the most
diverse families, and most threatened families in California. Twenty-two
institutions spanning the state, including public universities, state agencies,
museums, and botanic gardens, will participate in these efforts. This project
will generate data that will increase our understanding of flowering time shifts
- a critical need for agriculturalists, conservation biologists, plant
taxonomists, land managers, and wildlife
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Digitization of each specimen in the CCF TCN
will result in a high-resolution image, a databased record of collection
metadata, a georeferenced point, and the reproductive status of the specimen.
New tools will be developed for the public to search and display phenological
data through a Symbiota portal interface. The CCF TCN will develop novel data
standards for capturing and sharing trait data from specimens. Building on
already successful national and regional programs, the CCF TCN will partner with
schools, universities, botanical clubs, and the general public to crowd source
phenological measurements through online expeditions, workshops, new college
courses, and K-12 educational programs. The CCF TCN will provide a historical
record of plants currently being monitored through the National Phenology
Network and other regional programs. Finally, this award will expand efforts to
train the "next generation" of museum curators, collectors, and researchers.
This award is made as part of the National Resource for Digitization of
Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of Biological
Collections program, and all data resulting from this award will be available
through the national resource (iDigBio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.