* 1802085
* Imaging Electronic Dynamics in Matter with Atomic Spatio-Temporal Resolution.
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Uwe Thumm, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2021
* USD 270,000.00

Photoelectron emission is one of the most fundamental processes in nature. It
occurs when electromagnetic radiation of sufficiently short wavelength and
adequate intensity strikes a target, proceeds through the coupling of the
incident radiation with electrons in the target, and results in the transfer of
photonic energy to internal excitations of the target and the emission of
electrons. When these photoelectrons leave the target, they carry information
about the photoemission dynamics as well as the electronic properties of the
target material. For more than a century, the measurement and analysis of their
energy and momentum distribution has been a primary method for determining the
electronic structure of matter, importantly promoting the development of laser
and detection technologies as well as accurate quantum-mechanical theoretical
methods. Energy-domain photoelectron spectroscopy based on light sources and
detection schemes that do not allow time-resolution of the electronic dynamics
have been routinely employed for many decades and remain a preferred tool for
imaging electronic structure. Energy-domain spectra can image the sample's time-
averaged internal electronic dynamics during the photoemission process, but do
not resolve the ultrafast time-dependent electronic dynamics during the
photoelectron-release process. The proposed theoretical work is motivated by
extraordinary progress in ultrafast laser technology over the past two decades
that enabled the generation of ultrashort light pulses and their accurate
control and synchronization. These pulses allow for investigations of the
electronic dynamics in atoms, molecules, and condensed matter systems with
temporal resolution at the natural timescale of the electronic motion in matter
(of the order of a billionth of a billionth of a second). In same way as making
a movie of a fast-moving object, such as a race car or a bullet in flight
requires the stroboscopic assembly of many frames, each constituting a momentary
image of the object, time-domain spectroscopy is about to allow the composition
of electronic movies, capable of displaying, for example, the formation and
breaking of chemical bonds. These investigations may have a decisive impact on
emerging technologies, such as light-wave computing, nano-catalysis, and
artificial photosynthesis, contributing to the development of novel computers
and catalytic devices for securing our energy supply and preserving our
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond (1 as = 10-18 seconds) time-
resolved spectroscopy has led to impressive time-resolved studies of ionization
processes on isolated (gaseous) atoms and is anticipated to significantly
advance our understanding of electronic properties of molecules, layered-
semiconductor structures, and nanoparticles. However, the detailed physical
interpretation of time-resolved photoemission spectra faces significant
conceptual challenges and necessitates comprehensive theoretical investigations,
even for simple atomic systems. For complex systems, such as large molecules,
nanoparticles, and solid surfaces, additional severe technical difficulties in
describing the transiently photoexcited electronic dynamics must be overcome.
This project addresses these challenges and focuses on the modeling of time- and
spatially resolved photoemission from adsorbate-covered metal surfaces, and
nanoparticles. It proceeds by developing and applying complementary quantum-
mechanical methods, including exact numerical solutions of the time-dependent
Schroedinger equation and physically more transparent analytical methods. It
will assess the fidelity with which time- and photoelectron-emission-angle-
resolved spectra can reveal information on (a) electronic forces and dynamics in
solids and (b) non-homogenous nano-plasmonic electric-field enhancements in
response to incident infrared or visible light pulses. The proposed spatio-
temporally-resolved studies of complex systems will promote the understanding of
(i) elementary processes, such as single--electron and collective electronic
excitations, and (ii) the dynamics of electrons and fields in layered
semiconductors, adsorbate-covered surfaces, biomolecules, and
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.