* 1802167
* Collaborative Research: Defect Immune, Topologically Protected Devices for Ultra-Low Power Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Sanjay Banerjee, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 120,000.00

Imperfections in materials, such as defects or edge roughness, often severely
limit electronic device performance. This is especially problematic at the
nanoscale where even a single atomic defect can drastically disrupt transport.
Devices that are tolerant to these imperfections are thus the key to future
technologies. The investigation of the fundamental properties and integration of
two new defect-tolerant device concepts is proposed, enabled by novel 2D and 3D
topological insulators (TIs), that exhibit unprecedented low-power, room
temperature performance and functionalities only achievable using these unique
materials. This tolerance to defects will enable nanoelectronics beyond the
currently known limits and will specifically impact the national grand challenge
of enabling ultra-low-power, post-silicon electronics and represent significant
progress in an area of national technological strength, semiconductor
electronics. A team of researchers with complementary expertise, including
junior investigators complemented by accomplished senior professors, will
address the challenges of the proposed work. This research will also broaden
scientific and educational participation by creating a pipeline of pre-college
and undergraduate students motivated to study science and engineering at
universities through, for example, NSF-sponsored Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) programs and collaborations with national laboratories and
industry partners. The researchers will also engage the public through science
cafe programs where faculty members present their research in local pubs and
restaurants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative research team will
elucidate the fundamental science and technological implications of new
topological insulator (TI)-based nanoelectronic device concepts that can operate
at low-power, well above room temperature. Two complementary research threads
will be pursued, both of which will enable a new, ultra-low-power, topologically
protected device made of bismuth-based materials: 1) a 2D TI-based field-effect
transistor that is immune to materials and device imperfections such as defects
and line-edge roughness, and 2) a 3D TI-based tunneling device utilizing spin-
filtering to exhibit negative differential resistance with unprecedented peak-
to-valley ratio performance. TI growth by molecular beam epitaxy (Hinkle) will
focus on 2D Bi and 3D Bi2Se3, which have predicted room-temperature device
applications. Surface and edge state detection and chemical/structural
properties will be investigated using in-situ techniques (Wallace). Theoretical
studies including density functional theory (DFT), scattering, and mobility
calculations (Vandenberghe) will be employed. Advanced 2- and 3-terminal devices
will be fabricated (Banerjee) and these device characteristics will be evaluated
in NAND gates. This research will provide materials and device concepts for
advanced low-power, high-performance logic, memory, and even oscillatory
neuromorphic applications using TIs, a class of devices which are extremely
robust against defects/impurities. A TI and 2D materials property and
benchmarking database through collaboration with NIST will also be
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.