* 1802710
* Collaborative Research: Delay-Sensitive Hybrid Broadcast/Unicast Traffic over Heterogeneous Cellular Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/10/2017,05/31/2021
* Lingjia Liu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2021
* USD 194,201.00

In cellular networks, wireless traffic can be categorized into broadcast traffic
and unicast traffic where broadcast is defined as the unidirectional delivery of
common information such as mobile TV from the base station (BS) to many users;
unicast refers to the delivery of private information such as voice telephony
and wireless data access, which requires a bi-directional network. Because a
significant portion of the mobile data traffic is delay-sensitive, future
cellular networks will face the dual challenge of supporting large traffic
volumes and providing reliable service for delay-sensitive applications. On the
other hand, wireless community across the globe is facing severe spectrum
shortage. The goal of this project is to maximize the spectrum utilization
efficiency and guarantee quality of service for delay-sensitive hybrid
broadcast/unicast traffic by studying new collaborative spectrum sharing and
resource allocation technologies for heterogeneous cellular
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intellectual Merits: &lt;br/&gt;This project
defines new performance metrics that can accurately measure the spectrum
utilization efficiency as well as the quality of service requirements of delay-
sensitive wireless traffic. In particular, the concept of hybrid rate region is
defined to simultaneously characterize the broadcast outage capacity and unicast
effective capacity. To maximize the hybrid rate region, a two-pronged approach
is proposed to achieve a synthesis of pragmatism and fundamentally new
principles to systems engineering. The proposed research activities are
streamlined into two mutually supportive thrusts: (1) maximize the hybrid rate
region for the single-cell cellular network using both orthogonal and non-
orthogonal spectrum sharing technologies; (2) maximize the hybrid rate region
for a multi-cell heterogeneous cellular network where macro base stations and
low power relay nodes are overlaid in the coverage area. The project outcomes
include enabling spectrum sharing and resource allocation technologies that are
heavily dependent on the delay-sensitivity of the underlying traffic, and
characterization of optimal network topology for heterogeneous cellular networks
with hybrid broadcast/unicast traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader Impacts:
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses the worldwide spectrum shortage for broadband
cellular network. It has potential impact on emerging wireless industrial
standards and practices, such that the research outputs will likely influence
and transform, rather than follow, scientific and technological trends.
Meanwhile, the PIs will recruit students of underrepresented groups in Kentucky
and Kansas, including Native American, female, low incoming and first generation
students to participate in the project. By collaborating with the McNair
program, the PIs will broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in
electrical engineering.