* 1802193
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Doing Evaluation: Knowledge Production in International Development
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Millicent Thayer, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 12/31/2020
* USD 11,999.00

Project evaluation is a profession on the rise within and beyond the field of
international development. The field has added more members in the last three
years than in the previous thirty, reflecting wider shifts in how organizational
decisions are made and justified. Charged with producing impartial accounts of
project impact and worth, evaluators must reconcile different ideals of
international development, and of evidence and proof. And yet evaluation as a
profession has been little studied to date. This project will study of how
evaluators shape development policy and practice. Results from the project will
be useful for government and private funding agencies that require evaluations
in their grants, the implementing organizations that commission evaluations of
their work, and evaluators themselves as they further define their professional
standards and practices.

The project employs qualitative methods to shed light on the processes that
shape evaluators' practice on the ground, and the wider consequences of their
work. The project will conduct meeting ethnography and in-depth qualitative
interviews with 70 working evaluators at and around the annual meetings of
diverse professional evaluation associations, ranging from the regional to the
international. This fieldwork will reveal how members of this relatively
solitary profession create and contest the norms governing their growing field.
The resulting analysis of evaluators as an emerging professional community gives
vital institutional context to the larger study of how evaluators engage with
other stakeholders as they carry out project evaluations. This multi-level
analysis of professional evaluators will inform policy and practice in the
development field, and for evaluation more broadly. The study contributes to a
sociology of science that traces how social change happens through everyday
processes of measurement, persuasion, and professionalization.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.