* 1802831
* D3SC: CDS&amp;E: Collaborative Research: Development and application of accurate, transferable and extensible deep neural network potentials for molecules and reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Adrian Roitberg, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2022
* USD 435,561.00

Adrian Roitberg of the University of Florida and Olexandr Isayev of the
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill are supported by an award from the
Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of
Chemistry. Empirical potentials---also known as force fields---play an essential
role in simulating atomic-scale interactions between molecules. They are used in
the computational design of materials and pharmaceuticals. However, current
potentials have been designed to be fast or accurate, but rarely both. This
presents a critical bottleneck for the next phase of predictive chemical
computer models. In this project, Professors Roitberg and Isayev are leveraging
state-of-the-art artificial intelligence (AI) to "learn" potentials from ultra-
large datasets of molecular energies and chemical reactions. The project is
creating a new force field, ANI, that is accurate and fast, while also
applicable to a broad range of systems in chemistry. This research has the
potential to benefit materials design, renewable energy research, and drug
design. The project is first step toward the use of artificial intelligence
techniques to create new materials and molecules beyond what the human
imagination can do alone. The research team is engaged in outreach through
workshops on molecular simulations, "Talk science to me" science for the general
public, and the involvement of high school students from the North Carolina
School of Science and Math (NCSSM) in the research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to develop a chemically-accurate, extensible, and
universal neural network potential, ANI, for use in "in silico" organic
chemistry experimentation. The range of possible applications for ANI is very
broad, from conformational searches to chemical reactions and ligand binding.
Through intelligent sampling of new regions of chemical space, the researchers
are expanding use cases for ANI to include arbitrary systems containing H, C, N
O, F, S, P, Cl and Br atoms. The new design strategy is based on the ANAKIN-ME
method, used in implementing the earlier ANI-1 potential. To train ANI-1, a
database of wB97x/6-31G* DFT energies for 22 million structural conformations
from 60,000 distinct organic molecules was computed through exhaustive,
stochastic sampling of conformational and chemical space. Through rigorous
benchmarks for organic molecules, biomolecules, and peptides, ANI-1 predicted
total and relative energies with RMS errors under 1 kcal/mol, when compared to
DFT reference values. The enhancements being made to ANAKIN-ME are aimed at
improving computational efficiency, expanding the range of systems that can be
simulated, and achieving &lt; 1 kcal/mol RMS error in comparison to high quality
CCSD(T)/CBS quantum chemical energies. These enhancements include reducing the
required dataset size for a given set of atom types, to enable inclusion of
additional elements and chemistries; expanding training datasets to include data
on atomic charges and forces, in addition to energies, and data for charged
molecules; and implementing "query-by-committee" active learning approaches to
facilitate learning of addition, substitution, and elimination chemical
reactions by ANI. The ANI potential is being disseminated through user-friendly
open access mechanisms. The implementation of the ANI potential takes advantage
of graphics processing unit (GPU) acceleration to run on GPU-enabled
workstations and parallel supercomputers. The ANI software library has a simple
Python API and is being integrated with popular molecular modeling and
simulation packages such as AMBER, OpenMM and
Avogadro.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.