* 1802952
* Understanding Gravity at the Smallest Scale
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2021
* Giorgio Gratta, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Marronetti
* 04/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

This award is supported by the Gravitational Physics and the Atomic, Molecular
and Optical Experimental Physics programs. Understanding the nature of gravity
at microscopic distances is one of the most important open problems in
fundamental physics. Although General Relativity provides an extremely well-
tested framework for describing gravitational effects at large distances, it
cannot be consistently combined with the Standard Model of particle physics to
provide a description of gravity at small scales. The development of a quantum
theory of gravity that can be incorporated into the Standard Model is a central
goal of fundamental physics, with broad implications for our understanding of
particle physics and the mysterious nature of the "dark energy" that appears to
permeate the universe. Many theories attempting to provide a consistent
microscopic framework for gravity (e.g., those involving extra dimensions)
predict that gravity could deviate from the familiar inverse square law at
distances shorter than a mm. Such deviations are extremely difficult to measure
experimentally due to the small strength of gravitational interactions at
microscopic distances. The studies described here attempt to gain insights into
the realm of microscopic gravitational forces with a novel experimental setup.
Additionally, the research will enhance the training of students in STEM areas
which are vital for the future of the
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous measurements at these distance
scales have employed techniques derived from human-size devices in which
mechanical springs are used as force sensors. This group has developed a
drastically new technique, using the light field of a laser to confine and
measure the motion of micron (or, eventually, submicron)-size quartz
microsphere. Previous studies undertaken by this group include the most
sensitive search to date for fractional charges over 4 orders of magnitude
smaller than the charge of an electron. This is a by-product of having to
discharge the microspheres and check that they are really neutral. The group has
completed the construction of a new trap in which the entire microsphere
position readout is carried out interferometrically. This is a first in this
area of research and will be applicable to other areas, e.g. biology or polymer
science. The studies supported by this grant include exploring the possibility
of spinning the microspheres, something that could reduce the background of the
gravity measurements and may also lead to the development of
nanogyroscopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.