* 1802383
* Implicitization, Residual Intersections, and Differential Methods in Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Bernd Ulrich, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 05/31/2023
* USD 321,526.00

This award funds research in Commutative Algebra, the study of systems of
polynomial equations in several unknowns. To this end, one considers the
collection of all solutions of a system of equations as a geometric object and
investigates the functions defined on this object. Reversing the perspective
leads to the implicitization problem, which the investigator plans to work on:
Given a geometric object, such as a curve or a surface, one wishes to construct
a system of polynomial equations that has the geometric object as its solution
set. Once the system of polynomial equations is known, it becomes much easier,
for instance, to decide whether a specific point lies on the surface or whether
the surface is smooth at one of its points. The implicitization problem is
difficult and requires advanced techniques from pure mathematics, but its
solution even in particular cases has numerous applications, for instance in
computer aided design, robotics, and other areas of engineering.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several topics in Commutative
Algebra that have close connections with Algebraic and Analytic Geometry and
with Elimination Theory. They include the implicitization problem for Rees
algebras and rational maps, equisingularity theory, the Poincare problem for
plane foliations, and residual intersection theory. Determining the implicit
equations of graphs and images of rational maps is a classical, but open problem
in elimination theory, which amounts to finding defining ideals of Rees
algebras. Previously, the PI and his collaborators solved this problem for Rees
algebras of codimension three Gorenstein ideals, under the additional assumption
that the entries of a syzygy matrix of the ideal generate a complete
intersection. Now the PI intends to remove this crucial hypothesis. The PI also
plans to investigate Rees algebras of more general ideals, with the aim to
obtain at least qualitative statements and bounds for the implicit equations. A
goal in equisingularity theory is to devise fiberwise numerical criteria for
when a family of analytic spaces is topologically trivial. An important
intermediate step are numerical characterizations of integral dependence of
modules. The PI intends to prove such a characterization using a notion of
multiplicity that is inspired by intersection theory. Poincare had asked how to
decide whether a singular algebraic foliation of the complex plane has an
algebraic curve as a leaf. In more recent times, this question has often been
treated as a problem about relating invariants of a vector field to invariants
of curves or varieties that are left invariant by the vector field. The PI will
investigate this problem, using his expertise from prior work on algebraic
differentials and Castelnuovo-Mumford regularity. The notion of residual
intersection, a generalization of linkage or liaison, is ubiquitous and appears
naturally in intersection theory and in the study of Rees algebras, for
instance. Of central importance are the Cohen-Macaulayness and duality
properties of residual intersections. Based on partial results and experimental
evidence, David Eisenbud and the PI have observed that, unexpectedly, many
residual intersections, even when they fail to be Cohen-Macaulay, admit maximal
Cohen-Macaulay modules of rank one that are self-dual. The PI and his
collaborators intend to give a proof of this unusual
phenomenon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.