* 1802783
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Effects of External Threats on Community Cohesion
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2018,05/31/2019
* Carly Offidani-Bertrand, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2019
* USD 11,781.00

This project examines effects of a difficult environment on individuals and
their community. In a situation in which hardships have increased recently, this
study looks at the effects on 1) mental health challenges for individuals and
their groups; 2) how the community understands itself and its place within the
larger social structure of the United States; and (3) commitments of individuals
and groups within the community to support each other, including opportunities
for social solidarity and collective action in defense of vulnerable members.
Findings will contribute to the understanding of the indirect effects of
policies and their enforcement, and thus will be useful to policymakers as well
as to organizations seeking to influence policy and to the affected communities
themselves. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Qualitative data will be collected on the
practices and relationships of members of the community and on the extent to
which legal and enforcement threats shape their social, economic and
psychological well-being. The main methodological procedure is the construction
of case studies of groups of community members through long-term ethnographic
observation and interviews, often repeated, with key informants and community
members. Results will contribute to the theoretical understanding of how social
solidarity in communities is generated; how external processes condition the
well-being of individuals and groups; and how the effects of these external
processes may be modified through community characteristics and
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.