* 1802432
* Triazine Derivatized Biomaterials for Nucleic Acid Delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Dennis Bong, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Smith
* 07/31/2021
* USD 500,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
and investigate new bioinspired materials that can package and protect gene
therapeutics from degradation and enhance their efficacy. Gene therapy, the
therapeutic delivery of nucleic acid into a patient's cells as a drug to treat
disease, has the potential to be a general treatment for any disease with a
genetic determinant. However, protection of genetic cargo from degradation and
clearance, as well as delivery to the correct tissue location is a significant
challenge. Two major approaches will be applied to produce these new
biomaterials: 1) combination of natural components with an artificial scaffold;
and 2) modification of natural biomaterial scaffolds with synthetic components.
The artificial components are designed to bind gene therapeutics, while the
natural components impart targeting function and biocompatibility. The
artificial biomaterials will thus mask the presence of the therapeutic cargo,
protecting it from degradation. Natural biological components such as sugars and
lipids are expected to enhance water-solubility, biocompatibility and targeting
of gene therapy to the correct biological target. These new biomaterials will be
tested for their abilities to mimic natural packaging and protection strategies.
This research could lead to the development of more efficient therapeutic
products through a potentially general method and thus accelerate the emergence
of new therapies based on bioinspired biomaterial carriers. Given the importance
of molecular therapies for biomedical problems, these new biomaterials could
have a significant impact on human health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This proposal uses a simple
synthetic motif to generate a new family of nucleic acid reactive biomaterials
from readily available native ligands and polymers. This novel approach uses
triazine derivatization to unify nucleic acid binding with cell-surface
targeting in a multifunctional carrier design. It is the goal of this proposal
to develop a general synthetic approach to transform synthetic and native
biomaterials into nucleic acid carrier platforms, and elucidate the structural
basis of functional intracellular delivery. This creative and original approach
will yield the following expected outcomes: 1) A facile synthetic method to
generate novel non-electrostatic nucleic acid binders from synthetic and
biomolecular backbones; 2) a general method to transform native ligands into
nucleic acid carriers; and 3) a method to target native T/U-rich nucleic acids.
This research will impact targeted delivery of both RNA and DNA and enable
intracellular targeting of native nucleic acid components with carriers in which
binding can be decoupled from electrostatics. This decoupling allows for the
fine tuning of nitrogen/phosphate (N/P) ratios geared towards uptake and
release, rather than complexation. Importantly, these findings will enable the
next vertical step in design of synthetic biomaterials for targeted nucleic acid
chemistry delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.