* 1802482
* Atomically-Dispersed Co and Cu Catalysts for Reactions Involving C-H Activation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Robert Davis, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

Hydraulic fracturing technology has dramatically increased the availability of
natural gas feedstocks. This abundance of readily available domestic natural gas
suggests it may be a candidate to displace petroleum in the production of
commodity chemicals. Use of biomass-derived carbon resources would be an even
more environmentally benign feedstock to produce commodity chemicals. Yet, the
conversion of both natural gas and biomass into commodity chemicals requires a
catalytic upgrading reaction, in which one molecule is selectively converted to
a second desired molecule of higher value. For natural gas and biomass to be
economically competitive with petroleum as a feedstock, this catalytic
conversion must be both highly selective (i.e. unwanted byproducts are avoided)
and inexpensive. However, most of today's catalysts use expensive precious
metals, have only modest selectivity, and often require energy-intensive high
temperature and pressure conditions. Development of economic catalytic processes
that convert alternative chemical feedstocks into value added chemicals would
benefit greatly by the discovery and engineering of new catalysts that are
derived from low-cost earth-abundant elements. Recent observations suggest some
atomically-dispersed, earth abundant metals on a carbon support approach the
activity and selectivity of a precious metal catalyst, at much less expense.
This project seeks to identify the atomic and electronic structure of isolated
cobalt and copper atoms in nitrogen-loaded carbon and relate those
characteristics to catalytic performance in representative catalytic
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will correlate the catalytic
performance of atomically-dispersed cobalt and copper ions in nitrogen-loaded
carbon to the coordination environment and chemical state of the active
catalytic site. The latter will be probed with high resolution electron
microscopy, in-situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy and in-situ X-ray
photoelectron spectroscopy. Reactivity will be assessed via alcohol oxidative
dehydrogenation and hydrocarbon dehydrogenation. Results from this study should
provide structural models of the active sites and lead to generalized rules for
designing and synthesizing new, highly-dispersed, earth-abundant metal atom
catalysts. The project involves research training and education of undergraduate
and graduate students. Collaborations with the Max Planck Institutes in Germany
and two US national laboratories are part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.