* 1802358
* CAREER: From Data to Knowledge: Extracting and Utilizing Concept Graphs in Online Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 09/13/2017,03/31/2019
* Cornelia Caragea, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* James French
* 03/31/2019
* USD 193,323.00

Knowledge bases today are central to the successful utilization of information
available in the large and growing amounts of digital data on the Web. Such
technologies have started to unleash a transformation of Web search from a
keyword match to discovery, learning, and creativity, which are crucial to
promoting the goal of knowledge discovery. Unfortunately, the search for
information remains inherently difficult for significant portions of the Web
such as the Scholarly Web, which contains many millions of scientific documents.
For example, PubMed has over 20 million documents, whereas Google Scholar is
estimated to have more than 100 million. Open-access digital libraries such as
CiteSeerX, which acquire freely-available research articles from the Web,
witness an increase in their document collections as well. Despite attractive
advancements by scholarly search portals, semantic search technologies that
"understand" complex concepts and their relations and can systematically satisfy
users' intricate information needs have yet to be investigated on the Scholarly
Web. The goal of this project is to design solutions to make information more
accessible and comprehensible to Scholarly Web users in particular, and Web
users in general, and to help them discover knowledge more effectively and
efficiently. The approach taken will be to develop an integrated framework,
focusing on the extraction and utilization of scholarly knowledge graphs in
online scholarly environments. Educationally, this work will involve: training
of graduate, undergraduate, and high-school students, particularly encouraging
the participation of women and underrepresented groups in the research efforts;
curriculum development and integration of research into courses taught by the
PI; exposure of students to industry and international experiences; and
education for the general public. The project will target the following research
objectives: (1) explore the construction of scholarly knowledge graphs that
combine evidence from multiple resources in an open information extraction
framework; (2) design and develop novel algorithms for the detection and
analysis of interesting and previously unknown connections between concepts, in
order to enforce knowledge discovery on the Scholarly Web; and (3) investigate
the utility of scholarly knowledge graphs in a question answering system. The
results of this research will be integrated into the CiteSeerX digital library
(http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu). The software, tools, and benchmark datasets,
which will be developed during the course of this project will be made publicly
available. All findings will be shared with the research community through
publications in academic journals and presented in Information Retrieval, Text
Mining and Natural Language Processing conferences. For further information, see
the project web page: http://www.cse.unt.edu/~ccaragea/skg.html.