* 1802011
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Consulting Firms in the Nonprofit Sector
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Leah Reisman, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2020
* USD 12,000.00

The use of consultants is widespread in the U.S. nonprofit sector. Little is
known, however, about the day-to-day reality of consulting firms? work in the
nonprofit sector, or the influence of their recommendations on nonprofit
practice. This study will illuminate how the work and interaction of consulting
firms, clients, and funders define and implement core concepts in nonprofit work
such as "social good" and "strategic." It will accomplish this by providing an
analysis of consulting firms' processes, their relationships with client
nonprofits, and links to funding organizations. Findings will contribute to
policymaking concerning nonprofits and benefit philanthropic foundations and
nonprofits themselves by revealing some of the consequences, intended and
unintended, of consultant involvement in nonprofit
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Situated as they are at the nexus of the nonprofit,
for-profit, and philanthropic sectors, consulting firms working for nonprofits
operate in a context in which goals, methods of measuring value, and
accountability are unclear. This dissertation is motivated theoretically by the
question of how organizations manage in the context of ambiguity and how their
strategies to cope with ambiguity shape the nature of their work and the ideas
they produce. To investigate these questions, this study will draw on 1)
ethnographic data collected over 15 months at consulting firms located in
Philadelphia, Chicago, and San Francisco (n=3 total firms), 2) more than 85
interviews with consultants and clients, and 3) a survey of foundations, which
broker many consulting arrangements. The study will be among the first to
investigate consulting firms? role in the generation and dissemination of
assertions about nonprofit work, providing important insight about an
understudied category of actors in the nonprofit
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.