* 1802012
* Near Continent Intraplate Magmatism in the Atlantic: Implications for Mantle Dynamics and Melting
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2017,03/31/2020
* Esteban Gazel, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 03/31/2020
* USD 276,249.00

The processes that result in volcanism away from active plate boundaries are not
explained by the current plate tectonics theory, and thus remain a missing piece
in our understanding of the internal dynamics and evolution of our planet.
Localized upwelling of hot mantle known as "mantle plumes" successfully explains
locations like Hawaii and Yellowstone. However, there are many other sites
worldwide like Cape Verde and the Canaries islands that require further research
to understand the mechanisms behind volcanic activity. The team's goal is to
elucidate the mechanisms that produce volcanoes away from plate margins using a
collaborative approach that combines data from geochemical and geodynamical
studies. The investigators, including international collaborators, will collect
new geochemical data including volatiles (C, H, S, etc.) from Cape Verde and the
Canaries, using these locations as natural laboratories to study the deep Earth.
They will use melt inclusions contained within the host crystals to collect
volatile data to answer the proposed fundamental questions. These results can
also be incorporated in assessment of volcanic hazards. Additionally, they will
provide new CO2 and H2O data that will help constrain volatile output for
intraplate magmatism, and especially increase our understanding of the deep
Earth carbon cycle. The results from this project will flow directly into the
teaching of the principal investigator, and will be disseminated to a broad
audience through outreach activities at the Geosciences Museum at Virginia Tech,
the Virginia Science Festival, and through different media sources to the
public.

The goal of this project is to integrate petrological and geochemical data from
Cape Verde and the Canaries with geodynamic models to broaden our understanding
of the composition and dynamical processes in the mantle that can give rise to
intraplate magmatism. The mantle plume model has generally been accepted as a
plausible mechanism for intraplate volcanism, but not all locations that are
considered "hotspots" have the seismic and geochemical signatures to back up a
deep-rooted source. Small-scale convection (e.g., edge-driven convection, EDC)
has been proposed as an alternative mechanism for a subset of near continent
locations. The investigators propose to test mantle plume vs. EDC as mechanisms
for intraplate volcanism using Cape Verde and the Canaries as natural
laboratories. These locations were selected for their position near a
continental margin but away from plate boundaries, making them ideal to test our
working hypotheses. Also, these locations provide easy access to abundant
primitive tephras to be used for melt-inclusion studies and volatile
determinations, which are necessary for an improved determination of melting
conditions. Finally, Cape Verde and the Canaries are the only two oceanic
settings where carbonatites have been reported. Preliminary work on Cape Verde
and the Canaries suggest that some samples (including the carbonatites) from
these locations melted from a carbonated mantle source, indicating the
importance of intraplate volcanism for mantle outgassing, a missing link in the
deep global water and carbon cycles. Thereby, the team will address these
fundamental questions: 1) How do the dynamics of mantle upwelling control the
melting behavior of the source through the effects of temperature and upwelling
rate? 2) What is the source composition of these Atlantic hotspots, and how does
it affect the dynamics of mantle upwelling as well as petrological
determinations of source temperatures, the size of the swell and the seismic
expression of mantle upwelling? 3) What are the volatile budgets of intraplate
magmas and their role in the global water and carbon cycles, and how do
volatiles modulate mantle dynamics by reducing viscosity? 4) What are the
diagnostic geochemical and petrological signatures of the plume model vs. EDC?