* 1802281
* Counting Problems in Number Theory: Elliptic and Plane Quartic Curves over Finite Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Nathan Kaplan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 12/31/2022
* USD 155,217.00

This research project will explore several questions concerning counting in
number theory. One of the fundamental goals of number theory is to understand
solution sets of polynomial equations. These equations define geometric objects,
for example, the algebraic curves on which many modern cryptographic systems are
based. Instead of focusing on solutions to a single equation, one can consider a
family of equations and attempt to understand the average behavior, the extremal
behavior, and in particularly nice settings, to compute the entire distribution
of the number of solutions when varying through this family. Within families of
curves there are certain properties that one might want to avoid, or select for,
so it is an important problem to understand how often these properties arise. In
the second half of the twentieth century, mathematicians began to develop the
interplay between number theory and the theory of error-correcting codes. This
project will explore this connection, using ideas from coding theory to
understand families of algebraic curves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The questions
examined in this research project are a part of the field of arithmetic
statistics. The principal investigator will explore distributions of rational
point counts for families of elliptic curves over finite fields, especially
families that play a key role in cryptography. The project will build on earlier
work studying rational point count distributions for elliptic curves over a
fixed finite field, applying these ideas to answer statistical questions about
Legendre curves and pairing-friendly elliptic curves. The project will also
study the distribution of rational point counts for genus-3 curves over finite
fields. Computational evidence suggests that there are more curves with many
rational points than with few points. The principal investigator aims to use
ideas from the theory of error-correcting codes to understand this asymmetry. A
major theme of this project is finding boundaries between counting problems that
have polynomial answers, ones where formulas are not polynomial but can be
expressed in terms of quantities such as Fourier coefficients of modular forms,
and problems where we can only hope for asymptotic
answers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.