* 1802234
* Representations of p-adic Groups and the Local Langlands Correspondence
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,11/30/2020
* Jessica Fintzen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 11/30/2020
* USD 110,000.00

This project is motivated by the Langlands program. The Langlands program is a
far-reaching collection of conjectures that relates different areas of
mathematics, including number theory and representation theory, and thereby
provides a powerful tool to prove theorems and find explanations by transferring
results between different areas. Recent work in Langlands program has lead to
the resolution of various major conjectures. Number theory is one of the oldest
areas in pure mathematics, which includes the study of integers and objects
built out of them, such as integer solutions to equations. Apart from its
fundamental role inside mathematics, number theory manifests important
influences on our everyday life, for example, through cryptography.
Representation theory, on the other hand, is the study of abstract objects, such
as the symmetries of a cube (reflections and rotations that preserve the cube),
using matrices and linear algebra. By realizing abstract objects as matrices,
one can reduce abstract problems to questions in linear algebra, which are often
easier to study. Representation theory has also applications outside of
mathematics, for example, in physics. This project will enhance our
understanding of the objects studied on the representation theory side and aims
to achieve further progress towards an explicit construction of the local
Langlands correspondence on the number theory side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of
the central open questions in the representation theory of p-adic groups is the
construction of all smooth, complex, supercupsidal representations. In this
project, the PI will provide a new construction of such representations and
prove its exhaustiveness for all primes p. In parallel, the PI and her
collaborators will explore another novel approach to obtain a better
understanding of the structure of the representations of p-adic groups.
Moreover, the PI intends to use the new construction of representations to gain
new insights about the local Langlands correspondence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.