* 1802992
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic degradation of proteins by ubiquitination provides a novel  therapeutic for controlling elevated protein levels
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Christina Chan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2024
* USD 336,000.00

The ability to tightly control protein level is critical for cell health. High
levels contribute to diseases that include cancer, diabetes, dementia, and heart
disease. Current treatments do not attempt to degrade excess proteins. We
propose to develop a technology that triggers protein degradation and that is
reversible. Activities targeted to the general public and to teachers will
expand the understanding of the importance of training in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM). Exposing high school and undergraduate
students to hands-on laboratory research experiences will help to attract and
retain students in STEM fields. Ultimately, this training will result in a
globally competitive workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop a new and potent approach that induces protein degradation by
synthetically coupling and directing the native proteasomal degradation
machinery towards the desired target protein(s). We will repurpose the Cas6
family proteins as a generalizable platform for site-specific RNA binding and
processing, and demonstrate their utility to provide dynamic fine-tuning of
protein levels based on intracellular microRNAs (miRNAs) levels. A key challenge
in creating a novel technology that can adapt to the changing cellular
environment and permit the targeting of essential proteins, which presently is
not possible, is to enable dynamic fine-tuning of the protein levels. Towards
this end, we will evaluate different strategies to turn off the protein
degradation such that the target protein can be maintained at a desirable or set
level. We envision that our technology is broadly applicable to any protein and
thus will impact many diseases wherein elevated proteins levels contribute to or
drive their pathology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.