* 1802583
* Uncovering novel microbial ecological relationships that foster enhanced pollutant biodegradation rates in contaminated groundwater systems
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Timothy Mattes, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 329,993.00

Vinyl chloride (VC) is a known carcinogen and common groundwater pollutant that
may negatively impact drinking water supplies. Although some bacteria are known
to remove VC from groundwater, little is known about the ecology of these
organisms, especially under the low oxygen conditions that often occur in
groundwater. An improved fundamental understanding of the interactions between
these organisms, as well as interactions with other bacteria in the ecosystem
may lead to the development of novel remediation strategies. The proposed work
will benefit society by developing more precise and sustainable remediation
strategies based on microbial ecology. Additional broader impacts include the
training of undergraduate and graduate students to apply microbial ecology tools
to environmental problems, increasing the participation of underrepresented
groups in engineering, sharing research findings with environmental
professionals and regulators, and providing research opportunities to high
school students interested in pursuing Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math (STEM) topics. If successful, this research will provide valuable tools to
help ensure the Nation's water security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;VC is typically
generated by incomplete anaerobic biodegradation of the widely used chlorinated
solvents tetrachloroethene and trichloroethene. Because anaerobic VC
dechlorinating bacteria, and oxygenic nitrogen-cycling bacteria generate
products that can be useful as primary and cometabolic substrates and electron
acceptors for VC-oxidizers, it is hypothesized that there are novel ecological
relationships between these microbial groups at oxic/anoxic interfaces or in
regions of low-level oxygen flux at VC contaminated sites. This research will
probe the interactions between aerobic VC-oxidizing bacteria and anaerobic VC-
dechlorinating bacteria at low oxygen fluxes in contaminated groundwater
environments to identify potential significant positive impacts of these
interactions on VC biodegradation rates. The investigations will include three
specific tasks: 1) Demonstrate simultaneous oxidation and reduction of VC in
laboratory microcosms; 2) Investigate spatial relationships between VC-
oxidizers, anaerobic VC-dechlorinators, and potential oxygen-producing bacteria
in sediment samples from a VC-contaminated site; and 3) Investigate potential
interspecies oxygen transfer relationships in low dissolved oxygen (DO)
laboratory microcosms. Field samples will be analyzed by quantitative PCR and
fluorescence in situ hybridization-confocal scanning laser microscopy to study
spatial relationships between VC-oxidizers, anaerobic VC-dechlorinators, and
potential oxygen-producing bacteria in sediment samples. Microcosm studies,
including the use of oxygen permeation tubes to create low-DO flux conditions,
will be used for modeling the interactions between these organisms. Finally,
oxygen stable isotopes will be employed to investigate potential interspecies
oxygen transfer relationships in microcosms. This project should reveal the
important roles that aerobic and oxygenic nitrogen-cycling microorganisms play
in mediating subsurface biodegradation reactions. An improved understanding of
the contribution of aerobic processes to VC biodegradation rates will spur the
transformative development of predictive quantitative relationships between the
diverse microbial communities and VC attenuation. Improvements in management of
groundwater contaminated with chlorinated solvents could be realized by
developing more sustainable and precise approaches to remediation that involve
more targeted electron donor/acceptor injections or developing bioaugmentation
cultures capable of enhanced VC biodegradation. This improved understanding of
aerobic biodegradation processes in subsurface systems could also extend to
compounds beyond the chlorinated ethenes, as oxygenic and low oxygen flux
scenarios are relevant to a variety of subsurface biodegradation
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.