* 1802934
* Conference Proposal: Cluster Algebra and Mathematical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Michael Shapiro, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 04/30/2019
* USD 40,000.00

This award supports participation in the conference "Cluster Algebras and
Mathematical Physics (CAMP)", to be held May 7th to 11th, 2018. The conference
will take place on the Michigan State University (MSU) campus in East Lansing
Michigan and hosted by the MSU Institute for Mathematical and Theoretical
Physics (IMTP). The conference will be an opportunity to bring together both the
mathematics and physics communities to present and collaborate on research in
this new and exciting overlapping field. The conference is designed for 50-70
participants. In addition to the rich schedule of talks for Monday to Friday,
there will be an additional poster session for graduate students and early
career mathematicians. A substantial portion of the funding is being set aside
for such participants. Further information can be found at the conference
website: https://sites.google.com/site/campmay7may11/

First invented by Fomin and Zelevinsky in 2001 to study positivity of canonical
bases, the research field of cluster algebra has since taken off. Cluster
algebras have played a key role in new developments in supersymmetric Yang-Mills
theory, also equivalent to the perturbative topological B model string theory
and quiver gauge theories, specifically brane tilings and Seiberg dualities. For
example, in a collaboration between physicists and mathematicians, the cluster
theory of positive Grassmannian resulted in the definition of the amplituhedron.
This conference will focus on new developments in this area as well as
applications of similar techniques beyond supersymmetric theories.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.