* 1802390
* Towards a model for splashing: An experimental program to analyze a splash in terms of its jets
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Robert Deegan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,998.00

Many industrial and natural processes depend crucially on splashing, the
collision of a liquid drop with a surface and its subsequent fragmentation into
smaller droplets. Common yet important examples include inkjet printing, spray
painting, spray cooling, precision soldering of microelectronics, pesticide
spraying, fire suppression, airborne dispersal of seeds, bacteria, and viruses.
Our ability to predict and control such phenomena is limited by an incomplete
understanding of the fundamental process that governs these phenomena, the
splash. The overarching goal of this proposal is a fundamental study of
splashing using a newly-developed technique that makes it possible to measure
the fluid dynamics of a splash with unprecedented spatial and temporal
resolution. The project includes a significant educational component, including
training of future scientist at the undergraduate and graduate level, outreach
to unrepresented minorities in the K-12 community, and dissemination of science
to the public through social media and collaborations with
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a model of
splashing by decomposing the splash in terms of jets. Jets are the high-speed
sheets of liquid produced soon after drop impact. The objectives will be met by
(1) measuring the jet's early time dynamics and stability, (2) determining the
bifurcation points for qualitatively different dynamics, (3) measuring the most
unstable wavelength and the resulting droplet distribution, (4) modeling the
stability of jets and comparing with experiments, (5) studying jet production
from an apparatus that removes the complications in splashing from drop impact.
Experiments will record the evolution of the liquid-gas interface and the size
distribution of droplets created during the splash using high speed X-ray and
visible light imaging for a range of impact speeds with different liquid and gas
combinations. These data will be supplemented with direct numerical simulations.
This program is expected to (1) produce the highest resolution experimental
characterization of splashing, (2) test the hypothesis that splashes can be
analyzed in terms of jets, and (3) provide a fundamental basis for modelling
more complicated process that involve changes of
topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.