* 1802464
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Informal Financial Networks in a Conflict Economy
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Gozde Guran, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,970.00

This project analyzes an informal financial transfer system that has survived
and flourished in the face of protracted civil war. One surprising aspect of
civil war is the degree to which economic and social life endures in the face of
interminable dislocation and turmoil. The informal financial system under study
has endured and even expanded in the face of war, even as formal institutions
have mostly broken down. This research will explore how the system operates and
how it has shaped the dynamics of the conflict. The project will build knowledge
on the internal dynamics and drivers of civil wars, which will help to inform
the development of actionable policies aimed at their mitigation, prevention,
and termination. Its conclusions will be of relevance to a range of policymakers
and non-governmental organizations interested in the micro-dynamics of civil
conflict, including how everyday civilians experience and manage the realities
of war.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will employ ethnographic research in
two sites neighboring the war zone to illuminate this financial system, an
unregulated system based on networks of brokers who send and receive cash on
behalf of their customers, including refugees, humanitarian organization,
businessmen, and smugglers, among others. Several research methods will be used.
A small number of brokers will be shadowed to observe their daily business
practices, trace their transnational networks, and register patterns in their
transactions. Semi-structured interviews will be conducted with brokers, but
also customers and humanitarian NGOs that make use of the system and government
regulators. Quantitative data, including transaction log data from system
agents, also will be examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.