* 1802274
* Syntheses of new ladder molecules and exploration of their electrical and optical properties
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Luping Yu, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2021
* USD 450,000.00

Professor Luping Yu of the University of Chicago is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry (MSN) Program of the Division
of Chemistry to develop synthetic approaches to prepare new electron donor-
acceptor molecular building blocks and link them together in small chains termed
oligomers. The oligomers have the shape of a ladder. The ladder oligomers are
investigated to determine the relationship between molecular structure and
function as electric charge transporters. The objective is to develop oligomers
with enhanced emission of electrons as a result of absorption of light. The
project integrates synthetic chemistry, material science, theoretical
computation and device generation. The ultimate goal is to establish the
foundation upon which useful organic materials are developed for potential
applications in organic light emitting transistor (OLETs) and other molecular
electronic devices. The intellectual properties developed during the course of
conducting the project is commercialized by industrial partners. Another goal of
this project is to nurture the next generation of scientists in materials
chemistry and electronic device generation. Students and other professionals
receive interdisciplinary training and learn the skills necessary to face future
scientific challenges. Underrepresented minority students are involved in the
project and encouraged to pursue scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conjugated ladder oligomers are a class of
important materials that exhibit interesting optical and electrical properties.
In this project, synthetic approaches involving several annulation reactions to
ladder oligomers containing new electronic donor-acceptor (D-A) building motifs
are developed. New concepts with emphasis on improved solubility and improved
optoelectronic properties are formulated and a new generation of D-A ladder
oligomers with unique charge transport properties are explored. Theoretical
calculations are employed to inform the synthetic effort. These oligomers
represent a new classis of organic semiconductors with controlled band gap,
orbital energy levels and crystal structures. The electrical and optical
properties of these materials and the relationship between molecular
structure/crystal structure and charge transport property (mobility) are
investigated. The aim is to prepare ladder oligomers with enhanced photoemission
efficiency for applications in organic light emitting transistor (OLETs) and
other electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.