* 1802353
* Digitization PEN:  Field Museum of Natural History Partnership with the Southwest Collection of Arthropods Network
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Petra Sierwald, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 06/30/2021
* USD 163,485.00

Arthropods play a major role in shaping the ecosystems of the southwestern
United States and around the world. Arthropod research collections housed in
museums and universities contain key data for studying these roles. Collections
data can be used in ecological studies and to produce identification tools, but
for many collections these data are hidden away on specimen labels and in field
notes. The Southwest Collection of Arthropods Network (SCAN) was established to
improve accessibility of collections like these, with a goal to capturing the
data written on 750,000 arthropod specimen labels, allowing researchers to
explore how arthropods shape the ecosystems of the southwest and how they
respond natural and anthropogenic change. This Partner to Existing Networks
(PEN) award to the Field Museum will enhance SCAN through the addition of label
data from over 100,000 beetle specimens of SCAN target taxa, representing 860
species. Beyond the scientific value of the data will contributed to SCAN, this
project will take advantage of the Field Museum's strong history in public
outreach and status in the Chicago community to support informal educational
opportunities focused on ground-dwelling arthropods both locally and across the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PEN project will make available the ecological,
distributional, and morphological data from four beetle families for which the
Field Museum has large, historical holdings: The darkling beetles
(Tenebrionidae), the ant loving beetles (Pselaphinae), the feather-wing beetles
(Ptiliidae) and the ironclad beetles (Zopheridae). The project will enhance the
SCAN dataset by addressing critical taxonomic and distributional gaps. The Field
Museum's collection of 60,000 Pselaphinae specimens, a group whose evolutionary
history is deeply intertwined the ants (another target taxon), is the most
comprehensive and heavily-researched collection of these beetles in the world.
It is rich with type specimens (120 primary types), associated field notes,
ecological data, and undescribed taxa, yet these data are still not digitally
available. The project team will implement a workflow that involves 1) imaging
and transcribing data from all labels on 100,000 selected specimens and adding
the data added to the Field Museum's EMu database, 2) imaging all North American
primary types for target taxa, 3) georeferencing all southwestern collection
localities in the Field Museum Insect Collection database, 4) making these data
available through the SCAN portal, GBIF, and iDigBio (idigbio.org) data portals,
and 5) augmenting current digitization workflows at the Field Museum to leverage
the intern and volunteer contributions and sustain digitization through
establishment of a highly trained team of digitization volunteers and
interns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.