* 1802081
* I-Corps: Noninvasive Embryo Selection Technique
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2018,06/30/2018
* Samuel Prien, Texas Tech University Health Science Center
* Standard Grant
* Anita La Salle
* 06/30/2018
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project will improve
outcomes of assisted reproductive technologies by allowing a more effective
method to select high quality embryos to transfer. Incorporating embryo transfer
into livestock breeding programs to maximize superior genetic traits can be
economically advantageous to producers. However, the only currently available
means to select which embryo to transfer is subjective, invasive or expensive.
As most livestock producers cannot justify the cost of these available methods
into their programs, the transfer of dead and low quality embryos into
recipients, which will never establish a pregnancy, is common. The technology
developed with this project involves a noninvasive, cost-effective and
quantitative method to select embryo viability and quality. Using this
technology to select which embryo to transfer will result in increased pregnancy
rates after embryo transfer. This technology will reduce costs spent on
transferring non-viable embryos and caring for non-pregnant recipient animals.
This technology also provides the only published method to select which embryos
have survived cryopreservation. This I-Corps project can increase the efficiency
of embryo transfer and cryopreservation of mammalian embryos in a livestock
production setting.

This I-Corps project investigates the commercial potential of research
demonstrating early embryo growth potential can be determined by an embryos
specific gravity. This I-Corps technology measures the rate of an embryos
descent through a media filled chamber. The embryos descent rate provides
insight to intracellular properties based on density of intracellular
constituents, which cannot be estimated through standard embryo selection
techniques. For example, a non-viable embryo has lost the ability of its
membrane to regulate what enters and exits the cell. The cell will then move
towards equilibrium with the media and water will enter the cell. This increases
the cellular density of the dead embryo, and results in a faster descent time
than the descent time of a live embryo. Studies have demonstrated the
effectiveness of this technology to distinguish live from dead embryos in mouse
zygotes, mouse cryopreserved blastocysts and cryopreserved sheep blastocysts.
Additional studies have demonstrated the technology does not harm embryos, as
embryos continue development and establish healthy pregnancies after measured
with the specific gravity device.