* 1802070
* APS Division of Fluid Dynamics Travel Support Program for Students and Early Career Scientists 2017-2019
* ENG,CBET
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2020
* Patricia Lettieri, American Physical Society
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 10/31/2020
* USD 75,000.00

The project will partially cover travel expenses of graduate students, post-
doctoral researchers, and junior faculty members from institutions in the United
States to participate in the conference entitled, " American Physical Society,
Division of Fluid Dynamics (DFD), 70th Annual DFD Meeting in Denver, CO,
November 19-21, 2017. This is the largest international annual meeting of fluid
dynamics researchers in the world, with over 2,500 anticipated attendees.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chief intellectual merit of this conference lies in
the exchange of scientific ideas, presentations of cutting edge research, and
exposure to a richly diverse array of topics in virtually every sub-discipline
of fluid dynamics. The conference will be attended by both prominent and young
scientists in fluid dynamics from around the world, who will be discussing
present and future directions of research and research challenges. The
conference will foster cross-fertilization of ideas among researchers in cutting
edge areas of fluid dynamics and will address challenges involved in advancing
the field. The broader impact will be to increase participation of students and
young scientists who would not otherwise be able to afford to travel to the
meeting and pay associated costs. The travel grant program has traditionally
prioritized meeting attendance by students, young scientists, and, in general,
scientists from under-represented groups. Since the awards are meant to
supplement participant travel funds, not to cover these entirely, the committee
takes into account the travel budget entered on the application. Special effort
is made to achieve diverse participation from underrepresented groups in
engineering, including women and members of minority groups.