* 1802701
* SaTC: EDU: Online Digital Forensics Courses and Labs for Students and Professionals
* EHR,DGE
* 11/01/2017,08/31/2021
* Yier Jin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Li Yang
* 08/31/2021
* USD 314,955.00

In the current Internet-connected world, most companies, government agencies,
and the public heavily rely on the cyber world for information and data
management, processing, and exchange. Information leakage and data breaches have
become increasingly damaging to businesses, the government, and people's lives.
Correspondingly, hackers have more incentive to attack for financial and
political gains. While the existing cybersecurity curricula focus on defensive
solutions, this proposed online program from the University of Central Florida
attempts to provide both defensive and post-attack digital forensics curriculum
for dedicated digital forensics students and professionals. This project will
enrich the future cybersecurity workforce with both preventative and post-attack
digital forensics skills to effectively counter the cause and effect of cyber-
attacks. This program will also help alleviate shortages of qualified digital
forensic researchers and practitioners in cybersecurity areas.

Specifically, in this project, the researchers will build an online digital
forensics program including two introductory courses and seven hands-on labs.
The program will help build the necessary background for students and
professionals to perform high pressure, skilled post-attack digital forensics
analysis and incident responses. Students and professionals will acquire digital
forensics knowledge to tackle future challenges in emerging cyber-systems such
as networked critical infrastructures. Meanwhile, as computers and smart devices
penetrate every aspect of our life, digital forensics training should not only
cover traditional personal computers but also emerging smart devices, including
smart phones and Internet of Things (IoT). Upon this request, this program also
includes course materials and hands-on labs on forensic analysis of smart phones
and IoT devices. The principal outcomes of the project will be enhancing
cybersecurity curricula to include digital forensics courses and hands-on lab
modules that focus on evaluating and analyzing cyber-attacks and countermeasures
at the post-attack stage. Through this project, students and professionals will
be prepared with the digital forensics knowledge necessary for them to undertake
specific roles in future cybersecurity and digital forensics careers. Further,
hands-on labs are emphasized in the project since these can help students
solidify their knowledge from coursework and will eventually prepare them for
real-world cybersecurity challenges.