* 1802476
* Collaborative Research: Effect of Helicity on the Development of Free-Shear Turbulence at High Reynolds Number
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* John Dabiri, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2021
* USD 135,000.00

Helicity is an inherent fluid flow property that physically relates to the local
streamlines of a flow having helical-shaped structure. In the application of
wind energy, a wind turbine can induce non-zero helicity in its turbulent wake.
The speed of this wake flow has a strong impact on the power produced by a
downstream turbine in a wind farm. This project will examine the effect of
manipulating wake helicity generated by a vertical-axis wind turbine (VAWT) on
the development of wake turbulence. In particular, the relationship between
helicity and the turbulent entrainment of kinetic energy, which is critical to
wake flow speed recovery, will be a primary focus. The project is a
collaborative effort that exploits field, laboratory, and computational
facilities using state-of-the-art equipment and novel methodologies to overcome
the challenges of investigating highly turbulent flows. The project will also
encompass education activities, such as involving undergraduate student
researchers, facilitated by an emphasis on the connection between the
fundamental physics of fluids and wind energy applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this three-year project is to develop
an understanding of the effect of helicity on the development of free-shear
turbulence in high Reynolds number flows. A VAWT is employed as a ?helicity
generator,? where initial helicity in the turbine wake is controlled by turbine
blade geometry and rotational speed, and the subsequent evolution of the
turbulent wake is examined. Key components of this collaborative research effort
will include: (1) field experiments to quantify wake helicity for utility-scale
VAWTs in an atmospheric boundary layer flow using 3D particle tracking
velocimetry, (2) wind tunnel experiments to achieve high spatio-temporal data of
the VAWT wake using time-resolved stereoscopic particle image velocimetry, and
(3) large eddy simulations to efficiently probe the effects of helicity by means
not easily measured in the experiments. This combined effort offers an
opportunity to investigate the physical effects of helicity at high Reynolds
number, which contributes to basic fluid dynamics knowledge that could be used
to inform turbulence models or more directly in applications such as wind
farming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.