* 1802060
* Geometric Applications of Motivic Homotopy Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Aravind Asok, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 07/31/2022
* USD 180,000.00

This award supports research into algebraic geometry, a subject concerned with
the study of systems of polynomial equations in many variables. The solutions to
such systems give rise to algebraic varieties, which are fundamental objects of
study in algebraic geometry. Algebraic topology is the study of systematically
attaching algebraic invariants (numbers or abstract algebraic structures) to
spaces; such invariants do not depend on the way a space is pulled or twisted
(without tearing it). It is natural to try to analyze algebraic varieties using
the tools of algebraic topology. However, when algebraic varieties do not have
obvious "spatial structure," such as when they arise in arithmetic settings,
then a new approach is required. The project under consideration seeks to
analyze algebraic invariants of algebraic varieties using a new framework. This
theory allows one to apply the full power of techniques of algebraic topology to
objects of interest in algebraic geometry -- one may treat spaces having
complicated arithmetic structure, but a priori limited geometric structure, in
essentially the same way as more classical spaces. The current project seeks to
analyze certain classical algebraic and arithmetic questions using these new
techniques and to provide a better understanding of specific systems of
algebraic equations, which is fundamental to many areas of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will study questions
regarding projective modules over commutative unital algebras over a field, and
related topological and arithmetic questions, by means of the Morel-Voevodsky
A1-homotopy theory. Among other topics, the project investigates the following
concrete (and classical) questions. Given a complex algebraic variety, which
topological vector bundles admit algebraic structures? How many algebraic vector
bundles are there on a smooth affine variety over a finite field (say with fixed
invariants)? By their very nature, these questions draw together several
branches of mathematics and thus illustrate the fundamental unity of the
subject.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.