* 1802599
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Formation of Ethnoracial Identity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Shamus Khan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 03/31/2019
* USD 11,981.00

This project investigates the processes by which children of new groups
integrate into American society. More specifically, it focuses on the individual
and group-level identity-formation processes central to their incorporation.
This study will expand knowledge of these fast-growing but little-studied
groups, especially of how they are transitioning to new patterns of life.
Findings will advance understanding of identity formation and inform policy
makers and educators concerned with the adaptation of new groups, and workers
both outside and inside the groups whose goal is to ease their transitions.

This study uses ethnographic observations and interviews with high school
students and teachers in the Bronx and Brooklyn to explore their integration
experiences and the identity-formation processes central to their incorporation.
Semi-structured interviews will be conducted with 50 children from new groups
plus, for comparison and contrast, 40 students from more established groups but
generally matched on school performance and economic status. In addition, 20
teachers and staff will be interviewed. These interviews will be supplemented
with ethnographic observations of classrooms, local recreation areas, and local
commercial centers. The data and contrasting perspectives will illuminate how
ethnoracial identity may be formed and changed in a diverse environment.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.