* 1802964
* Developing Thermal Hybrid Exchange-Correlation Functionals for Accurate Prediction of Transport and Optical Properties of Warm Dense Plasmas
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Suxing Hu, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

The Nobel Prize-winning method of density-functional theory (DFT) has been
widely used for important applications to better understand the physics and
chemistry of nature, as well as to improve our daily life. Examples of DFT
applications range from inventing materials of specific functions, to
understanding chemical reactions for better products, to designing drugs to cure
cancers. The success of DFT relies on the accuracy of the approximation of how
particles in a material interact with each other, the so-called exchange-
correlation (XC) free-energy density functional. So far, most of the available
XC-functionals have been limited to zero-temperature cases. In this research
project, finite-temperature XC-functionals will be developed to significantly
improve the predictive capability of DFT for plasma-physics and materials
studies. The outcome of this research project is expected to make a significant
difference in a variety of scientific fields and applications such as planetary
science, astrophysics, fusion-energy and national defense applications, as well
as to make a positive impact on the society through delivering tools for
discovering better materials and designing efficient
drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Matter at warm dense conditions exists vastly in the
universe -- from shocks and inertial confinement fusion implosions created in
laboratories to planetary cores and astrophysical objects such as brown and
white dwarfs. Thorough understanding of the properties of warm-dense matter,
non-ideal and "exotic" plasmas hold the key to unravel many mysteries in
planetary and astrophysical sciences; for example, the possible H-He demixing on
Saturn. Reliably predicting the transport and optical properties of matter at
such extreme conditions heavily depends on the accuracy of XC functionals
required by the DFT method. In this project, a three-step research program will
be established to develop accurate finite-temperature hybrid XC-functionals by:
(i) Assessing the available thermal free-energy functional performance to
identify the state conditions wherein those current functionals fail; (ii)
Developing thermal-hybrid and thermal-screened hybrid XC functionals that
correspond to those proven to be accurate for the energy gap in the zero-
temperature case; and (iii) Applying the developed thermal hybrid XC-functionals
to warm-dense-plasma simulations to benchmark with experiments and deliver a
useful software to the broad computational science community. In particular, the
PIs will release the resulting software package as open source and incorporate
it into the standard distribution for the existing Quantum-Espresso and ABINIT
computational packages. This will allow a wider growth of the project. This
aspect is of special interest to the software cluster in the Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure, which has provided co-funding for this
award.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.