* 1802552
* HSI Conference: Accelerating the Impact of HSI STEM Education and Research on Innovation Ecosystems
* EHR,DUE
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2019
* Rodolfo Romanach, University of Puerto Rico Mayaguez
* Standard Grant
* Talitha Washington
* 12/31/2019
* USD 99,999.00

The National Science Foundation (NSF) Dear Colleague Letter NSF 17-092:
Improving Undergraduate STEM Education in Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs)
calls for projects to support conferences that will identify the most critical
challenges and opportunities regarding undergraduate science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) education at HSIs, and potential actionable
solutions that fall within NSF's mission, policies, and practices. In response
to this call, the University of Puerto Rico-Mayag√ºez (UPRM) will host the HSI
Conference: Accelerating the Impact of HSI STEM Education and Research on
Innovation Ecosystems, in cooperation with other HSIs in Puerto Rico, as well as
partners in the commercial economy. The conference will be held in October or
November of 2018 and will to seek to expand active learning opportunities for
undergraduate populations at HSIs by linking these students with mentors from
both the commercial and knowledge economies. The incorporation of undergraduate
experiential learning is an essential part of motivating students at HSIs to
become "do-ers" in the realm of entrepreneurship and technology, and will
contribute to increased persistence of students toward 4-year degrees at HSIs.
These new networks of collaboration will also increase the impact of HSIs on
innovation ecosystems. This conference is necessary due to (1) the density of
HSIs in Puerto Rico, which is home to 70 institutions with over 150,000 total
students, and (2) the need to expand the entrepreneurship and innovation efforts
at UPRM to all institutions, especially given the current economic circumstances
of the island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2-day conference, in addition to pre-
and post-conference meet-ups, will bring together an estimated 150 participants
that include HSI education and research leaders, current and potential
entrepreneurs, corporate and industry representatives, university
administrators, invited guest speakers, undergraduate students, and NSF
representatives to reflect on and discuss emerging effective strategies for
encouraging links between university and industry, with the important component
of undergraduate involvement. The activities will provide ample opportunity for
interaction among participants of all backgrounds and levels--including invited
undergraduate students--during poster sessions, panel discussions, and invited
presentations. This interaction is essential to fully understand the challenges
of establishing partnerships between university and industry, and how innovation
ecosystems can improve STEM education at HSIs. The conference outcome will be a
blueprint for developing innovation ecosystems at HSIs and the establishment of
a regional hub for this initiative.