* 1802939
* Leveraging Extreme Thermoacidophily for Bio-based Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Robert Kelly, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 06/30/2023
* USD 301,488.00

Sulfur compounds and carbon dioxide are generated in copious amounts as
byproducts of natural gas and petroleum refining processes, which creates
significant challenges in their safe handling and economical disposal.
Fortunately, microorganisms have much to offer toward the development of
environmentally-sound and energy-efficient processes to recycle these industrial
waste streams. Sulfur and carbon dioxide also happen to be potential sources of
energy and carbon for microorganisms called thermoacidophilic archaea that grow
in extremely hot, acidic environments. One potential approach to dealing with
the excess industrial sulfur and carbon dioxide is to engineer the metabolic
pathways of these archaea such that they use the byproducts to produce chemicals
of commercial value. This project will apply recently developed tools for
genetically engineering extreme thermoacidophiles to create novel
microorganisms. The study will examine the hypothesis that inserting sulfur
oxidation genes from one organism into another will result in a new
microorganism capable of converting carbon dioxide and sulfur into industrially-
relevant organic chemicals. Engineering sulfur oxidation genes into
microorganisms that naturally thrive under extreme conditions has many potential
benefits. The ability to grow at hot and acidic conditions minimize risk of
contamination by undesirable microorganisms and enables the bioprocess to be
operated much like a conventional chemical process. The high heat tolerance of
the microorganisms is also advantageous in recovering biochemical products with
low boiling points. To broaden the educational impact and inclusiveness of this
study, faculty and students at the North Carolina School for the Deaf (NCSD)
will participate through biotechnology-based teaching modules. The modules will
incorporate closed-captioning and other features to facilitate educational
objectives for the deaf and hearing-impaired. Modules will be demonstrated on-
site at NCSD. Additionally, the NCSU Biotechnology Program will host visiting
middle school and high school students from NCSD for a day-long laboratory
experience that will also familiarize them with higher educational
opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
metabolically engineer strains of a model thermoacidophilic archaeon, Sulfolobus
acidocaldarius DSM639, to produce chemicals from carbon dioxide (CO2) and
reduced, inorganic sulfur compounds (RISCs). Pangenomic analysis of the
extremely thermoacidophilic archaea revealed the presence of a novel CO2
fixation cycle and key genes that can be recruited to enable S. acidocaldarius
to oxidize sulfur. These unique biological characteristics will be exploited in
the metabolic engineering of the naturally heat- and acid-tolerant organism.
Metabolic engineering approaches will be informed by fundamental assessments of
wild-type and recombinant S. acidocaldarius physiology. The specific objectives
of this project are: (1) Create and characterize engineered S. acidocaldarius
DSM639 strains that utilize CO2 as a carbon source and RISCs as energy sources.
S. acidocaldarius encodes a cycle for CO2 fixation and an incomplete pathway for
sulfur oxidation that can be repaired with genes recruited from
chemolithoautotrophic Sulfolobales. (2) Demonstrate that a functional,
biosynthetic, thermophilic pathway for acetone can be engineered into strains of
S. acidocaldarius DSM639. Genes/enzymes have been identified that can be
recruited from other thermophilic microorganisms to enable S. acidocaldarius to
produce an industrial chemical from simple sugars. (3) Demonstrate that
engineered strains of S. acidocaldarius DSM639 can produce acetone from CO2 as a
carbon source and RISCs as energy sources. The goal is to obtain acetone
production under chemolithoautotrophic conditions. (4) Establish, at bioreactor-
scale, that engineered S. acidocaldarius DSM639 strains can produce acetone that
can be recovered through in situ distillation. T-x-y information indicates that
acetone-water mixtures form a two-phase system at aqueous acetone concentrations
that will facilitate recovery as a process intensification step. The project
will demonstrate the utility of extreme thermoacidophiles as versatile metabolic
engineering platforms, presenting a unique approach toward bio-based chemical
production from an industrial waste stream.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.