* 1802033
* Digitization TCN: Collaborative Research: The Pteridological Collections Consortium: An integrative approach to pteridophyte diversity over the last 420 million years
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Richard Rabeler, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 279,003.00

Ferns and their relatives ("pteridophytes") arose approximately 420 million
years ago and were the dominant plant groups for hundreds of millions of years
afterwards. Today the pteridophytes are outnumbered by the diversity and
abundance of other plant groups, such as those that bear flowers, but they
remain diverse (with around 12,000 species), ecologically important, and are
found throughout the world. This Thematic Collections Network (TCN) brings
together 9 core institutions whose goal is to make digital images and data on
the distribution and biology of 1.6 million fossil and modern ferns and their
relatives available to researchers. This effort includes 39 US Museums and
Herbaria that will provide on-line access of collections data to researchers
worldwide who will be able to address pressing questions about the evolution,
distribution, and biology of land plants. This project would train students and
reach the public through teacher training opportunities, the development of
curriculum and education boxes and through the production of informative science
videos. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Pteridological Collections Consortium TCN is
an interdisciplinary initiative that will database, image, and disseminate
information on an unprecedented number of extant and fossil pteridophyte
specimens. The combining of neo- and paleobotanical collections data will
produce an online resource via a Symbiota framework to enable research on the
distribution, ecology, genetics, and deep-time evolution of an important group
of vascular plants. Pteridophytes are important because they 1) are relatively
diverse and have extensive global distributions, 2) are associated with
evolutionary innovations that shaped adaptations to terrestrial ecosystems, 3)
they are sensitive to local environmental conditions and play important roles in
modern communities, and 4) they have an excellent fossil record for addressing
deep-time questions. This award is made as part of the National Resource for
Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.