* 1802491
* Digitization PEN: oMEGA - Online Metrology of Extant Giant Animals for the oVert TCN
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Leif Tapanila, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 175,835.00

This is a Partner to Existing Networks (PEN) award to the Idaho Museum of
Natural History to partner with the Open Vertebrate (oVert) Thematic Collections
Network (TCN). The oVert TCN is creating high-resolution three-dimensional (3D)
data for internal anatomy across the diversity of vertebrate animals. Using
computed tomography (CT) scanners at institutional collections across the US,
more than 20,000 fluid-preserved specimens will be scanned and made available
online for open public use. This PEN complements the oVert TCN program by
including vertebrate animals too large to be preserved in fluid or scanned by
conventional CT scanners. The oMEGA PEN will use portable surface scanners to
provide high-resolution scans of skeletons of large vertebrate animals curated
at Harvard, Berkeley, and California Academy of Sciences. The addition of large
vertebrates, including whales and elephants, provides an important segment of
the animal world to open access collections for researchers and educators. The
process of creating this 3D resource will provide training for undergraduate
students, and on-site workshops for collections staff. Skeletal models will
support TCN activities in creating K-12 STEM lesson plans and 3D-printable
resources for the classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The digitized skeletons
acquired in this PEN will help fill a major gap in the original TCN and support
its research theme on the evolution of vertebrate morphological diversity. By
virtue of their large size, vertebrates exceeding 250 kg define upper boundaries
of size-dependent anatomical form and function, and therefore push the limits on
development and physiology. These skeletal data will provide new opportunities
to evaluate gigantism and the tendency of animal lineages toward ever-larger
body size. Combined with the other oVert 3D specimens, the TCN's digital
collection distributed through MorphoSource and iDigBio will inspire new
research questions and provide the raw materials to test hypotheses in a broad
range of biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.