* 1802773
* Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement: Medical System-State Collaborations
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2019
* Katharine McCabe, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 06/30/2019
* USD 11,036.00

The study examines how government mandates affect medical responses to
substance-using pregnant women. Federal and state mandates increasingly
encourage medical providers to initiate punitive state responses when they
suspect perinatal substance use by pregnant women. This challenges the
professional role of medical personnel as providers of care to their patients.
This study uses a variety of qualitative methods to investigate the actions of
the different actors in this process, state actors, medical professionals, and
pregnant women. Findings of this research have the potential to influence
government policy-making concerning substance-using pregnant women as well as
the responses of medical experts and maternal health advocates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs a multi-level analysis to assess macro,
micro, and intermediate level factors that mutually shape interventions on
pregnant women. To assess macro-level processes, a systems-level analysis
informed by interviews with stakeholders such as medical experts and child
welfare advocates looks at how policy domains (including drug policy, child
welfare policy, and maternal-fetal health policy) shape medical agendas and
encourage medico-legal collaborations. At an intermediate level, a year-long
ethnographic study of a Labor and Delivery unit uncovers how day-to-day medical
practices are carried out and to what extent the state is invited into or
intervenes upon these processes. At the micro level, semi-structured interviews
with medical professionals and women directly affected by medically-initiated
state sanctions show how medical-state collaborations affect care outcomes and
patient well-being. A key consideration throughout is the role that social class
and race play in shaping institutional responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.