* 1802718
* Travel support for student and amateur participation in the 9th International Crustacean Congress, Washington DC, May 22-25, 2018
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2018,01/31/2019
* Rodney Feldmann, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Dena Smith
* 01/31/2019
* USD 11,032.00

The 9th International Crustacean Congress will be held in Washington, DC, in May
2018 and for the first time, technical sessions featuring paleontology will be a
part of the meetings. Research presented at this meeting will bridge the gap
between biologists studying modern organisms and those examining the fossil
record. The interaction of these two groups is critical to increasing our
understanding of patterns of evolution and extinction, as well as placing
questions related to biodiversity in an historical context. Crustaceans are a
particularly important group economically, and more fully understanding their
history and their community interactions will promote refined management
procedures. This award will support the participation of 10 student and
avocational scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
support meeting registration and subsistence costs for 10 recipients, as well as
defray the costs of a field trip that will stimulate interaction between
participants and likely lead to the generation of novel research questions.
Announcement of the application procedure for this support will be broadcast as
widely as possible through established mailing lists and websites. Applications
will be judged on the nature and significance of their proposed contribution as
well as need for support. A summary of the results of the meetings will be
submitted broadly amongst the paleontological and biological communities.
Finally, student and avocational scientists who participate in the congress will
benefit from an increased network and additional professional development
opportunities.