* 1802394
* Coastal SEES (Track 2), Collaborative: Developing High Performance Green Infrastructure Systems to Sustain Coastal Cities
* ENG,CMMI
* 11/01/2017,08/31/2018
* Krista McGuire, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2018
* USD 8,089.00

Discharge of wastewater, sewerage and runoff from coastal cities remains the
dominant sources of coastal zone pollution. The impervious nature of modern
cities is only exacerbating this problem by increasing runoff from city
surfaces, triggering combined sewer overflow events in cities with single-pipe
wastewater conveyance systems and intensifying urban flooding. Many coastal
cities, including US cities like Seattle, New York and San Francisco, are
turning to urban green infrastructure (GI) to mitigate the city's role in
coastal zone pollution. Urban GI, such as green roofs, green streets, advanced
street-tree pits, rainwater gardens and bio-swales, introduce vegetation and
perviousness back into city landscapes, thereby reducing the volume and
pollutant loading of urban runoff. Urban GI, however, also has co-benefits that
are equally important to coastal city sustainability. For example, increasing
vegetation and perviousness within city boundaries can help cool urban
environments, trap harmful air-borne particulates, increase biodiversity and
promote public health and well-being. Despite the significance of these co-
benefits, most current urban GI programs still focus on achieving volume
reduction of storm water through passive detention and retention of rainfall or
runoff. Holistic approaches to GI design that consider multiple sustainability
goals are rare, and real time monitoring and active control systems that help
ensure individual or networked GI meet performance goals over desired time-
scales are lacking. Furthermore, how city inhabitants view, interact with, and
value GI is little studied or accounted for in current urban GI programs. This
project will develop and test a new framework for the next generation of urban
GI that exploits the multi-functionality of GI for coastal city sustainability,
builds a platform for real-time monitoring and control of urban GI networks, and
takes account of the role of humans in GI stewardship and long-term
functionality. The project will use the Bronx River Sewershed in New York City,
where a $20 million investment in GI is planed over the next 5-years, as its
living test bed. GI has its roots in several disciplines, and the project brings
together expertise from these disciplines, including civil and environmental
engineering, environmental science, and plant science/ horticulture. In
addition, the project integrates expertise from other disciplines needed to
elevate GI performance to the next level, including urban planning and design,
climate science, data science, environmental microbiology, environmental law and
policy, inter-agency coordination, community outreach and citizen science.

The specific outcomes of the project will include: (i) new, scientific data on
the holistic, environmental performance of different GI interventions in an
urban, coastal environment; (ii) new models for the system level performance of
networks of GI interventions; (iii) methodologies for projecting GI performance
under a changing climate; (iv) a platform for remote monitoring and control of
GI; (v) proposals for law and policy changes to enable US coastal cities to
introduce GI at scales necessary to meet sustainability goals, and (vi) new
understanding of human-GI interactions and their role in the long-term
performance and maintenance of urban GI. Engagement with schools in the Bronx
River Sewershed and engagement of citizens in the GI performance monitoring are
both important components of the project work. The interdisciplinary project
team integrates academic expertise with expertise in industry, government and
non-profit organizations.