* 1802153
* Collaborative Research: Seasonal climate change over the last two millennia from archaeological sources in the subtropical eastern North Atlantic region
* GEO,OCE
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Yurena Yanes, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 199,999.00

How has the seasonal range in sea surface temperature (SST) changed over the
last two millennia along subtropical coasts that are inherently sensitive to
human and climate impacts? Seasonally-resolved records of preindustrial climate
in subtropical coastal settings are few but critical to understanding impacts on
humans and ecosystems. The goal of this research is to reconstruct summer and
winter SST during four warm vs. cold climate intervals from the last two
millennia. This will be achieved using paleoclimate proxies (indirect measures
of SST) preserved in shells from archaeological deposits accumulated by
aboriginal people in the Canary Islands. Outcomes will advance knowledge of
human-climate interactions, such as the long-term effects of climate variability
on prehistoric human subsistence patterns and behavior in ecologically sensitive
habitats. This project will train students from high school to PhD level,
targeting undergraduate students from low-income households, first-generation
college students, and members of under-represented ethnic groups, using
established programs including McNair Scholars, Women in Science and
Engineering, and Upward Bound Programs. Through the UNC Baccalaureate Education
in Science &amp; Teaching program, future high-school earth science teachers
will perform research that will generate laboratory curricula for K-12 science
courses. This project fosters international and multidisciplinary collaboration
among scientists from the US and Spain. Results will be disseminated to both
specialists and the general public in both English and Spanish, which will
engage a diverse audience in the US and elsewhere. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Using
oxygen isotope (delta18O) time-series of radiocarbon-dated archaeological
Patella candei (Mollusca: Gastropoda) shells from the Canary Islands, several
critical abrupt multi-centennial warming and cooling transitions (Roman Warm
Period, Vandal Minimum or Dark Ages Cool Period, Medieval Climate Anomaly, and
Little Ice Age) will be examined and compared to the late 20th century. The main
goals are to: (1) calibrate and validate oxygen isotope sclerochronology (shell
growth patterns) of living specimens of P. candei with instrument records as
credible repositories of seasonal SST; and (2) reconstruct SST profiles from
radiocarbon-dated archaeological shells during important abrupt climate
intervals over the last two millennia relevant to our rapidly warming world.
Results from this investigation will be then used to explore temporal variations
of the North Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), which is a key feature of atmospheric
variability in the North Atlantic and mainly operates during the winter. The
geographic location offers a unique opportunity to examine the NAO phase and its
shifts in the subtropical fronts during preindustrial warming and cooling
climate episodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.