* 1802364
* Broadband Seismological Investigations of Earth Structure and Earthquake Sources
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2024
* Thorne Lay, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2024
* USD 691,707.00

In this four-year renewal proposal the PI consolidates his research efforts
using broadband digital seismic data to address fundamental questions about
earthquake rupture processes and deep earth structure. The primary focus is on
quantitative analysis of seismic wave recordings to determine how large
earthquakes rupture, how ground shaking from the ruptures is affected by the
faulting process, how tsunami are generated by submarine faulting, and how
stress changes from one earthquake affect other earthquakes. This effort is
directly relevant to the global mitigation of earthquake and tsunami damage and
development of resilience to natural earthquake and tsunami events. Broader
impacts of this project include training of graduate students, public outreach
and contributing to seismic hazard assessment along subduction zones around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will build upon the
significant progress made under the expiring four-year grant in the following
areas: (1) joint modeling and inversion of broadband seismic body and surface
waves, tsunami observations, and high-rate geodetic data that exploits their
complementary sensitivity to source processes will be sustained, with
application to recent great earthquakes in Mexico and the Komandorsky Islands;
(2) development of new seismological procedures for evaluating the up-dip extent
of rupture in subduction zone plate boundary earthquakes will be undertaken,
with 3D numerical modeling of water multiple excitation to constrain near-
trench-rupture; (3) synthesis of large earthquake seismological parameters for
different categories of faulting will be extended from completed work on
megathrust events, including further exploration of the Radiated Energy
Enhancement Factor (REEF), which is a new measure of relative seismic energy
release for large earthquakes that characterizes differences in rupture
complexity; and (4) stacking and modeling of multi-scale arrays of seismograms
from deep earthquakes will be performed to enhance images of P and S velocity
structure in end-member regions of the lowermost mantle applying constraints
from phase equilibria for lower mantle phases, with procedures for separating
source, receiver and deep contributions to the waveforms. This overall research
effort will involve the PI and two graduate students who will engage in both
earthquake source and structure research problems, along with continuing
collaborations with colleagues at other institutions. We anticipate sustaining
progress in characterizing important dynamical processes associated with
earthquake processes and the Earth's internal dynamical structures as the
primary intellectual merit of the project. The broader impacts will be on
graduate student training, contribution to seismic/tsunami hazard assessment in
developing nations, enhancing public awareness of earthquake processes and earth
dynamics, graduate student interaction with STEM-oriented undergraduate
freshmen, and contribution to multidisciplinary research on geophysical grand
challenge problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.