* 1802034
* Digitization TCN:  Collaborative Research:  Digitizing "endless forms": Facilitating Research on Imperiled Plants with Extreme Morphologies
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Matthew Pace, New York Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 837,624.00

The "Endless Forms" Thematic Collections Network (TCN), composed of 17
collaborating U.S. herbaria from 11 states, will digitize approximately two
million specimens belonging to some of the most interesting plant species on
Earth. Iconic species such as the Giant Saguaro Cactus, the Venus Fly Trap, and
the leafless Ghost Orchid of southern Florida are just a few of the hundreds of
thousands of plants that have evolved astounding adaptations allowing them to
grow in extreme terrestrial environments, including deserts, tropical rain
forests, and nutrient poor bogs. Many of these plants can also be challenging to
study in nature and face elevated conservation concerns in the face of rapid
environmental change. By digitizing herbarium specimens of these groups,
researchers will gain a better understanding of these adaptations and their
evolution, and can design conservation and management strategies. The public's
interest in these unusual plants affords an opportunity to engage k-12 students
and teachers in discussions about biodiversity and preservation, plant
adaptations, and mutualistic relationships. This project will also train
undergraduate and graduate students in the areas of museum studies. Finally, the
availability of two million digitized records for these charismatic plant groups
will help protect them and enhance their enjoyment by hobbyists, citizen
scientists, and other non-academic enthusiasts&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
"Endless Forms" project is the first TCN initiative to digitize the very
significant holdings of non-North American specimens housed within North
American herbaria. This project will provide access to digitized records of 15
plant families associated with adaptations to extreme terrestrial environments
that can be used to test evolutionary and ecological hypotheses. This network
will, for example, provide data that can be used to explore trait development
and evolution, species delimitation, and geographic distribution modelling and
that can inform national and regional floristic projects. This project will help
provide critically needed information to overcome obstacles related to studying
plant families which are very large, have cryptic diagnostic features, or occur
in geographically challenging areas. This TCN will also help overcome an acute
problem of access to specimens of CITES-listed taxa (species threatened with
extinction) by easing data access and by holding a Plant Collecting Ethics
Workshop that will bring together an array of stakeholders to make
recommendations on best practices for handling sensitive data for rare species.
The project will fill taxonomic and geographic gaps in U.S. institutional
specimen digitization, will bring new institutions into the national
digitization effort and will invest in the development of tools to stream-line
the digitization process. This award is made as part of the National Resource
for Digitization of Biological Collections through the Advancing Digitization of
Biological Collections program and all data resulting from this award will be
available through the national resource (iDigBio.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.