* 1802286
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Moral Foundations of the Big Data Economy
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Frank Dobbin, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/28/2019
* USD 11,999.00

Increasingly the United States is a big data economy, a society in which
corporations gather and analyze massive amounts of personal information to
predict how individuals will behave so that they can more profitably price goods
and services and allocate economic resources like insurance, credit, and jobs.
This project addresses the question: What ideas about fairness underpin an
economic system that uses data about individuals and their past behavior to
determine who gets what going forward? Economic sociologists have long studied
how markets and the people who decide their contours, like business leaders and
regulators, institutionalize certain understandings of good and bad, of
legitimate and inappropriate. Over time, these ideas about how markets should
operate become taken-for-granted assumptions that seem natural and obvious, but
when market practices are new, these ideas are not yet settled on. By studying
the big data economy in its early years, this project seeks to capture how
certain ideas about market fairness are becoming accepted?and others are being
left aside.

To understand these dynamics, the project focuses on the case of car insurance
pricing and leverages a series of U.S. policy debates to study how market
actors?including companies, regulators, and consumers?morally frame the use of
personal data in insurance pricing. The project also studies how different moral
frames enable or deflect the use of various types of information, such as credit
scores, social media posts, and real-time driving data. The project draws from
policy and industry documents, in-depth interviews, and ethnographic
observations at insurance conferences to analyze how different ways of
construing fairness lead to different business practices and policy outcomes. To
complement these data, the project includes a survey of American consumers to
understand the moral intuitions of the people whose lives are affected by these
policies and practices. With this analysis, the project contributes to economic
sociology?s morals and markets literature and burgeoning efforts to understand
the practices of mass data collection, predictive analytics, and algorithmic
decision-making, which increasingly give markets their shape.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.