* 1802726
* MSB-ECA: A Lengthening Vernal Window: How Vernal Asynchronies in Energy, Water, and Carbon Fluxes Impact Ecosystem Function
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Alexandra Contosta, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 320,300.00

The vernal window is the transitional period between winter and spring in the
northeastern US, when air temperatures warm above freezing, snow melt begins,
and forest canopies fully leaf out. The sequential order and timing of physical
changes during this window plays a key role in the healthy functioning of
seasonally snow-covered ecosystems. The vernal window is shorter following cold,
snowy winters but lengthens when winters are warmer and snow packs are shallow
or melt multiple times through the winter. When the vernal window gets longer,
it can lead to a mismatch in the timing of key ecosystems processes. For
example, earlier snowmelt in the spring can flush nutrients from soils before
trees emerge from dormancy, preventing trees from accessing those vital
nutrients during early spring growth. The vernal window is expected to lengthen
given documented warming trends in winter climate, and, under higher emission
scenarios may be eliminated altogether in more southerly locations. This study
will integrate observations of snow, streamflow, and forest health to document
historical changes in the length of the vernal window and use simulations to
project future changes in the vernal window. Results will be use to assess the
impact on key energy, water, and carbon transitions on ecosystem function, using
the northeastern United States forests as a testbed. In collaboration with a
local high school classroom, the investigators will develop a low-cost
instrumentation suite constructed by students through an inquiry-based lab
course that will allow students to track changes in the vernal window in their
school yards. A Next Generation Science Standard compliant curriculum with units
on energy balance, the carbon cycle, and hydrology will accompany the instrument
kit, laying the groundwork for outdoor classroom inquiry on the environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous studies have demonstrated the importance of
winter coldness or snowpack as drivers of spring onset, however, it remains
unclear how antecedent winter temperature and snowpack properties interact to
influence the timing and duration of the vernal window. In addition, previous
work has not investigated explicitly how biogeochemical asynchronies that result
from longer lags between transitions in the longer vernal window can impact
ecosystem function, which is essential for understanding the impact of
environmental change. Rapid changes in winter conditions could lead to vernal
asynchronies that have strong potential to alter energy, water, and carbon
balances. The most extreme case is a shift into a snow-free regime in which the
vernal window ceases to exist and is replaced by a prolonged period of increased
net radiation into terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems between senescence and
leaf out that may fundamentally alter ecosystem function. The work proposed here
brings together large existing datasets and process-based models that will be
used to investigate explicitly 1) the relative importance of winter coldness and
snowpack in altering the vernal window; 2) how longer vernal lags and windows
impact ecosystem energy, water, and carbon balance; and 3) how future winter
coldness and snowpack characteristics might lead to additional changes in the
vernal window. The outcome of this process will be a regional, 30-year
historical analysis of changes to energy, carbon, and water balances during the
vernal window. Insight gained from this historical analysis will provide the
ability to project future changes in not only vernal window length, but also the
impact of changing energy, carbon, and water balances during the vernal window
on ecosystem function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.