* 1802867
* CDS&amp;E: Optimal control of material microstructure evolution via massively parallel computing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lawrence Rauchwerger, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2022
* USD 914,232.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports interdisciplinary
computational research and education aimed to advance understanding and control
of the microstructure of materials. Some important properties of materials, such
as mechanical strength or corrosion susceptibility, are largely a function of
microstructure: the sizes, shapes, and arrangement of material constituents, for
example grains in polycrystals, over distances of micrometers. Despite the
importance of microstructure, techniques for synthesizing and processing
materials to obtain desired microstructures, and therefore desired materials
properties, remain limited. Understanding how microstructure evolves in time as
a material is made remains a fundamental challenge and the susceptibility of
microstructure evolution to external control is nearly unexplored. This project
investigates the fundamental physical characteristics that make microstructure
evolution amenable to external control and explores novel pathways for creating
designer microstructures through incorporation of materials modeling, real-time
feedback, and control into material processing. This work will close a deep
knowledge gap concerning the fundamental limits of microstructure
controllability, thereby laying the foundation for the systematic control of
microstructure evolution. "Controllability" itself will be a fundamental
physical property emerging from the mechanisms that govern microstructure
evolution. The computational tools and fundamental insights provided by this
project will guide future development of microstructure controllers to be used
in specific materials processing applications. The computational aspects of this
project are extremely demanding and will require the full power of exascale
computers: ones that perform 1 billion billion floating point operations per
second. A major part of this project is therefore to efficiently parallelize
nearly every stage of computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This award supports interdisciplinary computational research
and education aimed to advance understanding and control of the microstructure
of materials. While much effort has been invested into the design, discovery,
and optimization of new materials, optimal control of materials processing is
relatively less well understood. In particular, the fundamental physical
characteristics of an evolving microstructure that determine the degree of
susceptibility to external control remain unexplored. This project will lay the
foundations for material microstructure control by: a) designing microstructure-
sensitive feedback controllers, b) developing computational tools for efficient
implementation of feedback control, and c) systematically exploring feedback
controller performance with respect to metrics such as objective fidelity,
energy-efficiency, and cost-optimality. This work lies at the intersection of
control theory, materials modeling, and high-performance computing. Ultimately,
the researchers aim to create optimal controllers for the synthesis of designer
materials by exploiting massively parallel, high performance computing
architectures to explore fundamental questions of controllability in materials
processing, such as: How does one optimally control materials processing
parameters to make designer microstructures? What are the limits to the types of
microstructures that may be made using a given processing method? What are the
minimal requirements for a processing method to be able to synthesize a given
type of microstructure?&lt;br/&gt;This work will explore the fundamental limits
of materials microstructure controllability using the tools of control theory:
the branch of engineering that creates optimal algorithms for the autonomous
operation of vehicles, aircraft, and robots. To enable rapid investigation of
this new field, the project will use computational materials models as
surrogates for physical materials. The goal is to develop model-agnostic control
tools that are transferrable between different models. However, effort will
initially focus on one specific model problem, namely: phase field models of
microstructure evolution as governed by the Allen-Cahn equation. Since the
control methods to be developed will be sufficiently general that they can be
used with other materials models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
supported by the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory Program in the Division
of Materials Research in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
the Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation Division in the Engineering
Directorate, and the Software and Hardware Foundations Program in the Division
of Computing and Communications Foundations in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.