* 1802821
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Race, Entrepreneurship, and Urban Revitalization
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/28/2019
* Candace Miller, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Toby Parcel
* 02/28/2019
* USD 11,781.00

The past two decades have seen a period of urban transformation guided by a
reliance on gentrification to improve cities, which has both costs and benefits.
However, few studies examine the ways that local small businesses fare in the
context of gentrification. This project investigates how gentrification-based
redevelopment impacts urban black-owned businesses compared to urban white-owned
businesses. Considering that neighborhood conditions, especially in cities, are
shaped by the commercial enterprises that serve the community, understanding the
varied experiences of black business-ownership and white business-ownership
during redevelopment will inform public discourse regarding wealth attainment,
employment, and neighborhood conditions. Furthermore, this project will have
practical implications for public policies aiming to encourage more inclusive
redevelopment programs and to develop infrastructure that will more effectively
support commercial and residential retention.

This project employs a mixed-method design to address three research questions.
First, the U.S. Census: Survey of Business Owners (SBO) is used to answer
questions regarding the spatial and temporal trends in black and white business
development in Detroit, Michigan between 1997 and 2012. These data will be used
to illustrate and compare businesses in size, number of paid employees, and
receipts. Second, archival material from two prominent Detroit newspapers
published between 1997 and 2018 are used to examine how the incorporation of
black-owned businesses in media accounts of redevelopment compare to the
incorporation of white-owned businesses. Finally, through in-depth, qualitative
interviews and ethnographic observation, this project investigates how black and
white business-owners differ in the ways they perceive and negotiate access to
and ownership over local business resources, such as capital investment,
consumers, and networks.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.