* 1802208
* Electrical mitigation of radiation-induced defects in AlGaN/GaN photovoltaic detectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Leonid Chernyak, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2022
* USD 375,014.00

Non-technical: Ultraviolet photodetectors have many uses, such as chemical and
biological analysis or flame detection. Damage by energetic particles degrades
the sensitivity of ultraviolet photodetectors in harsh radiation environments.
This project will lead to a dramatic increase in the recovery of photodetectors
based on gallium nitride (GaN). This outcome will be achieved by electrical
tailoring of a fundamental property of GaN, the electron diffusion length, by
in-situ charge injection under applied voltage. Photodetector sensitivity will
recover completely and return to the original state prior to irradiation. The
project will advance the fundamental understanding of the nature of point and
extended defects in GaN-based semiconductors and devices. The project will
integrate research and education at the graduate and undergraduate levels and
features an active industrial partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical: This
project focuses on electrical mitigation of irradiation-induced defects by
charge injection into ultraviolet photodetectors based on gallium nitride (GaN).
The ultimate aim is to produce radiation hard and efficient devices. This
project hinges on the PI's previous findings that charge injection into p-type
GaN leads to considerable changes in the material's electronic properties,
particularly the carrier diffusion length. These changes result in an order of
magnitude enhancement of the photodetector quantum efficiency. It is therefore
possible to improve performance of photodetectors, affected by radiation, using
short pulses of solid-state forward-bias charge injection into GaN p-i-n
devices. The project will lead to a better understanding of the interaction
between wide gap semiconductors and highly energetic particles, including
electrons, gamma-ray photons, and protons, as well as of the nature of
radiation-induced defects. Charge injection will result in enhanced minority
electron diffusion length in the top p-type absorption layer of a photodetector,
thus increasing the quantum efficiency for the device and "healing" the adverse
impact of gamma-rays, protons, electrons and other radiation types. A unique
combination of electrical, optical and structural studies in the PI's lab will
shed light on the mechanism, which is responsible for the effect of interest.
Studies of minority carrier diffusion length and lifetime will be carried out in
independent experiments using electron beam-induced current and ultrafast time-
resolved cathodoluminescence at various temperatures. Polychromatic continuous-
wave cathodoluminescence will be employed for assessment of irradiation impact
on threading dislocation density in GaN. Finally, deep level transient
spectroscopy will allow studies of radiation-induced point defects. The ultimate
goal is to correlate charge injection regimes (current; voltage; duration) and
irradiation doses, thus proceeding towards control of photodetector performance
and recovery from radiation damage by purely electrical
means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.