* 1803805
* Modular protein switches
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Marc Ostermeier, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2022
* USD 345,368.00

Each of the thousands of different proteins in a cell has a unique function.
These functions are often regulated by other molecules (signals). Some proteins
are switches; a signal molecule binds to the protein and switches its function
from an "off" to an "on" state (or vice versa). The switch could sense the
presence of a pollutant, or of an infection, and trigger defense mechanisms. It
could sense the presence of cancer cells and trigger a cell-killing response.
The potential sensing and response capabilities are tremendous. Two modular
platforms for creating switches will be developed during this project. One will
detect specific proteins, and the other will control gene expression. Success in
the research of this proposal will enable others to develop protein switches
with applications in synthetic biology for biomanufacturing as well as in basic
biological research. Rigorous training of undergraduates and graduate students
will expand the biotechnology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein
switches recognize input signals such as ligand concentration and trigger an
output signal such as enzyme activity or DNA binding. Directed evolution has
generated switches with high affinity for their ligand and large changes in
output. However, developing suitable selections or screens to identify switches
remains challenging and often greatly hinders switch development. In this
project, modular protein switch platforms for protein sensing and for control of
gene expression will be developed. The protein-sensing platforms will utilize
designed ankyrin-repeat proteins and will trigger enzyme activity or
fluorescence. The platform for modular control of gene expression will utilize
the nuclease-null dCas9 protein of the Clustered Regulatory Interspaced Short
Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) system, and protein domains that bind inexpensive
small molecules. The switches will function as inducible repressors of gene
expression, with the small molecules serving as low-cost inducers. The
development of these modular platforms will provide a set of functional switches
for biotechnological use and for mechanistic study to facilitate the design of
future switches. These switches will be used in basic scientific research to
understand cellular function and applied research in synthetic biology and
metabolic engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.