* 1803090
* Rheology and fluid dynamics of surfactant solutions with flow-induced structure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Michael Graham, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Surfactants are molecules comprised of a head that is water soluble bonded to an
oily tail that repels water. Because of this dual nature, surfactants dissolved
in water form assemblages called micelles, in which the oily tails form the
center, separated from the surrounding water molecules by the water-preferring
head groups. Micellar surfactant solutions are used in a wide range of
applications from fracking fluids in the oil and gas industry to heat-transfer
fluids in the chemical process industries to various personal care and cleaning
products. During flow, surfactant solutions that form long thin "wormlike"
micelles undergo a process where individual micelles combine to form much larger
assemblages. These are called flow-induced structures and can have dramatic
effects on the flow properties of the solution. These structures form in
turbulent flow of wormlike micelle solutions leading to substantial reduction in
the energy cost for pumping the fluid. Despite the increasingly frequent
application of these so-called drag-reducing surfactant systems, this structure-
formation phenomenon remains poorly understood. This work will advance the
development of mathematical models for predicting the flow behavior of wormlike
micelle solutions and use these models to understand why they are so effective
in reducing energy consumption in flow processes. The project will also involve
a substantial outreach component: in a service-learning course, undergraduate
engineering students will develop project-based lessons in fluid mechanics and
then go out to the Boys and Girls Clubs to share these with kids from
underserved minority populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term aim
underlying this project is (1) development of models for self-assembling complex
fluids like micellar solutions that areas computationally tractable for fluid
dynamics analyses, and (2) use of these models to generate insights and
predictions into the behavior of this class of fluids in flows characteristic of
engineering applications. The work will further develop a recently-proposed
micromechanical constitutive model called the reactive rod model, putting it
firmer physical ground and making extensive comparisons to experimental data. It
will also analyze the flow of an structure-forming fluid in a circular Couette
device, where many of the interesting features of flow-induced structure in
surfactant solutions have been studied experimentally. Finally, it will
elucidate the interaction between turbulence, flow-induced structure and drag
reduction using computations with the model. Comparisons with results for
polymer solutions will be made, to uncover differences between turbulent drag
reduction in polymer and surfactant solutions. Furthermore, comparisons of
simulation results with experimentally observed features of turbulence in
surfactant solutions will be made. Flow-induced structure formation is
widespread in complex fluids and this work takes first steps into analysis of
the fluid dynamics of these materials and thus toward new insights into the
origins and consequences of their fascinating
behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.