* 1803864
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Hurricane Response, Governance Structures, and Public Higher Education
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2018,02/29/2020
* Alisa Fryar, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Lee Walker
* 02/29/2020
* USD 60,284.00

Public universities face many challenges in their efforts to operate within an
environment that is both dominated by political influences and subject to the
pressures of market-based competition for necessary resources. Disasters magnify
the challenges of managing within this environment, especially when the
institution is constrained in its ability to accommodate the unique needs of
students who are facing significant difficulties after a natural disaster. The
short term disruption caused by a disaster can lead to long-term consequences
for public institutions, but many of these more pronounced consequences may not
be fully attributable to the effects of the disaster, but instead may be a
function of the inability of policy frameworks and administrative structures to
adapt to the needs of public institutions and policy beneficiaries after extreme
events. Especially important are the financial consequences of enrollment loss
and the constraints that come with accreditation structures. This study will use
administrative interviews and data on student success to examine the role of
policy design in post-disaster decisions and its influence on student success.
We hope that our findings will motivate discussions among federal education
officials and accreditation organization leaders about the ways in which they
may consider options that would enable institutions to better support students
in their efforts to rebuild their lives and pursue their educational
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theories of publicness, political
control, policy implementation, and the politics of attention mostly speak to
the challenges faced by public sector leaders in times of relative stability
(not in response to extreme events), and many discussions of disaster response
are limited to elected officials and/or federal agencies. This project seeks to
examine how these dynamics play out in disaster recovery efforts for public
higher education institutions and their students. We will use a mixed methods
design, with qualitative interviews of administrators and a quantitative
analysis of student data. The study site is Lamar University in Beaumont, TX.
The administrative interviews focus on the ways in which efforts to accommodate
and support those affected by the storm were influenced by accreditation-related
constraints (in this case, from the Southern Association of Colleges and
Schools) and concerns about the effects on funding streams (tuition revenue,
state appropriations, and federal financial aid). The quantitative analysis
examines how the decisions immediately following the storm affected student
enrollment and persistence and the extent to which these effects vary by
student-level risk factors or level of storm damage for the individual's
household.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.