* 1803675
* Collaborative Research: How to Foil Synuclein Aggregation? Nanotechnology for Inhibition of Neurodegenerative Brain Plaques
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Jean Baum, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2021
* USD 429,511.00

As a greater proportion of our society ages, the scope and severity of brain
health disorders are widening. One of the serious challenges in neuroscience and
aging is the progressive nerve damage that stems from excessive protein
aggregation (proteins stick together and form a cluster) in the brain. Alpha-
synuclein (ASYN) is a key protein whose uncontrolled aggregation is believed to
be a major risk factor leading to the death of healthy neurons and causing
diseases like Parkinson' disease (PD) and certain types of dementia. Under
healthy conditions, immune cells in the brain attract and take-in ASYN, which is
then degraded within the cell, a process referred to as "ASYN clearance." Under
unhealthy conditions, the ASYN aggregates within the immune cell, which prevents
degradation and leads to immune cell damage and ultimately to nerve damage. Thus
the challenging goal of this project is to design a therapeutic strategy for
increasing the immune cell uptake of ASYN while minimizing the potential for
ASYN aggregation within the cell. The goal will be addressed using a systems-
level engineering approach to design novel materials based on polymers that can
help the immune cell uptake of ASYN yet interfere with ASYN aggregation within
the cell. Initial studies are designed to analyze protein-receptor interactions
in vitro (outside the body). These studies will then be extended to cellular and
mouse models of ASYN clearance and aggregation. The highly cross-disciplinary
nature of this team will inspire boundary-bridging research, education, and
outreach. The educational efforts associated with this project will involve
undergraduate researchers in summer experiences and lab boot-camp workshops in
an REU on Cellular Bioengineering, as well as graduate and postdoctoral research
experiences in diversity-expanding training programs on the
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major class of brain degenerative conditions is
associated with excessive build up of aggregates of Alpha-synuclein (ASYN) and
are referred to as "synucleinopathies." ASYN is one of the disordered proteins
whose dysregulated degradation and clearance can lead to high levels of
oligomers, which can be released and can cause neurotoxicity. The objective of
this project is to design novel nanoscale materials with intrinsic therapeutic
activity to advance a systems-level engineering approach to address the coupled
processes of ASYN uptake/clearance (which needs to be increased) and ASYN
aggregation (which needs to be disrupted). The key intellectual innovation is
the design of polymers that show tunable affinity to scavenger receptor proteins
and the combination of such as ligands within dual-action nanoparticles (NPs).
The shell ligands will act as nano-chaperones for ASYN binding and uptake into
immune cells (microglia), while the core ligands will serve to disrupt the
scavenger receptor templating that leads to self-aggregation of ASYN. The
research plan is arranged under three aims: 1) To elucidate the key receptor
phenomena that trigger enhanced oligomerization of ASYN following its uptake in
microglia, thus developing a rational basis for designing counter-ligands to
disrupt these interactions; 2) To design synthetic counter-ligands, which
disrupt ASYN intracellular oligomerization while enabling ASYN uptake and
clearance, thus developing a rational design for independently functional NPs;
and 3) To evaluate the dual ability of AM (amphiphilic macromolecules)-based NPs
to promote ASYN clearance while inhibiting ASYN aggregation within a pilot
synunucleinopathy model for a "dyanamic" brain environment, thus identifying the
NP's role in engineering the rescue kinetics from ASYN aggregation. These aims
are designing to test the hypothesis that nanotechnology-mediated microglial
dynamics of ASYN will reduce ASYN-induced neuropathology and toxicity in vivo,
which may have significant implications for treatment of synucleinopathies, for
which there are currently no disease modifying
therapies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.