* 1803695
* Collaborative Research: Nanofluidics Enabled Attenuation of Dynamic Impacts and Stress Waves
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Weiyi Lu, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 253,229.00

Attenuation of dynamic impacts and stress waves has been pursued to protect
personnel and important infrastructures and devices. However, mitigation
procedures of stress waves of most of existing protection materials and
structures are based on energy absorption underpinned by unrecoverable buckling
and/or plastic deformation of materials and structures. Besides, the activation
time of such deformation mechanisms is much longer than the time needed for
dynamic impacts and stress waves propagate through these protection materials.
Nanofluidics, in which the liquid is forced into nanoscale channels with
hydrophobic surface by an external pressure or stress, is expected to provide a
compelling route for attenuating mechanical wave energy. This mechanism has been
routinely applied to characterize the nanopore size distributions of porous
materials, but now offers a new paradigm for the design of protection materials
and structures, entirely distinct from conventional energy absorption
mechanisms. The overarching goal of this project is to investigate and
understand nanofluidics enabled mitigation of dynamic impacts and stress waves
with particular focuses on nanofluidics in three-dimensional nanoporous
networks. This collaborative project will also provide a broad impact on
education including professional trainings to both graduate and undergraduate
students, and on outreach including inspiring interactions with local high
schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative project is to
systematically investigate the science of nanofluidics in non-wetting liquid-
solid nanoporous composite materials, and to explore its underlying protection
mechanism for mitigating dynamic impacts and stress waves. To this end, the
proposed research will focus on three tasks: (i) to investigate and unveil the
science of nanofluidics in non-wetting liquid-solid nanoporous structures under
a high speed loading using atomistic simulations, (ii) to develop a theoretical
model of nanofluidic energy capture mechanism to quantify nanofluidic responses
to dynamic impacts and stress waves, and (iii) to design and carry out
verification experiments at high strain rates by employing non-wetting liquid-
solid nanoporous materials platforms. The nanofluidic energy capture mechanism
will refresh existing design strategies of protection materials and structures
subjected to stress waves, thereby revolutionizing both fundamental nanofluidics
and application technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.