* 1803991
* Maximizing efficiency in solar water splitting by engineering interfaces in hybrid photo-catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2022
* USD 330,000.00

Photocatalytic splitting of water using sunlight to create abundant and
inexpensive hydrogen fuel is an important technical challenge for scientists and
engineers. This technology has impact for the production of "solar fuels" that
uses the resource of solar energy to convert water or carbon dioxide into higher
valued chemicals and fuels with a lower environmental impact. It is becoming
increasingly recognized that high efficiency solar water splitting processes
will require multi-component, multi-functional photo-catalytic systems. These
photocatalysts contain a semiconductor light absorber, a material that
stabilizes the light absorber under the reactions conditions (insulators are
often used for this function) and attached metal electrocatalysts that perform
chemical transformations. In this project, fundamental understanding will result
on how different components of these multi-functional photo-catalysts impact the
performance of these systems. Ultimately, the knowledge will be used to form the
foundation for developing predictive structure-performance relationships that
would guide the design of the multi-component photocatalysts for efficient solar
water splitting. The project also emphasizes a wide array of educational
activities that build upon the Principal Investigator's (PI) research to promote
engagement of students in science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. The project will result in new curriculum content for a
massive open online course (MOOC) emphasizing sustainable energy topics. These
activities include outreach to high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups, as well as strategies aimed at improving the
utilization of the World Wide Web in reaching students and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on fundamental understanding about
the influence of insulating protective layers on the overall performance of
metal-insulator-semiconductor (MIS) photocatalyst system for solar water
splitting. The aim of the project is to identify the fundamental characteristics
of the protective layers that impact the performance and tune these
characteristics to design MIS photocatalyst with minimal junction losses. The
project has two central objectives: 1) Developing a physically transparent model
that will capture the essential features of the MIS photocatalyst systems, 2)
Guided by the model, design MIS photocatalysts with optimal geometric
characteristics. The PI will focus on some of the most promising semiconductors
(Si, GaAs, and Cu2O) and their coupling to oxygen evolution reaction (OER)
electrocatalysts (Ni, Ru, and Ir) through the insulating layers (HfO2 and
Al2O3). The project will use characterization techniques that include atomistic
characterization of the geometric structure of the MIS photocatalysts, analysis
of electronic and optical properties of the multicomponent systems as well as
rigorous measurements to assess the device-level
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.