* 1803440
* Super-radiant virus-like particles as targeted contrast agents for laser-guided surgery
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2021
* Bogdan Dragnea, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 05/31/2021
* USD 327,159.00

The PI will construct the smallest reported light source with emission similar
to laser light. Its brightness will be at least two orders of magnitude higher
than state of the art fluorescent nanoparticles of similar size. Such a
nanoscopic laser source will be valuable in guiding and assisting microscopic
surgery, specifically in the brain. The PI has a well-established record of
mentoring and outreach. The PI will continue these activities, e.g. mentoring a
summer undergraduate student during the proposed research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The small size of the nanolaser will enable
accessing the spaces between cells. The high brightness will enable triggering
local photochemical reactions. Such a remote light source could photo stimulate
a single synapse, a step towards wireless remote information exchange between
the nervous system. This could also produce chemical species which selectively
destroy cancer cells targeted by the nanolaser particles. The nanolaser is a
unique molecular structure, its material scaffold being a virus shell. The
advantage of using such a bio-enabled approach is due to the inherited molecular
precision in structural organization and from self-assembly, which occurs
spontaneously from simple, benign reagents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.