* 1803706
* Efficient Global Dynamic Optimization using Dynamic Cut Generation and Domain Reduction Techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,10/31/2019
* Joseph Scott, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 10/31/2019
* USD 290,476.00

Dynamic optimization is a computational approach used to optimally control
dynamic processes. Effective dynamic optimization codes have become a key
enabling technology in many industries, leading to substantial gains in
profitability, efficiency, and safety. However, dynamic optimization problems
commonly exhibit multiple sub-optimal local solutions. Use of these sub-optimal
solutions instead of the desired globally optimal solution can lead to
significant economic loss and performance degradation in many applications; this
can even produce expensive or dangerous unreliable conclusions. This project
aims to develop more efficient global optimization algorithms for types of
problems that arise in a broad spectrum of applications in the chemical,
pharmaceutical and aerospace industries.

This project aims to increase the efficiency of global dynamic optimization
(GDO) codes by developing cut generation and domain reduction techniques in the
branch and bound (B&B) algorithm for solving nonconvex algebraic optimization
problems. Cut generation refers broadly to methods that strengthen the convex
relaxation of a nonconvex problem by imposing constraints that are redundant in
the original model, but not in the relaxation. In contrast, domain reduction
refers to methods that tighten the bounds on the decision variables in a B&B
node using the problem constraints or a known feasible objective value. Research
into such techniques for GDO is very well motivated by analogy to standard
nonlinear programs (NLPs). Prior work on GDO has focused on relaxation methods
that can be considered dynamic extensions of the most basic methods used for
NLPs (specifically those based on factorable decomposition, such as McCormick
relaxations). However, B&B codes based solely on these techniques are extremely
inefficient in most cases. In contrast, modern B&B codes, which routinely solve
problems with hundreds of decisions, utilize a rich toolbox of cut generation
and domain reduction techniques. This strongly suggests that analogous
techniques for dynamic problems will profoundly impact the efficiency of GDO
algorithms. In addition to training graduate students, the proposed research
will involve training of undergraduate researchers through Clemson's Creative
Inquiry Program and rising high school seniors through Clemson's six-week Summer
Program for Research Interns. The project also includes the development of a
half-day long hands-on research activity for educating women and minorities
about career opportunities in STEM fields, hosted by Clemson's Women in Science
and Engineering (WISE) Program and the Programs for Educational Enrichment and
Retention (PEER).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.