* 1803014
* Investigation of the effects of turbulent flow on energy and mass transfer close to solid surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,03/31/2024
* Dimitrios Papavassiliou, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2024
* USD 325,592.00

Turbulence is the most common type of fluid flow in both the industry and the
environment, while it is still one of the unsolved problems in physics. Its
ability to mix and disperse energy or mass (like chemicals or particles) plays a
key role in every day applications, like flows in oil and gas pipelines, in
industrial reactors, in mixing, in heating or cooling, as well as in the
atmosphere and in oceans. The goal of this project is to understand the effects
of flow features that are commonly observed in turbulent flow on the transport
of energy and mass using advanced computational techniques. The findings of this
research could lead to efficient energy management, efficient design of
industrial equipment where heat and mass transfer take place, and better
prediction and control of pollutant dispersion. The database generated through
this project will become available to the scientific community, and simulation
data generated through this project will be used to develop animations of
turbulent dispersion that can be used in K-12 science
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central concerns for the development of a
comprehensive turbulent transport theory have been the prediction of the spatial
variation of turbulent viscosity, the effect of molecular dispersion on
turbulent transport, and the effect of coherent velocity structures on the
transport properties. The main hypothesis here is that the reason for the
failure in predicting scalar transfer from momentum transfer is that only some
of the velocity structures participate in turbulent transfer close to a wall,
and the range of scales that participate in the transfer depends on molecular
dispersion effects. Main questions to be answered are what is the role the very
large scales of motion (known as VLSM) in turbulent transport, and how the
interplay between molecular diffusion and convection affects mixing or
separation of particles in anisotropic turbulence. The proposed approach is to
use computations with Lagrangian methods for analysis, which afford the study of
a range of fluids that span several orders of Prandtl number in magnitude (e.g.,
liquid metals, gases, refrigerants, and electrochemical fluids) making it
possible to handle cases where conventional methods are often not feasible with
the current supercomputers. Expected results could lead to the development of a
comprehensive model for the prediction and control of turbulent
transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.