* 1803702
* Magnetospheric Resonances at Middle and Low Latitudes
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Anatoly Streltsov, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2023
* USD 269,424.00

This grant supports an investigation into the dynamics behind the coupling of
Earth's ionosphere and magnetosphere. It is important to understand how Earth's
magnetic field couples to the outer layers of the atmosphere as a background to
understanding how space weather effects the very near-Earth environment and
ultimately societies most critical space and ground based assets. This study
supports education and training in the fields of data analysis, numerical
simulations and space plasma physics for one PhD student. In addition, it
includes collaboration between national labs (Air Force Research Laboratory and
U.S. Naval Research Laboratory) and an academic institution (Embry-Riddle
Aeronautical University). The results of this study will be disseminated through
public outreach events including lectures at local high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will specifically examine the
relative importance of the field line resonator and the ionospheric Alfven
resonator in generating Ultra Low Frequency waves at middle and low latitudes.
This will be achieved through use of reduced two-fluid magnetohydrodynamics
model in 2D and 3D which includes ionospheric conductance and collisions. SAMI
is Another Model of the Ionosphere 3 (SAMI3) model data and
Communication/Navigation Outage Forecasting System (C/NOFS) satellite data will
provide ionospheric input to the model. The outcomes will be compared with
magnetic observations conducted at South American Meridional B-Field Array
(SAMBA) stations in Antarctica and Chile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.