* 1803754
* GOALI: Collaborative research: Biochar-catalyzed microbial reductive degradation of emerging organohalides
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Ching-Hua Huang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2021
* USD 90,000.00

Organohalides are common environmental contaminants designated by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency as priority pollutants due to their
toxicity and prevalence in the environment. Cleaning up organohalide pollution
is thus important for the protection of human health. Biochars (materials
generated from high-temperature decomposition of organic matter) have unique
surface properties that has led to interest in using them to clean up
environmental contaminants. However, relatively little is known about the
ability of biochar to stimulate the biological degradation of organohalides. In
this project, researchers from three Universities will investigate how biochar
can help enhance the cleanup of toxic organohalides in wastewater. The findings
of the project will be tested and applied under real-world conditions through
collaboration with wastewater treatment facilities. If successful, this research
has the potential to create an inexpensive and effective treatment technology
for the most important class of pollutants in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research will test the hypothesis that biochar can catalyze the microbial
dehalogenation of emerging organohalides through accelerated extracellular
electron transport. In this project, the team will: (1) quantify the biochar-
catalyzed microbial degradation of organohalides and their degradation products
by two pure cultures of known model bacteria; (2) study the effects of nano-
sized biochar, lowest-valent biochar, and nano-sized lowest-valent biochar on
biotic and abiotic dehalogenation; (3) analyze the degradation of organohalides
by a natural microbial community in the presence of biochar and study this
potential application for advanced wastewater treatment. This project will
provide timely information for the biochar-catalyzed microbial degradation of
emerging organohalides. Lowest-valent biochar and nano-sized lowest-valent
biochar, as novel analogs to zero-valent iron and nano zero-valent iron, will be
produced and studied for their role in the degradation of organohalides. The
intellectual merit is derived from the novel understanding of the role biochar
properties play in catalyzing the microbial reductive dehalogenation of
organohalides. The project has the potential to create a cost-effective strategy
for the treatment of organohalide-contaminated waters in the U.S. and other
countries. By working with UNR's Dean's Future Scholars program and The North
Star STEM Alliance program at the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, the
investigators will offer summer research internships for first-generation
college-bound middle school students and underrepresented graduates in STEM
fields to enhance awareness and knowledge of modern water quality problems and
technological solutions. Research results will also be integrated into current
undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.