* 1803823
* Integrating Polar-Aprotic Solvolysis into Waste-To-Energy Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Xianglan Bai, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 305,400.00

Waste-To-Energy (WTE) technologies offer promising solutions to alleviate
environmental problems associated with landfilling of Municipal Solid Wastes
(MSW) generated during wastewater treatment processes while promoting resource
and energy recovery. However, these technologies are crucially affected by the
uneven mixing of combined MSW compositions. Some of the possible problems caused
by the use of MSW for these WTE technologies include contaminated products, low
product values, pollutant emission during processing, reactor clogging,
corrosion, and catalyst poisoning. The objective of this project is to develop a
pretreatment process for combined MSW to produce biorefinery chemicals, higher
quality syngas or pyrolysis oil, and fewer pollution byproducts. The success of
the project could lead to an innovative green WTE technology that can convert
non-recyclable MSW to a domestic source for energy and valuable chemicals, thus,
benefiting society by reducing the pressure of MSW landfills. Producing
biorefinery chemicals, in addition to high-quality syngas or pyrolysis oil from
abundant MSW, can provide an opportunity to lower the feedstock cost in
biorefining and improve the economic sustainability of biorefineries while
reducing the Nation's dependency on fossil fuels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-
mingled MSW can consist of nearly 60% cellulosic wastes, making these wastes a
potential source of low-cost biorefinery chemicals. This research proposes a
two-step conversion to recover the economic value from the polysaccharides in
these wastes as well as to produce better quality syngas or pyrolysis oil
products from these wastes. The proposed approach to properly integrate polar-
aprotic solvolysis pretreatment of co-mingled MSW with subsequent thermal
conversion by gasification or pyrolysis will transform the detrimental
characteristics of MSW materials into assets that increase product values and
reduce pollutant emissions. Specifically, the proposed approach will utilize the
contaminant acids as catalysts and the feedstock moisture as a co-solvent to
produce biorefinery chemicals in addition to cleaner and higher BTU syngas or
pyrolysis oil. The environmental and economic benefits of the proposed approach
will be further enhanced by the use of recyclable biobased green-solvents. The
main focus of the proposed research is to gain new insights into the
interdependency among the solvent pretreatment, the selectivity of biorefinery
chemicals, the quality of syngas/pyrolysis oil, and contaminant formation and
transport on MSW conversion. The research outcomes will provide important
fundamental mechanisms and insights pertinent to the required reactions, product
transport, and product recovery during the polar-aprotic solvent-based
conversion of co-mingled organic and synthetic waste materials. The knowledge
obtained during this research will lay a strong foundation for the development
of a novel WTE strategy for non-recycled co-mingled MSW to achieve high-quality
products while reducing pollutants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.