* 1803760
* A New Paradigm for Computing Discrete Adjoint Sensitivities Based on Operator-Overloading and Its Application to Aerodynamic Design
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Kivanc Ekici, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 302,989.00

The design and development of future wind turbines, aircraft, and turbomachinery
requires extensive use of computational fluid dynamic (CFD) analyses to model
and understand complex fluid phenomena. However, these analyses alone do not
provide insight into how current and future designs can be optimized.
Complementary to CFD analyses is another computational method called adjoint
computation. High-fidelity adjoint computations provide exciting potential for
aerodynamic optimization, but widespread use of such methods is hindered due to
the significant time required for hand-coding adjoint solvers and the
substantially cumbersome debugging process needed to adopt existing automated
approaches. Therefore, the principal aim of this project is to develop fully
automated adjoint sensitivity analysis techniques that are not only
computationally and memory efficient but also able to be readily integrated into
existing CFD solvers. Successfully completing this project will significantly
advance the state-of-the-art in aerodynamic design optimization and enable the
next generation of aerospace innovation. This project will incorporate several
outreach and educational activities, including a new project-based graduate
course, a training program for faculty and engineering professionals interested
in this technology, and hands-on workshops to pre-service science teachers to
facilitate the use of related activities in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to introduce
a new approach for adjoint sensitivity analysis. This new paradigm will employ
operator overloading (OO), a capability offered by object-oriented programming,
to automatically compute the sensitivity of any objective function to all design
variables (potentially thousands). Unlike the traditional use of OO in adjoint
computations, which requires the storage of any intermediate variable in the
iterative process, thereby exponentially increasing the memory needed, this
method will take advantage of the repetitiveness of the iterative process to
minimize the memory footprint. More specifically, the efforts will focus on (i)
developing a novel and efficient CFD-based approach to calculate steady, time-
periodic, time-accurate adjoint sensitivities; (ii) coupling this novel
technique to a reduced-order-model-based acceleration technique to further speed
up adjoint computations; (iii) applying the new technique to relevant problems
including optimizing wind turbine shape and designing new natural-laminar flow
airfoils. These activities will directly contribute to the fundamental
understanding of how complex flow features affect design and performance of
future aircraft engines, as well as aircraft wings and wind turbine
blades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.