* 1803517
* Real-Time Sensing of Neurotransmitters From Stem Cell-derived Neural Interface Using Hybrid Graphene-Nanostructures
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2023
* Manish Chhowalla, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2023
* USD 349,998.00

Neurotransmitters are one of the most critical biomolecules in the brain. They
play a vital role in preserving neurophysiological processes such as cognition,
memory, and behavior. For example, the abnormal levels of neurotransmitters may
result in severe neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease,
schizophrenia, and Huntington's disease. In the case of Parkinson's disease,
most patients have lost more than 80% of their production of dopamine
neurotransmitter. Stem cell-based therapy to create dopamine-producing
(dopaminergic) neurons that can be implanted into patients has emerged as a
promising approach for treating Parkinson's disease. The functionality of stem
cell-derived dopaminergic neurons can be confirmed by the detection of dopamine.
The proposed biosensing system has the capability of real-time monitoring of
stem cell differentiation by detecting neurotransmitters. It will accelerate the
development of stem cell therapies by removing some bottlenecks in current stem
cell therapies. Moreover, the proposed biosensor will be an excellent sensing
platform to advance research and development in regenerative medicine and
neuroscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this proposal is to
investigate how stem cells can generate a neural interface with functional
neurons by detecting neurotransmitters selectively and effectively. Conventional
neurotransmitter detection methods suffer from non-specific sensing and lack of
in situ analysis. Addressing current challenges in the detection of
neurotransmitters, a novel in situ nano-biosensor using graphene oxide-covered
nanostructure arrays as a platform to real-time monitor mature neuronal
differentiation of stem cells will be developed by detecting the secreted
neurotransmitters in a noninvasive manner. For this purpose, the proposal
focuses on the synthesis of chemically well-defined graphene oxide-
nanostructures and the development of graphene-based hybrid nanoelectrode arrays
to generate stable and reproducible signals. The developed novel graphene-based
hybrid nanoelectrode arrays detect dopamine molecules selectively and
sensitively using surface-enhanced Raman scattering technique. Raman dye
(graphene oxide)-labeled aptamers targeting dopamine molecules are attached to
the surface of graphene oxide-covered nanostructure arrays through the pi-pi
interactions, resulting in a Raman enhancement from the graphene oxide
nanostructures. The loss of binding affinity between nucleotides and the Raman
dye (malachite green molecules)-labeled aptamers after the dye-labeled aptamers
reacted with dopamine will consequently decrease the Raman signal for
quantitative analysis. The whole processes enable the detection of low
concentration of dopamine in the neural interface. Upon successful completion,
the proposed nano-biosensing system will facilitate the study of a biological
phenomenon by monitoring cell secretions from complex biological matrices. The
proposal takes advantage of the graphene functionalized surface and the highly
selective bio-recognition elements to fabricate a novel hybrid graphene-
nanostructure-based real-time sensing system to act as a multi-purpose sensor
platform for the detection of a variety of molecules. Given the challenges of in
situ detection of neurotransmitters at the single cell level, this surface-
enhanced Raman scattering-based detection method can represent a unique tool for
investigating single-cell mechanisms associated with dopamine, or other
neurotransmitters, and their roles in neurological
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.