* 1803837
* RUI: Atomic Physics with Rapidly Frequency Chirped Laser Light
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Matthew Wright, Adelphi University
* Continuing Grant
* John D. Gillaspy
* 08/31/2021
* USD 139,992.00

This project will study the how collisions between ultracold atoms can be
controlled by an external laser field. These experiments will lead to a greater
understanding of light-assisted collisions and simple chemical reactions. The
major advancement in this project is that the laser will be pulsed on a time
scale, and chirped over a frequency range, commensurate with the atomic
collision process. Using ultrafast lasers, related experiments on much faster
time scales have led to a greater understanding of light-assisted chemical
reactions. However, because atoms in the planned experiments will be very cold,
the new experiments can be conducted on significantly slower time scales. This
team has already developed a novel amplitude and phase modulated laser system
for these experiments. This laser system will also be used to explore new
methods for controlling atomic excitations. This is important for slowing atoms
and is an interesting avenue toward slowing molecules to a stop. These
activities provide an ideal environment for undergraduate physics students to
conduct exciting physics and experiments, use lasers to control quantum
mechanical excited-state collisions, and explore new techniques for preparing
ultracold molecules. Engaging students in undergraduate research is a high-
impact teaching practice and helps to generate trained scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both of the projects are centered on a novel laser system
to generate intense frequency-chirped pulses of laser light. This laser will be
used to affect a variety of dynamics in atomic physics, including coherently
controlling ultracold collisions and studying rapid adiabatic passage. In the
first project, this team will use loss from a magneto-optical trap as a tool to
explore coherently controlling trajectories in inelastic light-assisted
collisions between atoms. Recent work has shown that ultracold collisions
between two rubidium atoms can be controlled with frequency-chirped laser light;
typically the entire process takes about one nanosecond. By tuning the laser
frequency and amplitude on that same time scale, one can influence the behavior
of the collision and the entire process can be coherent. The initial experiments
have shown that this is the case using a 1 GHz in 100 ns laser pulse; however,
the experiments weren't fast enough to observe total control over collisional
processes. This team has shown, using semi-classical simulations, that a modest
increase in the chirp-rate leads to full control over collisional processes of
this type (1 GHz in 20 ns). This project now aims to show that shaping laser
pulses on the one nanosecond time scale can lead to control over collisions in a
novel way. In the second project, this team will explore shaped frequency-
chirped laser light as a means to accelerate atomic gases. They will do this by
using a pair of counter propagating frequency-chirped pulses delayed by much
less than the lifetime of the transition. This will work with a Doppler
broadened gas because the range of chirp is large and rubidium is heavy.
Successful developments on this project may increase the likelihood that
coherent processes will be used to slow molecular beams (SrF, CaF, etc), for
cold and ultracold molecule experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.