* 1803920
* Water Sustainability at the Food-Energy-Water Nexus under Urbanization and Climate Change
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Kristie Franz, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,138.00

This project will develop an integrated platform including urbanization,
electricity and water demand, and hydrology/crop models to examine the impact of
urbanization on electricity use, water demand, and crop yields in the context of
climate change. By taking a nexus approach to addressing these challenges, this
work should lead to new and unanticipated solutions to improve sustainable use
of water in this century of urbanization and climate change. A set of
socioeconomic, urbanization, and climate change scenarios will be designed to
explore challenges of growing water demand under urbanization and climate
change. The modeling platform is designed to be transferrable to watersheds
across the world - especially those facing the challenges of fast urbanization
and potential climate change - for a systematic and integrative evaluation of
the food-energy-water system to develop adaptation and mitigation strategies for
water sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A modeling platform integrating three
key components will be built to allow an improved understanding of water demand
and sustainability under urbanization and climate change. The first component is
an urban growth model, supported by satellite remote sensing and socioeconomic
data, to project future urbanization and predict the consequent urban heat
island intensity. The second component is a multi-sector water demand model to
evaluate the impact of urbanization and climate change on water demand from
public supply, and electricity use and resulting thermoelectric cooling water
demand. The third component will examine the impact of urbanization on runoff
and crop land loss, along with resulting complex changes in crop yields and
irrigation water demand. This integrated modeling platform will serve as a
prototype in coupling often independent research areas (e.g., urbanization,
energy, and water) together with scenario analyses to explore complex problems
and create a means to address growing water demand challenges under urbanization
and climate change. This project will offer the opportunity for stakeholders to
participate in the dialogue. The plan is to develop an interactive training
program for land use planners and water managers with specific outreach to
planning agencies that will encourage people to engage in the training. Through
this, the aim is to help decision-makers improve their understanding of how
urbanization and climate change influence water demand and sustainability for
more informed decision making and planning, with potential to help global
communities achieve their 2030 Sustainable Development
Goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.