* 1803744
* Electron and Positronium Collisions with Molecules
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Ilya Fabrikant, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 08/31/2023
* USD 270,000.00

Low-energy electrons and their antiparticles, positrons, play a critical role in
a large number of fundamental and applied fields. Electrons can induce specific
chemical reactions which are relevant to dielectric aging, surface engineering,
radiation damage, cancer therapy, and atmospheric physics. Collisions involving
positrons and positron-containing atoms play an important role in ongoing
investigations of fundamental properties of matter and antimatter. Answers to
the big question of why matter dominates over antimatter in our universe require
studies of the simplest antimatter atom, antihydrogen. Creation of antihydrogen
atoms can be accomplished by colliding antiprotons with positronium atoms, each
containing an electron and a positron. These processes are currently
investigated at the CERN laboratory in Switzerland, which provides the powerful
source of antiprotons. This project will contribute to such efforts by providing
a foundation of basic collision theory, and by extending existing collision
theory into uncharted domains. The awarded research will have impact in the
areas of chemical control, radiobiology, atmospheric science, and in studies of
fundamental properties of antimatter. The research involves interdisciplinary
efforts and international collaborations with scientists from other fields of
physics and chemistry. Supervision of graduate students promotes their training
in diverse areas of physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves studies
of electron-molecule and positronium-molecule collision processes. These studies
are supplemented by theoretical investigation of more fundamental processes of
positronium collisions with protons and antiprotons. The research focus is on
development of the theory of the dissociative electron attachment to polyatomic
molecules, the process resulting in bond breaking in molecules and dissociating
them into neutral and negatively charged fragments. Effective potentials are
used for calculation of positronium collisions with diatomic molecules with
emphasis on the resonant scattering. New quantum-mechanical methods for
theoretical studies of positronium-proton/antiproton collisions are being
developed and compared with results of previous classical simulations. The
research activities advance the theory of electron and positronium interactions
with molecules and protons/antiprotons. First, they develop new formalisms which
are then applied to electron and positronium collisions with various targets.
Second, they lead to generation of new data which promote understanding of these
processes, particularly dissociative electron attachment processes and
positronium-molecule elastic and inelastic collisions. Third, they determine the
range of validity of classical methods for treatment of positronium-
proton/antiproton collisions which were used in the
past.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.