* 1803747
* GOALI: Advanced biomanufacturing with inducible feedback promoters
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Keith Tyo, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

Producing chemicals using microbes and biomass is an alternative to processes
that use petroleum as a raw material. Performing this at a commercial scale is
difficult. This project will develop a new tool to improve microbial chemical
production. The tool will use the microbe's ability to sense its environment to
improve performance. The microbes will produce a variety of industrial
chemicals. Outreach to the community will take many forms. One involves hands-on
demonstrations in a local high school and elementary school serving
underrepresented populations. The broader public will be engaged through booths
at Chicago-area Maker Faires. These activities are designed to stimulate
interest in biology as a tool to solve societal challenges. They should also
expand the pool of students pursuing STEM careers and entering the
biomanufacturing workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IFPs (inducible
feedback promoters) represent a new regulatory concept for metabolic pathway
control and optimization. They combine naturally occurring stress responsive
feedback with purely inducible timing control. Inducibility allows titration and
timing of pathway expression to be rapidly explored. Stress responsive feedback
allows autonomous expression optimization. The central objective is to develop
and validate IFPs in the context of two industrially important metabolic
pathways: terpenoid oxygenation and n-butanol production. This objective will be
pursued through aims that validate the approach of IFP regulation in each
pathway. We will create a community resource of unique IFPs applicable to
diverse metabolic pathways. IFPs that are directly relevant for industrial
bioprocess application will be fine-tuned using autonomous timing control
through quorum-sensing and biosensors. These efforts will be done in
collaboration with industry partners who will provide critical perspective to
allow development of IFPs that provide the greatest possible value to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.