* 1803592
* Shock wave focusing to achieve high energy concentration
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* John McCartney, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 308,063.00

A shock wave is a thin discontinuous region over which fluid properties abruptly
change from one state to another. Shock wave focusing occurs frequently both in
nature and in a variety of man-made applications. It takes place when a shock
wave propagates through a non-uniform or moving media and reflects from curved
surfaces or through reflections with other shock waves. Extreme conditions
created at the focal region - resulting in very high pressures and temperatures
- can be either beneficial as in the case of shock wave lithotripsy to remove
kidney stones or in inertial confinement fusion for energy generation, or
detrimental as in the case of superbooms (a type of sonic boom). As the shock
wave emerges from the focal region, after the shock focusing event, the shape of
the shock is often fundamentally altered. Therefore, a deeper understanding of
the shock focusing process, and how to control it, is critical to fully
understand its consequences and how to best enhance or mitigate it as needed
depending on the application at hand. Today, three-dimensional effects of shock
wave focusing are not yet fully understood. Therefore, the principal goal of
this research project is to develop a deeper understanding of the key factors
that govern shock wave focusing in three dimensions using an experimental
approach. This project will also provide opportunities to learn about shock wave
dynamics for undergraduate students and high school students, particularly from
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this
research is to experimentally study shock wave focusing using an exploding wire
setup capable of producing multiple simultaneous shock waves in two or three
dimensions. Ultra high-speed photography coupled with visualization techniques
will be used to determine the conditions when regular shock wave reflection
transitions into irregular shock wave reflection. Another goal is to quantify
the amount of energy focusing at the focal region given the competition between
the weakening of each individual shock wave as it propagates radially outward
from the exploding wire and the strengthening due to Mach shock generation.The
proposed research is expected to lead to a much enhanced understanding of the
principles of shock wave dynamics, and shock wave focusing, especially for three
dimensional shocks with decaying fluid properties behind them ? in addition to
providing a wealth of data to help verify numerical frameworks dealing with
shock focusing scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.