* 1803730
* Extreme Magnetoconvection
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Oleg Zikanov, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 299,763.00

Thermal convection, i.e., a fluid flow in which hot fluid raises against
gravity, is ubiquitous in nature and technology. Sometimes, the fluid is
electrically conducting and moves in the presence of a magnetic field. For
example, this happens in the outer core of the Earth, in processing of steel and
aluminum, or growth of semiconductor crystals for electronics. Most closely
related to the project are the examples from the two emerging energy
technologies: nuclear fusion and energy storage in liquid metal batteries. The
interaction with the magnetic field entirely changes the thermal convection.
Unexpected patterns appear in the flow, such as strong internal jets,
fluctuations of temperature with very high amplitude, spots of anomalously high
or low temperature, and so on. The ability of the fluid to transport heat also
changes dramatically. The project considers these effects in the case when both
the convection and the magnetic field are very strong. Computer simulations are
performed in cooperation with experiments conducted by project partners in the
USA and Europe. The goals of the project are to understand the change of
convection flow and to determine consequences for technology and
nature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal convection in an electrically conducting
fluid (e.g., a liquid metal) in the presence of a magnetic field is analyzed
computationally. The case of very large Grashof and Hartmann numbers is
considered. It has been found recently that, as conventional turbulence is
suppressed by the magnetic field, such flows acquire counter-intuitive extreme
features, such as high-amplitude temperature fluctuations, anomalously strong
convective heat transfer carried by quasi-two-dimensional jets, etc. The project
applies high-resolution simulation approach in cooperation with experiments by
research partners to understand the mechanisms of the flow modification and
analyze the implications for emerging energy technologies, materials processing,
and astro- and geophysical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.