* 1803955
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: WRF: Securing the Future of Direct and Indirect Potable Reuse ? N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) Formation Pathways and Precursors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Megan Plumlee, Orange County Water District
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 69,966.00

The use of disinfectants during water treatment has effectively eradicated
waterborne illness, but these disinfectants form low concentrations of
carcinogenic chemical by-products. These by-products tend to form at higher
levels in disinfected wastewater, a complication that is usually alleviated by
time in rivers, lakes, and aquifers that allows for the degradation of these
carcinogenic chemicals. However, this time for degradation is reduced in potable
water reuse scenarios, putting the future of potable water reuse technologies at
risk. This project will investigate the mechanisms of and potential solutions to
the formation of a carcinogenic chemical, N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA), during
advanced treatment of wastewater targeted for potable reuse. The project will
also enhance educational opportunities for students at the college and middle
school level, and provide new educational and research infrastructure in a
partnership between two industrial partners and a university. If successful,
this research can further enable the use of potable water reuse, a valuable
technology that could support our nation's water security.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) is a carcinogenic compound that forms
during chloramine disinfection. NDMA precursors that enter drinking water
treatment plants are thought to originate in wastewater. Based on ongoing NDMA
precursor research, some technologies used in potable reuse systems have been
identified as technologies that reduce NDMA occurrence and formation: reverse
osmosis (RO), which physically removes precursors, and strong ultraviolet (UV)
light, which photolyzes NDMA to nitrite and dimethylamine. While these systems
effectively reduce NDMA formation by &gt;90%, NDMA formation still occurs at
physiologically relevant concentrations (&gt;5 ng/L) in the disinfected water.
The sources of these precursors are unknown, but preliminary research indicated
that the treatment processes themselves may release a new subset of NDMA
precursors into the water. The overarching hypothesis of this research is:
Advanced treatment for potable reuse contributes NDMA precursors to the finished
water via leaching NDMA precursors from RO and/or transforming unreactive
organic matter to NDMA precursors during UV, hydrogen peroxide (UV/peroxide)
treatment. The rationale that underlies the research is that NDMA is highly
carcinogenic, and while RO and UV/peroxide remove most NDMA precursors, they
also change the water chemistry which may cause occurrence of new NDMA
precursors. The hypothesis will be tested by pursuing 4 specific aims: 1)
Determine the reactivity of known precursors and chemical additions in forming
NDMA; 2) Identify UV/peroxide transformation products and kinetics that "up-
convert" unreactive organic N to reactive, NDMA precursors; 3) Characterize
changes in bulk chemical characteristics of the NDMA precursor pool during
advanced water treatment; and 4) Identify operational changes that minimize NDMA
formation at pilot-scale. These aims will be investigated using novel mass
spectrometric and separations techniques pioneered by members of the research
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.