* 1803240
* Diagnosing Urban Stream Syndrome: Identifying Novel Contaminants and Toxicants in Our Stormwater
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,02/28/2023
* Edward Kolodziej, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2023
* USD 329,577.00

In rapidly urbanizing areas of the Unites States, stormwater runoff is a major
water quality and treatment problem because it accumulates many harmful
chemicals from our homes, roads, and cities as it flows downstream. Although it
this "urban stream syndrome" is known to be harmful to fish and aquatic
ecosystems, the chemical make-up of urban stormwater runoff is poorly
understood. This project will focus on identifying toxic chemicals in urban
stormwater, focusing particularly on understanding the link between stormwater
pollution and observations of mortality in the economically and culturally
important adult coho salmon in the Pacific Northwest. This project will measure
harmful pollutants in stormwater with the goal to better manage urban water
quality and protect fish such as coho salmon. Citizen scientists will help
monitor watersheds for salmon mortality as it happens, and alert project
researchers to collect water and tissue samples during acute mortality events.
The research group of Edward Kolodziej will work with citizen science groups,
regional agencies, and the Center for Urban Waters (Tacoma, WA) to collaborate
with local, regional, state, and tribal communities who are interested in
protecting salmon for economic and cultural reasons.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Relative to well-studied urban pollutant sources such as
municipal wastewater effluent, little is known about the chemical composition of
urban stormwater runoff despite its importance as a major source of chemical
pollutants to receiving waters. In the Pacific Northwest, an unexplained acute
mortality phenomena occurs widely in urbanized watersheds where 50-100% of adult
coho salmon quickly perish after urban stormwater exposure. This project will
focus on characterizing the identity and quantity of novel contaminants in urban
stormwater using high-resolution mass spectrometry to identify stormwater
contaminants with problematic structures such as metabolic poisons that inhibit
mitochondrial electron transport and induce cellular hypoxia. Water and tissue
samples collected by citizen scientists will be screened using broad spectrum,
suspect and non-target analyses to identify novel pollutants in urban
stormwater. Chemical bioactivity will be selectively screened via in-silico
receptor docking to detect novel bioactivity from high interest detections.
Along with ongoing ecotoxicology efforts, selective fractionation and chemical
screening will be used to identify toxicant candidates in toxicologically active
samples and link toxicant chemical characteristics to typical stormwater runoff
treatment systems. Project outputs will be broadly disseminated through
collaboration and outreach efforts to local and regional citizen science
programs. Through the project affiliation with the Center for Urban Waters,
additional outreach to local, regional, state, and tribal stakeholders, many of
them very interested in salmonid health for economic and cultural reasons, will
occur. Project collaborations will include regional municipalities and agencies
such as the Puget Sound Partnership as well as NOAA-NMFS researchers and
regulators focused on the health of economically important salmon populations.
Via project characterization efforts, the management of urban stormwater quality
can be improved by enhanced capabilities for chemical source control and
optimization of treatment technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.