* 1803526
* RAPID: Collaborative Research: Tracking Hurricane Harvey's Storm Surge and Flood Sedimentation
* GEO,EAR
* 12/01/2017,11/30/2019
* Harry Williams, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 11/30/2019
* USD 20,692.00

Category 4 Hurricane Harvey, the most intense wind and rain event to strike
Texas in 56 years, made landfall on August 25, 2017, with maximum sustained
winds of 130 mph and a storm surge of over 2 m. In addition, the hurricane
brought 30-50 inches of rain and caused record-breaking freshwater flooding
throughout southeastern Texas, inundating large tracts of coastal marshes with
flood waters from rivers and the Gulf of Mexico. Severe freshwater flooding also
occurred in inland fluvial wetlands along the Brazos, Trinity, and San Bernard
Rivers. Harvey provides an excellent opportunity to study the sedimentary
signatures of a rare wind-and-rain event and to estimate its return period by
documenting past similar event deposits in the geological record. In addition,
there is growing public awareness of the detrimental effects of climate change,
particularly in coastal areas threatened by accelerated sea-level rise. This
research will help determine whether coastal marshes can survive rising sea-
level by providing new information on the role of hurricanes in contributing
sediment to marshes, causing accretion and counteracting relative elevation loss
due to sea-level rise. This is a collaborative project by research teams at
Louisiana State University and the University of North Texas encompassing the
complete sedimentary impacts of Hurricane Harvey along a coastal (saltwater)-to-
fluvial (freshwater) transect across southeastern Texas.

Studies conducted to date suggest that hurricanes are major contributors to
marsh growth, with the magnitude of Hurricane sedimentation (millions of metric
tons) exceeding annual riverine and coastal sediment inputs, but the topic is
still debated. Through marsh coring along the freshwater to marine transect,
this study?s main objectives include: (i) documenting the magnitude, character
and extent of washover and flood sedimentation in coastal marshes in southeast
Texas, and (ii) to measure the magnitude and inland extent of washover
sedimentation in the lee of foredune barriers to evaluate whether relatively
subtle increases in barrier dimensions can cause substantial reductions in the
magnitude of washover sedimentation in marshes. The study will inform coastal
management agencies on the use of barriers to block or reduce storm overwash,
potentially reducing washover sediment magnitude and inland extent in adjacent
marshes, at a time when such sedimentation may be a crucial factor in
survivability of marshes in the face of accelerating sea-level rise. This study
also aims at producing centuries-to-millennia-long multi-proxy records of
hurricane-generated extreme events for southeastern Texas. These long-term
records are vital for estimating the return period of such extreme events as
Harvey and is critically important for hurricane- and flood-risk assessments and
coastal management decision-making.