* 1803808
* RUI:Collaborative Research:  Understanding and exploiting proton mobility in Au catalyzed selective oxidation reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Robert Rioux, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 222,000.00

The US produces more than nine billion tons of hydrogen (H2) gas per year. Much
of the hydrogen must undergo clean-up reactions prior to end use. One such
reaction used widely for fuel cells involves catalytic removal of small amounts
of unwanted carbon monoxide (CO) in a reaction known as preferential oxidation
of carbon monoxide (CO-PROX). The study will focus on the important role of
water in the CO PROX reaction and other related catalytic reactions. This
project will build on previous studies by the investigators to provide more
detailed understanding of how water promotes catalytic CO-PROX while exploring
the extent to which water, or other molecules with similar characteristics, can
be used to promote additional industrial reactions such as those involving
hydrocarbons. The collaboration between Trinity University - a small
undergraduate institution - and Pennsylvania State University will provide
opportunities for undergraduates from Trinity (many of whom come from Hispanic
background) to conduct research in collaboration with graduate students from
Penn States. Via their previous joint research projects, the investigators have
developed an excellent track record of inspiring their undergraduate students to
continue their education in both chemistry and engineering graduate programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CO oxidation and CO-PROX have been of considerable
scientific and commercial interest for the past 30 years. Despite this
attention, progress in developing PROX catalysts has been hindered by lack of
fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanisms at work. Based on
experimental observations and density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the
investigators have recently proposed a new CO oxidation reaction mechanism that
explains most of the disparate results in the supported catalyst, surface
science, and computational literature. The key feature of this new mechanism is
the role of water as a weak acid-base co-catalyst. Water first acts as a proton
donor, facilitating O2 binding to Au as Au-OOH. The reactive Au-OOH intermediate
oxidizes CO to Au-COOH; water then acts as a weak base, accepting a proton as
Au-COOH decomposes to release CO2. This project will further characterize the
Au-OOH intermediate and expand the scope of this new oxidation chemistry, in
which water acts as a "proton shuttle", carrying protons to and from reactive
intermediates on the metal. A variety of spectroscopic techniques will be
employed to identify and characterize Au-OOH on the catalyst surface as a
function of water and oxygen pressures. Au-OOH is a potentially strong yet
selective oxidant, offering opportunities to use Au catalysts in new oxidation
reactions. However, it relies on the weak acid-base chemistry associated with
weakly adsorbed water, which limits the reaction conditions under which Au-OOH
is accessible. To this end, a new approach termed "collaborative bifunctional
catalysis" will be pursued in which the metal particle and weak acid/base
chemistry will work in concert at the active site. Via this approach, new proton
shuttles will be developed to replace water as the primary proton carrier on
metal oxide surfaces, thus allowing for collaborative bifunctional catalysis to
take place at higher temperatures. Generation of Au-OOH at elevated temperatures
will be confirmed by reaction kinetics and kinetic isotope effect measurements.
The novel chemistry will also be extended to alkyne oxidation/hydration
reactions. Alkynes are well known to adsorb onto Au, making this an excellent
test reaction to develop new reaction chemistries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.