* 1803004
* New Interactions and New Particles with LHCb
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Sheldon Stone, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* James Shank
* 01/31/2022
* USD 3,974,001.00

One of the major intellectual achievements of the 20th century was the
development of the Standard Model (SM) of particle physics. This model succeeded
in classifying all of the elementary particles known at the time into a
hierarchy of groups having similar quantum properties. The validity of this
model to date was confirmed by the discovery of the Higgs boson at the Large
Hadron Collider at CERN. However, the Standard Model as it currently exists,
leaves open many questions about the universe. These include why matter
dominates over anti-matter in the Universe (CP violation), the values of the
masses of the fundamental constituents, the quarks and the leptons, the size of
the mixings among the quarks, and separately among the leptons, and the
properties of dark matter. Most explanations require the presence of new
particles, symmetries or forces, which we call Beyond the Standard Model Physics
(BSM). This project is designed to pursue searches for BSM
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The LHC is the premier High Energy Physics
particle accelerator in the world and is currently operating at the CERN
laboratory near Geneva Switzerland, one of the foremost facilities for answering
these BSM questions. The Syracuse University group is a collaboration member of
LHCb, an experiment designed specifically to study the decays of hadrons
containing b or c quarks at the LHC. The goal of LHCb is to identify new physics
in nature by examining the properties of hadrons containing these quarks. New
physics, or new forces, can be manifest by particles, as yet to be discovered,
whose presence would modify decay rates and CP violating asymmetries of hadrons
containing the b and c quarks, and thus allow new phenomena to be observed
indirectly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Syracuse group plays a leading role in the
physics analysis of LHCb. Their ongoing analyses shed light on important aspects
of our understanding of the Standard Model, including CP asymmetry which could
explain the preponderance of matter in the universe as opposed to antimatter.
Additionally, the group is one of the lead institutions in the design,
development, and construction of a new tracking detector subsystem for LHCb
called the UT, which will increase the data throughput of the experiment by an
order of magnitude, allowing the LHCb experiment to probe BSM physics more
deeply. The UT is a state of the art silicon tracking detector, which will play
a crucial role in providing fast momentum measurements of particles, many of
which are from b and c hadron decays of interest.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
broader impacts of this work span several areas, from student research
experiences for grads and undergrads, to a very active QuarkNet Center and
Masterclass programs for high school teachers and students. For many years a
steady stream of undergraduates has been working in the group's laboratories,
where it is a tradition to ensure that graduate students have direct engagement
in both instrumentation development as well as data analysis. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be direct participants in the fabrication and testing of
the UT detector that is under construction. The upgrade work will be integrated
into the Syracuse QuarkNet program to involve high school teachers and high
school students. This detector is an integral part of the LHCb Upgrade and is
essential for LHCb to continue to produce cutting edge physics results. Young
and nontraditional researchers will be integral participants in this exciting
program of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.