* 1803797
* Contact Angle Hysteresis on Curved Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Anthony Dinsmore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2022
* USD 336,724.00

Contact between liquid droplets and solids arise in many everyday settings such
as rain droplets on a car, condensation of dew on plant leaves, or insects
walking on water ponds. To understand or control the behavior of these and
related systems, we must first understand the shape of the fluid surfaces and
the forces that they can apply. In all of these systems, there is an interface
between two fluids (air and water, for example), which meets the surface of a
solid object. The angle between the fluid interface and the solid surface (the
"contact angle") is the key parameter that determines the interface shape and
the forces applied by the fluids. Experiments show that the contact angle has a
consistent value when a fluid interface advances across a dry surface, and a
smaller value when the interface recedes (moves in the other direction). This
variability of the contact angle, known as hysteresis, determines key properties
such as whether droplets slide off a surface or remain trapped. There is no
general theory for contact-angle hysteresis, but it is typically thought to be
an inherent property of the materials being used. This project investigates a
new finding that contact angle hysteresis also varies with the shape of the
fluid interface. The project is important because understanding the role of
geometry in contact-angle hysteresis will give broader insights into the
phenomenon that we currently lack. Ultimately, the results of this project will
contribute to improved technological processes such as coating of fibers with
fluids, stabilizing oil droplets with particles in food or oil-recovery
applications, and even assembling electronic components by floating them on a
liquid surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide measurements of
the of the contact-line shape and the contact angle by direct observation under
conditions of advancing and receding fluids. Chemical treatment of the solid
surface will be varied and a range of fluids will be used. Experiments focus on
millimeter-scale objects so that the interface can be directly visualized. From
the known interface shapes, the surface energies will be calculated numerically
and, where possible, analytically. These results will allow testing of proposed
mechanisms of contact-angle hysteresis. In addition to generating new basic
science, the proposed research will support educational projects for local
middle-school students and career training for undergraduate and graduate
students at the University of Massachusetts Amherst.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.