* 1803067
* Unraveling Plasma-Assisted Catalysis: Toward Understanding Fundamental Molecule-Surface Interactions and Energy Partitioning Synergisms
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Ellen Ellen, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

The proposed project seeks to explore the fundamental chemistry occurring in low
temperature plasmas (LTPs) used for plasma-assisted catalytic (PAC) processes
designed to remove atmospheric pollutants. Plasmas contain a broad spectrum of
reactive species that can work synergistically with a catalyst to enhance the
overall elimination of contaminants such as nitrogen oxides (NOx) and volatile
organic compounds (VOCs). The mechanisms for these cooperative actions, however,
are not well understood. The proposed work will combine electronic structure
calculations with multiple spectroscopic analysis tools to unravel the
complexity of reactions occurring in this system. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will combine experimental and theoretical approaches to
decipher energy partitioning and inter-twined reactions to elicit predictive
outcomes. These studies are designed to illuminate key factors that address
critical foundational science challenges associated with LTP processes,
including determining how energy is partitioned in LTPs and how reactive species
are formed in these systems. On a molecular level, the project seeks to
determine how substrate architecture (including micro- and nanostructure)
affects plasma-surface interactions as well as the mechanisms for plasma-
substrate interactions. The proposed experiments will provide robust
experimental data to improve computer models of relevant LTPs that currently
rely on either incomplete data or extrapolated information for plasma
properties. A key element is a comprehensive approach that connects gas-phase
chemistry with molecule-surface interactions to elucidate the underlying
chemistry in PAC systems with enhanced performance. Spatially- and temporally-
resolved absorption and emission spectroscopies along with mass spectrometry
will be used to probe dynamics, energy partitioning and synergisms among
chemical processes in LTPs. Substrates and plasma processing systems selected
for the proposed study are designed to improve performance of plasma-catalytic
removal of atmospheric pollutants. The PI has a strong track record of mentoring
groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM and is currently leading efforts
to establish a cross-college, multidisciplinary School of Advanced Materials
Discovery (SAMD) at Colorado State University. SAMD will house interdisciplinary
degree programs and serve as an umbrella organization for materials-related
education and outreach. Based on the proposed work, the PI and her trainees will
further develop materials-focused kits for use in K-12 classrooms and
demonstrations that emphasize materials chemistry and plasma
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.