* 1803494
* Temyiq Tuyuryaq: Collaborative Archaeology the Yupiit Way
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Kristen Barnett, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 08/31/2022
* USD 608,853.00

This project is an excellent illustration that archaeological inquiry in North
America inherently intersects with Native American peoples and interests. In
addition, it provides a deeper understanding of human experience and adaptation
during several periods of socio-environmental change during the last 2000 years.
This project builds a unique partnership between an Alaska Native community, an
Alaska Native archaeologist and students at Bates College to explore an
important archaeological site in Southwest Alaska, Temyiq Turyuraq (Old Togiak).
The site was evaluated as simply a midden (village dump) by archaeologists in
1960. In 2015 and 2017, working closely with the Togiak community, including
Bates undergraduates, Togiak Elders, and village students, the site was mapped
with a variety of geophysical methods and reanalyzed and found to contain more
than 70 traditional-style residential structures. In addition, this site was
found to have been occupied for more than 2000 years up to the present, as
represented by the Yup'ik community of Tuyuryaq (Togiak), a community comprised
of more than 800 residents. Drawing unique insights from community members the
project will address questions such as demography, cultural continuity,
development of adaptive behaviors during climate instability and inter/intra
village relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a long-term
collaborative archaeological project with the community of Tuyuryaq (Togiak),
Alaska. This project redefines the cultural landscape utilizing a developing
field of Indigenous archaeology with the specific community-based approach,
placing value and focus on community while contributing to a better
understanding of a coastal sub-arctic village and the peoples' relationships to
the landscape including plants and terrestrial and marine resources. This
project will further develop knowledge coproduction methods between scientists
and community members within an archaeological framework. This project takes a
place-based inclusive approach that advances youth access to education in the
sciences and beyond and supports a newly established cultural center which will
curate the materials resulting from the research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.