* 1803343
* Collaborative Research: Selective Oxidation Catalysis on Oxides Containing Pores of Molecular Dimensions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Steven Suib, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 115,289.00

Our modern standard of living depends upon the fuels that are needed for our
transportation, and the chemicals that are used to make many of the materials of
our many consumer products. These fuels and chemicals are predominantly derived
from the conversion of fossil fuels into value-added chemicals and materials via
catalytic reactions. Thus, the environmental footprint of our lifestyles can be
significantly reduced with more efficient use and conversion of these raw
materials. One example of a catalytic upgrading reaction is the conversion of
shale gas to bulk chemical and fuel precursors. Conversion of the short,
saturated hydrocarbon molecules (light alkanes) within shale gas to alkenes
leads to a more reactive, and thus more valuable, chemical intermediate. This
conversion involves the removal of hydrogen atoms and insertion of a more
reactive carbon-carbon double bond. To perform this conversion at low
temperatures requires use of a catalyst, and one such example is a mixed metal
oxide catalyst. The objective of this project is to understand how the size and
shape of pores within the mixed metal oxide may be engineered to more
selectivity catalyze the oxidative alkane to alkene reaction.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will probe the role of micropores in ordered bulk
transition metal oxide catalysts in the selective hydrocarbon oxidation of small
alkanes and alkanols. Ordered M1 phase mixed oxides contain one dimensional
pores that are similar in size to the kinetic diameters of the reactants;
examples include M1 phase mixed oxides of Mo V, Te and Nb and octahedral
molecular sieves of Mn oxides. The project will correlate the oxidation rate
ratios of linear versus branched alkanes to cycloalkanes to pore dimension, with
consideration of pore sizes that exhibit size exclusivity. Kinetic and density
functional theory (DFT) will probe selectivity with variations in pore geometry,
reactant geometry, and surface reactivity. It is anticipated van der Walls
stabilizations and steric hindrance may limit conversion to secondary
byproducts, which may enhance selectivity by bypassing the thermodynamic driving
forces for secondary oxidation reactions to secondary byproducts. Planned
education and outreach activities will promote understanding of heterogeneous
catalysis and its role in meeting the challenges of sustainable chemical
production and energy efficiency. These activities will target students from
underprivileged backgrounds, with an aim to increase their retention in science
and engineering fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.