* 1803728
* Controlling Shear-Induced Migration in Colloid/Polymer Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Jacinta Conrad, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2023
* USD 299,950.00

Mixtures of small, rigid particles in solutions of polymers are widely used in
advanced technologies such as 3-D printing and energy storage. The particles
impart function, such as conductivity needed to transport electrons through 3-D
printed wires. The polymers are added to control the flow behavior of the
mixture. Tuning the properties of these mixtures requires controlling the
distribution of the particles -- conductivity, for example, requires the
particles to form a connected network. One factor that affects particle
distribution during flow is shear-induced migration, in which particles migrate
away from the walls and accumulate near the center of a narrow channel. This
project will use experiments to determine the effect of polymers in solution on
the distribution of particles as they flow through narrow channels. This
knowledge will provide new routes to control the structure and functional
properties of particulate suspensions for applications in next-generation energy
storage and transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Suspensions of microscale particles
in complex fluids offer transformative opportunities in materials engineering
for energy storage and transport. Miniaturizing these technologies requires
increasing the suspension conductivity, by ensuring particle connectivity, while
minimizing clogging in small channels. Complex fluid additives such as polymers
or surfactants needed for suspension function or stability, however, may alter
particle connectivity and density. Hence controlling particle density in the
presence of additives is essential for attaining the desired functional
properties of confined particulate suspensions. Polymers added to particulate
suspensions may alter shear-induced migration, one mechanism that generates non-
uniform density profiles in confined flows, in at least two ways: by generating
aggregates or by enhancing normal stresses. Systematic understanding of how to
control microscale particle migration in polymer solutions is currently lacking.
The objective of this project is to understand how polymers alter shear-induced
migration of colloidal particles during microchannel flow. To test the
hypothesis that the extent of migration reflects competition between polymer-
enhanced normal stresses and polymer-driven migration, the PI will use bulk
rheology and microchannel confocal imaging experiments to characterize the
normal stresses and particle microstructure in strongly and weakly migrating
suspensions containing either adsorbing or non-adsorbing polymers. Measurements
of particle velocity and concentration profiles will be compared to existing
theoretical models for shear-induced migration of hard-sphere particles in
simple liquids. This plan of work will identify the relative impact of the two
competing mechanisms on shear-induced migration, leading to unprecedented
control over particle density in models of technologically important materials
and allowing existing models for shear-induced migration to be extended to
include polymer-mediated interactions. This project will thus generate new
design rules for suspensions to maximize particle connectivity during complex
fluid flow while minimizing clogging. The PI will disseminate results to
scientists in Houston's energy and medical industries through tutorial workshops
aimed at oil and gas professionals and through the Texas Soft Matter meeting,
which she founded and organizes, and will expand her ongoing outreach activities
to K-12 students and the general public to include new hands-on activities on
complex fluid flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.