* 1803693
* EAGER: Touch and Kill: A New Mechanism for Engineered Nanomaterials to Fight Bacteria
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Tolou Shokuhfar, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Nora Savage
* 12/31/2021
* USD 264,000.00

Bacteria resistance to antibiotic drugs is a major health challenge to the
United States affecting the lives of many people each year. Since bacteria
develop resistance to drugs and chemicals over time, it is paramount to the
health and well being of our society to find new solutions to effectively kill
such bacteria. Nanomaterials that have very few layers of atoms offer exciting
new properties to fight against bacteria. This research project aims to
understand how atomically-thin nanomaterials interact with bacteria. If this
research is successful, it facilitates the design of new antibacterial agents to
kill drug-resistant bacteria. This research also has the potential to prevent
the development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria. The principal
investigators will recruit and mentor female and underrepresented students
during the course of this research. In addition, the research findings will be
showcased and discussed in relevant undergraduate and graduate classes to
further stimulate a new generation of students with the fundamental knowledge to
engage in this field. To increase public awareness, the principal investigators
will disseminate the new results of this project through social media, press
coverage, and news releases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among bacteria,
multi-drug resistant bacteria pose a significant threat to the well being of
humanity killing many people each year. Through biochemical evolution, such
bacteria usually develop new defensive mechanisms to survive the effects of
chemical-based antibiotic drugs. As such, physical-based methods to kill
bacteria enable new frontiers to suppress the bacteria resistance. Two-
dimensional (2D) nanomaterials depending on their chemistry and surface
properties provide new means to fight bacteria. The goal of this project is to
investigate how 2D nanomaterials interact with bacteria. This project will study
the interaction of bacteria with certain 2D nanomaterials by direct imaging of
hydrated bacteria at high resolutions. It is expected that the high surface
reactivity of 2D nanomaterials lead to degradation of bacteria membrane upon
contact and eliminate the creation of superbugs by suppressing the capability of
bacteria to develop resistance. For broader impacts, the principal investigators
will involve students at both undergraduate and graduate levels in training and
education on the state-of-the art microscopy techniques for health sciences.
Scientific visits and hands-on experience on the lab activities will be
showcased for minority and underrepresented students. The finding of this
research will be incorporated in a bioengineering graduate course that has been
developed for senior undergraduate and graduate students. The principal
investigators are committed to recruit female/minority students for
undergraduate education through well-established outreach programs at the
University of Illinois at Chicago.