* 1803215
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: On-Demand Continuous-Flow Production of High Performance Acrylic Resins: from Electronic-Level Modeling to Modular Process Intensification
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Andrew Rappe, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 240,000.00

The proposed collaborative research project between two academic groups and an
industrial partner, Axalta Coating Systems (formerly DuPont Performance
Coatings), aims to investigate the effects of molecular oxygen on free-radical
polymerization (FRP). The effects of molecular oxygen can be either catalytic,
at high temperatures, or inhibitory, at low temperatures. The majority of FRP
studies with molecular oxygen have focused on its inhibitory effects, so it will
be of great fundamental interest to discover the mechanisms of oxygen-based
catalysis under different reaction conditions. To translate this finding into
practical industrial processes, it is vital to understand how the concentration
of molecular oxygen influences reaction rates and resulting polymer conversion
and microstructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team proposes to: (a) Identify the
most likely mechanisms for polymer-chain initiation by molecular oxygen and the
departure of oxygen from live polymer chains before they are terminated, using
Density Functional Theory (DFT); (b) Design and conduct batch polymerization
experiments to capture the initiating and product species and to verify the
theoretically-predicted species and mechanisms; (c) Develop a macroscopic
mechanistic model of an oxygen-initiated polymerization tubular reactor (PTR) to
perform model-based design; and (d) Develop a modular PTR design that
intensifies and modularizes acrylic resin processes. The reduction or
elimination of conventional thermal initiators (normally the most expensive
component of a resin) will lower the operating costs. The elimination of
residual groups left by conventional initiators in the final product (which
adversely affect polymer properties such as UV resistance) and the optimal
operation of FRP reactors will improve the resin quality. Beyond acrylates, the
outcomes of this research may impact every free-radical polymerization process.
In addition to training two graduate students, the team plans to create computer
modeling modules and projects to provide research training opportunities to
undergraduates selected from underrepresented groups through Drexel's Co-op
program and UPenn's Vagelos Integrated Program in Energy Research
(VIPER).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.