* 1803907
* Graphene/Hydrogel Hybrid Field-Effect Transistors for Seamless Bioelectronic Interfacing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Fiorenzo Omenetto, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2021
* USD 249,824.00

Nanoscale field-effect transistors represent a unique platform for real-time
detection of biochemical and bioelectrical signals with unprecedented
sensitivity and resolution, yet their translation toward applications under
physiological conditions remains challenging. The goal of the project is to
develop a hybrid sensing platform to overcome the intrinsic limitations of
traditional field-effect transistor design by incorporating functional hydrogels
as the interfacing material. The proposed sensor design not only provides a true
biocompatible microenvironment for long-term, reliable molecular and cellular
integration, but also enables the application of existing nanoelectronic
toolsets in physiologically relevant conditions, thus allowing for new insights
into many biologically significant processes. The proposed studies will impact
positively on many aspects of public health by providing new opportunities in
point-of-care diagnostics, in-vitro/in-vivo monitoring of disease progression,
and clinical brain-machine interfaces. Furthermore, the investigators will
emphasize the interdisciplinary link between advanced technology and the natural
sciences to broaden STEM participation through summer internship, with special
focus on underrepresented high-school students from local community.

The overall objective of this proposal is to develop a hybrid nanoelectronic
interface composed of graphene field-effect transistors and spatially-defined
functional hydrogels for improved bioelectronic transduction at both the
molecular and cellular levels. In particular, targeted photopolymerization will
be exploited to achieve selective placement and design of biocompatible
hydrogels on top of individual transistor devices to integrate the
nanoelectronic and biological functionalities onto a single, multifuntional
platform. At the molecular level, bio-specific receptors will be sequentially
encapsulated into the hydrogel gate to independently encode device selectivity
for multiplexed molecular detection with high spatial resolution while reducing
Debye screening and non-specific binding, and extending shelf-life. At the
cellular level, surface-initiated nanometer-thick hydrogel will serve as
photosensitive adhesive to establish robust, minimally-invasive cellular
interfaces. Such intimate proximity will enhance coupling of bioelectronic
signals with the underlying graphene channel. The ability to pattern and
electrically communicate with individual cells enables the rational design of
large-scale, addressable transistor/cellular arrays that will provide high-
spatiotemporal resolution studies of bioelectrical and biochemical signal
propagation at both single cell and biological network levels. The proposed
research represents a new approach to achieve seamless integration of biological
components with electronics, and is expected to provide a significant
improvement over current state-of-the-art techniques by allowing to access
elusive biological signals and emerging bioelectric phenomena and providing a
substantial increase in data availability and information.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.