* 1803409
* Optically-Driven Changes in Nanoparticle Solvation, Transport and Interaction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Nicholas Abbott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 339,078.00

Molecules within liquids organize themselves near solid surfaces in a range of
different ways, a phenomenon called solvation. This organization plays a central
role in important physical processes and technologies. For example, solvation
underlies the use of liquids as lubricants to minimize friction between two
surfaces or to control the assembly of nanoparticles of metals (for example,
gold) into advanced materials for sensing. The central role of solvation in
determining the properties of solid-liquid interfaces has motivated many past
efforts aimed at changing solvation. Past efforts have included addition of
salts to liquids or manipulation of temperature and pressure. This project moves
beyond past studies by investigating the use of visible light to optically
excite and change solvation of metal surfaces. The intensity and location at
which light is delivered to a system can be readily manipulated, and thus the
approach has the potential to make possible reversible and active control of
solvation. The successful outcome of this research may provide the basis of new
energy-efficient separations processes or new ways to create materials for low-
cost sensor networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will elucidate how
optical excitation of nanoparticles can change their solvation, transport
properties and phase behavior. The first thrust of research focuses on single
nanoparticles, and elucidates how optical excitation of nanoparticles changes
interfacial solvent structuring and thus nanoparticle hydrodynamic size. The
second thrust of research examines how optically-induced changes in nanoparticle
solvation alter pair-wise interactions, including electrical double layer and
solvent-structural contributions. Measurements of probability distance
distribution functions for pairs of nanoparticles will be inverted to obtain
potentials of mean force. The third thrust of research investigates how
optically-driven changes in nanoparticle solvation influence collective
phenomena, such as the stability of dispersions of nanoparticles and their phase
separation. The overall outcome of this program of research will be new
knowledge of fundamental transport and phase separation processes arising from
optically-driven changes in nanoparticle solvation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.