* 1803830
* Collaborative Research: Tools for Noninvasive Nano-Optical Imaging of the Role of Extracellular Matrix in Pre-Malignant Breast Cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Amy Oldenburg, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2022
* USD 366,505.00

Despite extensive research, much is still unknown about factors that cause
normal cells to become pre-cancerous cells. This project supports research into
novel imaging methods to better understand how pre-cancerous cells are shaped by
tissue fibers in their local environment, termed the extracellular matrix (ECM),
and signals from surrounding cells. There is evidence that certain types of
breast cancers, called basal-like breast cancers (BBCs,) progress more rapidly
in response to changes in ECM nanostructure. Pre-cancerous BBCs are studied in a
three-dimensional (3D), tissue-like environment to model many features of real
tissues. The thick, 3D models are difficult to measure with traditional
microscopes, however, and information about features that are too small to be
seen with a microscope cannot be determined without killing the cells. This
research addresses these limitations by developing nanoparticles that move
inside the ECM and can be pulled with an external magnet. A non-invasive imaging
technique that uses light waves, known as Optical coherence tomography (OCT),
will be optimized and used to track nanoparticle motions and determine ECM pore
size, fiber alignment, and stiffness. Studies will be performed in 3D models to
reveal how the ECM is restructured in the very early stages of BBC. In addition,
the research will answer the question of whether remodeling occurs differently
in the presence of adjacent supporting cells or certain growth factors
implicated in BBC progression. Fundamental new insights into BBC formation have
potentially broad impacts on human health. The development of new imaging tools
and novel optical-magnetic nanoparticles will be broadly useful for studying
other 3D organ tissue models, which are of increasing interest as they reduce
the use of animals while providing a controlled platform for scientific studies.
Education and outreach activities are planned to engage middle and high school
students and teachers in learning about optical physics and nanotechnology
through lectures and hands-on activities. Another goal of the outreach
activities is to foster the students' professional development, including
raising their awareness about opportunities to pursue undergraduate degrees in
STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the need for tools to
noninvasively assess ECM nanostructure and stiffness properties within 3D in
vitro models of early stage breast cancer by employing plasmonic gold nanorods
(GNRs) that readily diffuse into and access 3D cultures, in combination with OCT
to provide depth-resolved imaging. The research is organized under three
objectives. The first objective is to develop and validate diffusion tensor OCT
of GNRs for measuring anisotropic matrix pore sizes, beginning with construction
of an optical scanner to sense angle-dependent GNR diffusion with OCT and
developing methods for parallelized scanning to obtain 6 unique angle
measurements per sample voxel. GNRs of varying sizes will be synthesized to
explore extending the pore size sensitivity range. This will be the first
instrument capable of quantifying the diffusion tensor of particles over a
spatial resolution scale of ~10 micrometers. The second objective is to develop
and validate Magnetic GNRs for spatially-resolved matrix stiffness, beginning
with development of a technology for real-time, spatially-resolved ECM stiffness
measurement using magnetic GNRs (Mag-GNRs) in combination with magnetomotive OCT
(MM-OCT). The method developed is expected to provide a stiffness parameter that
is proportional to Young's modulus in collagen matrices. This will be the first
magnetomotive method that can disentangle the coupling between particle density
and stiffness by use of the novel Mag-GNRs. The third objective is to quantify
nanoscale ECM properties during normal-to-pre-malignant progression in a 3D
organotypic model of BBC. Using technologies developed under objectives 1 and 2,
ECM nanostructure, alignment, and stiffness will be measured during the
progression from normal breast to ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS). Mammary
epithelial cell organoids will be cocultured with stromal fibroblasts to
recapitulate stromal-epithelial cell signaling. These techniques will be used to
dis-ambiguate the effects that pore size and stiffness each confer on the
behavior of mammary epithelial cell organoids. Specifically, because pre-
malignant disease is characterized by increased fibroblast proliferation and
increased density and alignment of ECM fibers, early-stage microenvironmental
changes will be studied with an isogenic line of basal-like mammary cells that
range from normal to DCIS-like. These experiments are expected to advance
understanding of the distinct interactions that BBCs exhibit with the
microenvironment during the progression from normal to pre-malignant
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.