* 1803771
* A Reductive Dehalogenase for Aerobic Applications In the Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Steven Rokita, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2021
* USD 471,231.00

Organic compounds that contain chlorine or fluorine (halogenates), are
remarkably difficult to degrade. To improve their degradation, the investigators
will modify an enzyme that demonstrates the correct capability but currently
lacks the ability to recognize these pollutants. Halogenated phenols will be the
model compounds used. If successful, this approach will enable the
decontamination of compounds previously found impossible to treat. Graduate
students will learn to combine experimental and theoretical approaches to
generate new enzymes. Undergraduate students will help design enzymes using an
educational game to simulate protein folding and conformation. Underrepresented
minorities will be actively recruited to participate in every aspect of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods for removing halophenol
contaminants from our environment are available but unsatisfactory. Strong
chemical oxidants can be used in waste water but their residue adversely affects
downstream processes. Alternatively, organisms can be used degrade the
halophenols, but they require anaerobic conditions. In contrast, the enzyme
iodotyrosine deiodinase has the potential to degrade halophenol using a
reductive process that is uniquely compatible with atmospheric oxygen. A number
of natural examples of this enzyme have been examined, but all are specific for
tyrosine derivatives. Consequently, our goal is to develop new variants that
accept a broader range of substrates. Three parallel computational approaches
will be tested for predicting the necessary mutations to generate stable enzymes
with active site geometries favoring halophenol substrates. The highest ranked
variants will be expressed and screened for the desired activity. Further
optimization will rely on directed evolution using methods of random mutagenesis
and gene shuffling. This research effort should define a general approach for
modulating active site lids to accommodate chosen substrates in addition to
providing a testable product, engineered enzymes for halophenol
decontamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.