* 1803563
* WRF: Collaborative Research: Extended-range forecasts of atmospheric rivers for adaptive management of flood risk, water supply, and environmental flows in California
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Scott Steinschneider, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2021
* USD 151,967.00

This research will develop ways to improve the robustness of human and
environmental water supplies in California and similar regions with highly
variable climates. Adaptive control policies that explicitly account for
uncertainty in forecasts of extreme storm events will be designed. This work
will explicitly tailor water system operations for regional storm track patterns
and associated forecast errors for those storm types. Expected outcomes include
three major scientific advancements: 1) characterization and modeling of spatial
and temporal uncertainty in extended-range forecasts of cold-season
precipitation, temperature, and floods at different locations and lead times 2)
this improved knowledge of forecast error structure will be coupled with
computational approaches for water resources control policy design to develop
adaptive policies that are robust to forecast uncertainty; 3) determination of
how forecast-informed control policies should be designed for long-term climate
uncertainty represented by decadal-scale droughts and floods. Through these
outcomes, this work will support a shift toward integrating state-of-the-art
climate information with decision-making in the water sector of California, and
findings from this work will be transferable to other semi-arid regions with
similar flood regimes.

This work will enable extensive interactions and technology transfer with key
stakeholders in water management agencies in California throughout the project
to promote the translation of research findings and methods into practice. All
software and data analysis performed for this project will be open source and
hosted on GitHub, enabling researchers around the world to reproduce and extend
the project's findings. These software tools will be designed to support
analyses on desktop computers as well as high-performance computing clusters,
including NSF XSEDE resources, to support a range of decision-making processes.
The team will advance graduate and undergraduate education in the key areas of
data science and software design, identified in recent National Academy reports
as critical issues for scientific reproducibility and workforce preparedness.
These education expansions include of the PIs' statistics courses at Cornell and
water resources engineering courses at UC Davis, incorporating simplified data
analysis and modeling tasks from this project. Educational developments will be
shared broadly through the ASCE Task Committee on Education (ECSTATIC).

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.