* 1803968
* Statistically Sequence-Controlled Pharmaceutical Polymers, and Studies of Their Molecular Thermodynamic and Kinetic Properties
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* You-Yeon Won, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 384,495.00

The manipulation of monomer sequence as a means to produce structure and
function in a polymer is well established for natural polymers, such as DNA and
proteins. However, for synthetic polymers it is prohibitively difficult, if not
impossible, to precisely control the sequences of their building blocks. For
applications in which low fidelity in sequence control is sufficient, a useful
alternative to specific sequence control is to take a statistical approach,
which may be preferable from a cost-benefit standpoint. The proposed research
aims to use statistical sequence control to develop polymeric materials for drug
delivery applications with improved biodegradation and drug release properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed research is to develop
poly(D,L-lacticco- glycolic acid) (PLGA) copolyesters having improved
biodegradation and drug release properties. PLGA is the most prevalent polymeric
material used in drug delivery applications. Currently, commercial PLGA polymers
are produced by batch-type copolymerization reactions, which typically produce
non-sequence-controlled "Gradient PLGA" copolymers because of the disparate
reactivities of lactide (LA) and glycolide (GL) monomers toward polymerization.
The proposed research will aim at advancing the fundamental understanding of
ring-opening polymerization to control monomer sequence distribution along
random copolymer PLGA, and developing a framework to understand how monomer
sequence distribution affects drug encapsulation and release properties of the
polymer. A set of structure-property studies is proposed to investigate the
relationship between sequences and drug delivery. The scope of work is
fundamental, and if successful, could have impact in both pharmaceutical and
polymer research. The research project will provide integrated training for
graduate and undergraduate students in a multidisciplinary environment and teach
them skills that are necessary for developing the future generation of chemical
engineering and polymer science researchers. Hands-on modules will be developed
to demonstrate controlled release processes in outreach events. A Summer High
School Research Experience Program is proposed and curriculum development is
planned in the field of polymer, colloid and interface
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.