* 1803063
* Elucidating Physical and Electronic Interactions in Ternary Blend Organic Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Barry Thompson, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2022
* USD 317,641.00

Solar energy is among the most attractive renewable energy sources, providing
motivation for fundamental research to enable low-cost technologies that are
adaptable for a variety of applications. Among these, thin film organic
photovoltaic cells (based on small organic molecules and polymers) are a
potentially suitable option. This technology provides a path towards a
lightweight, flexible platform for integration of renewable electricity
production capacity into building infrastructure. Of the organic solar cells
under study, ternary blend cells have demonstrated the potential for state-of-
the-art efficiency. In addition, the technology amends itself to simple device
fabrication methods that are compatible with existing continuous roll-to-roll
processing manufacturing methods. This project will address fundamental research
into the mechanisms that govern the active layer of material, the polymer blend,
in order to increase efficiency of the resulting device. The project will focus
on the complex physical and electronic interactions in the ternary polymer blend
mixture that determines the cell's solar conversion efficiency. The research
plan of the project is coupled with a cohesive educational plan that benefits
community college students as well as University of Southern California (USC)
undergraduates and graduate students. Community college students from Cerritos
College (Norwalk, CA) will be hosted each summer to participate in the research
project. These students are largely from under-represented groups in STEM and
many are first generation college students. The project also involves
collaborations with laboratories in Germany and Denmark. Undergraduate and
graduate students (from Cerritos and USC) will also work closely with the
international collaborators, including graduate student exchange for an extended
international research experience. Finally, the project includes efforts toward
developing write-to-learn pedagogies are being pursued in undergraduate organic
chemistry courses at USC with the goal of facilitating learning and student
retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the fundamental research project
is to expand the understanding of the role of miscibility of synergistic
components in ternary blend organic solar cells, specifically those based on two
donor polymers and one molecular acceptor. Specific interests are centered on
how physical relationships influence the open circuit voltage and on the
development of a more global picture of favorable electronic interactions
between components. The objectives of the project are: to elucidate the
fundamental physical and electronic interactions between synergistic components
and clarify the mechanism of operation; to establish the limits of effective
electronic relationships between synergistic donor components, specifically
focusing on the maximum effective highest occupied molecular orbital offset; and
to develop rational design rules for synergistic components. This work will be
executed through a combination of polymer synthesis, basic electronic and
structural characterization, device characterization and theory. Achievement of
the stated objectives should lead to an enhanced fundamental understanding of
the ternary blend platform and the path to clear design principles for new donor
and acceptor components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.