* 1803197
* Neonicotinoid Fate Across the Source Water-to-Drinking Water Continuum
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* David Cwiertny, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 332,125.00

Neonicotinoid pesticides are the most widely-used insecticides in the world. As
such, they are commonly found in rivers and streams of the Midwest and have
recently been detected in drinking water. Although neonicotinoids are potent
toxins to insects, it is possible that they may react in the environment through
natural processes or during water treatment to produce byproducts that may
endanger human health. This work will examine the fate of neonicotinoids in the
environment, focusing on processes that may amplify the risk they pose to human
health. This work will help ensure that watershed-level efforts to improve water
quality are more effective in limiting the release and persistence of
neonicotinoids to protect the Nation's drinking water sources. Additionally,
this project will train and educate students on scientific measurements, engage
young students and the public (including underrepresented groups) on water
quality, and help inform future risk assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
central objective of this study is to establish the public health risks posed by
the widespread use of neonicotinoid insecticides through the identification of
major fate pathways and persistent bioactive transformation products along the
continuum from source water to drinking water. The central hypothesis is that
alteration of the critical neonicotinoid pharmacophore generates novel
transformation products with differing environmental fates, increased human
hazards, and exposure potentials relative to the parent insecticides. Specific
objectives of this project are to: 1) identify and quantify the generation of
novel neonicotinoid disinfection byproducts with altered pesticide
pharmacophores; 2) quantify differential sorption characteristics of
neonicotinoids with altered pharmacophores; and 3) measure the microbial
transformation of the neonicotinoid pharmacophore during water treatment.
Research outcomes will include improved risk assessments, water treatment
technologies, and best management practices for neonicotinoids. Understanding
these transformation mechanisms will also help inform the future design of more
environmentally responsible target-specific pesticides. These research efforts
are complemented by education and engagement efforts that will: 1) broaden
participation in STEM through participation of three high school students from
traditionally underrepresented groups via the Iowa Secondary Student Training
Program; 2) engage K-12 students through participation in the Iowa STEM festival
with an interactive display on non-point source pollutants; 3) promote the
interdisciplinary research, training, and education of graduate students by
leveraging an NSF NRT INFEWS grant program at the University of Iowa; and 4) in
partnership with the University of Iowa Public Policy Center, broadly
disseminate research outcomes to technical and non-technical audiences,
including policy makers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.