* 1803380
* Cohesive Sediment Dynamics in Turbulent Flow
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Eckart Meiburg, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 12/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Cohesive sediment refers to particles below approximately 63 microns in size. It
is present in ecologically sensitive environments such as rivers, lakes,
estuaries, and fisheries. Reliable prediction of contaminant and nutrient
transport in these environments requires accurate models of cohesive sediment
dynamics. We currently lack such models. For the small particles in cohesive
sediments, attractive forces between particles due to electric charges
frequently dominate hydrodynamic and gravitational forces. While these
attractive forces can cause the particles to form larger aggregates or "flocs",
turbulent fluid stresses tend to break up the flocs. Hence, the size
distribution of cohesive sediment flocs is governed by a delicate balance of
interparticle and turbulent stresses, which affects their transport rates. The
attractive forces between particles also strongly affect the erodibility of
sediment deposits on the seafloor, which influences sediment transport processes
in rivers and oceans. This research will explore cohesive sediment dynamics in
turbulent environments via a series of computer models and simulations. The aim
is to develop reliable, predictive tools for the transport of nutrients and
contaminants in the environment. The results will also improve predictions
related to other technologies, including deep sea hydrocarbon exploration. The
research will educate and train a doctoral student, as well as undergraduate and
high school students, in computational modeling, fluid dynamics, sediment
transport, and high-performance computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research explores the dynamics of cohesive sediment in turbulent environments
via a series of increasingly complex computational investigations, based on a
hierarchy of approaches ranging from one-way coupled, reduced-order Lagrangian
point particle models to grain-resolving direct numerical simulations (DNS) that
are fully `four-way' coupled. It will address a broad range of fundamentally
important questions, among them: a) how do the turbulence properties affect the
equilibrium balance between sediment flocculation/coalescence and break-up?, b)
how does the floc size distribution vary as a function of the turbulence and
sediment properties?, c) how does the effective settling velocity of the
cohesive sediment depend on the turbulence and sediment properties?, d) how are
the turbulence properties altered by the sediment?, e) how is the effect of
cohesive sediment on turbulence different from that of non-cohesive sediment?,
and f) how is the erodibility of a sediment bed affected by cohesive forces? The
envisioned computational simulations will serve as basis for formulating scaling
laws that capture the dynamics of cohesive sediment in turbulence, and which are
suitable for implementation into existing larger-scale sediment transport
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.