* 1803919
* Simulation of Singlet Oxygen Kinetics for Trace Organic Transformation in Wastewater Effluent
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Robert Arnold, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2022
* USD 329,966.00

Water resources in dry regions are stressed by drought and population growth.
Wastewater reclamation can provide an additional source of water for these
areas. However, trace contaminants such as pharmaceuticals that are not removed
during wastewater treatment may pose ecological and/or human health concerns.
This project will provide new information on the role of sunlight in destroying
potentially toxic trace contaminants, addressing the national need for
sustainable, low cost and energy efficient technologies for water treatment.
Results will inform design of wastewater reclamation treatment systems in water-
stressed areas. The project will take advantage of programs at the University of
Arizona to augment educational activities among disadvantaged students in STEM
areas. If successful, this project will provide valuable information on how to
remove potentially harmful pharmaceutical and other contaminants from wastewater
to allow its safe re-use in areas where water security is threatened.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar-driven processes involving effluent organic matter
(EfOM) generate reactive oxygen species (ROS) that contribute to transformations
of trace organic contaminants (TOrCs). For an important subset of TOrCs, a
reaction with singlet oxygen is the dominant natural reaction pathway in treated
wastewater. It is not yet possible to provide a physically accurate
representation of that pathway or the kinetics of indirect photolytic
transformations of TOrCs by singlet oxygen. Areas of uncertainty include (i) the
dependence of quantum efficiency for singlet oxygen generation on light
wavelength, (ii) the identities and concentrations of sensitizers in EfOM that
participate in generating singlet oxygen, (iii) reaction rate constants for many
TOrCs with singlet oxygen, and (iv) the toxicities of ROS-generated
transformation products. The primary objective of proposed work is to support
the development of a robust and physically accurate kinetic model for the light-
driven degradation of TORCs via reaction with singlet oxygen in treated
wastewater. The proposed research will use mathematically-supported methods to
eliminate or minimize uncertainties in the photochemistry of singlet-oxygen-
dependent mechanisms for TOrC transformations in treated wastewater. More
specifically, the work is designed to expose (i) the concentrations and
characters of EfOM fractions that serve as sensitizers in the singlet oxygen
pathway, and (ii) the dependence of quantum efficiency for singlet oxygen on
light wavelength. Results will support development of improved kinetic models
that are potentially useful for reactor design in advanced wastewater treatment
systems. Next generation models based on bulk organic characteristics in EfOM
and quantum efficiencies normalized to dissolved organic concentration are
necessary to overcome deficiencies in state-of-the-art kinetic representations
that are necessarily conditional in character.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.