* 1803156
* The Effect of Particle-polymer Interactions on the Rheology and Structure of Dilute Particle-filled Polymeric Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Donald Koch, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2021
* USD 317,299.00

Solutions of polymer molecules and suspended solid particles are used in a range
of products from paints and coatings to health care and foods. The polymer
molecules and the suspended particles act cooperatively to create a range of
complex fluid behaviors that impact their processing. While much is known about
how particles and polymers act independently to alter fluid responses, little is
known about their coupled effects. This project will develop theories to predict
1) the stretching and alignment of polymer molecules by the disturbance to the
flow caused by the particles, 2) how elongated solid particles or fibers align
in the presence of polymers, and 3) the flow response of mixtures of particles
and polymers. The influence of flow rate, flow history, and flow geometry on the
behavior of polymer-particle mixtures will be examined. As part of this
research, a graduate student and several undergraduates will receive training in
fluid dynamics and theoretical and numerical methods. Both the principal
investigator and the graduate student will participate in mentoring an
undergraduate student from a group that is underrepresented in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay of particle and polymer
stresses will be explored in steady shear, oscillatory shear, and extensional
rheology of suspensions of spheres and fibers in polymer solutions. The
hydrodynamic disturbance of the particles can dramatically alter the polymer
conformation in the surrounding fluid while the polymer stress can lead to
unexpected changes in the particle stresslet. The rheology of fiber suspensions
is strongly influenced by the orientations of the fibers. While previous
theoretical studies have suggested that polymer stresses induce fiber alignment
with the vorticity axis of a steady simple shear flow, experiments reveal a
greater diversity of orientations even at low particle concentrations. A search
will be made for stable fixed orientations of fibers in simple shear flow and
the dependence of the orientations on the rheological properties of the fluid.
The rheology of dilute particle-filled polymeric liquids will be determined
using an ensemble averaged equation approach. To facilitate quasi-analytic
results, perturbation analyses based on small polymer concentration will be
performed. In contrast to previous studies that considered second-order fluids,
this approach allows an exploration of the strain rate (or Deborah number)
dependence of the rheology even while considering weak polymeric stresses. Fully
nonlinear computations using a finite volume method in a body-fitted coordinate
system will complement the theoretical studies of fiber orientation in simple
shear flow. A variety of rheological models that include and exclude shear
thinning and finite extensibility will be used to understand the effect that
different polymer rheological properties have on particle-polymer interactions.
To broaden the diversity of future graduate students in the field, the PI and
graduate student on the project will provide on-going mentorship throughout the
undergraduate career of a prospective female or URM student from another
university as well as offering undergraduate research projects on complex
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.