* 1803159
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: RAPID 2017 Hurricane Irma: How do the effects of pulse disturbance vary with abiotic conditions, disturbance history, and proximity to a transition zone.
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2017,10/31/2019
* Merryl Alber, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 10/31/2019
* USD 174,105.00

Storm surge is often considered the greatest threat to life and property
associated with a hurricane. Studies of the ecosystem effects of storm surge
often focus on exposed coastal areas such as beaches. However, the upstream
delivery of salt water can have long-lasting effects and can result in the
decline of valuable freshwater tidal areas, which provide habitat to fish and
wildlife, protect and improve water quality, and store floodwaters. This is
especially important given the fact that these areas are already facing
potential loss due to upstream salt water intrusion as a result of sea level
rise. Hurricane Irma, which passed over the US on Sept. 11, 2017, caused the
highest storm surge ever recorded on the central Georgia coast and resulted in
salt water moving much further upstream than usual. The NSF-sponsored Georgia
Coastal Ecosystems Long Term Ecological Research Project (GCE-LTER) has long-
term experiments and monitoring programs that provide "before" data and a
context for understanding the effects of this event. The investigators
anticipate that the salt water delivered by the storm surge will affect multiple
components of intertidal wetland ecosystems, including plants, animals, water
chemistry, and soil surface elevation. The results of this research will be
shared with coastal managers through the Georgia Coastal Research Council and
the Georgia Coastal Hazards Community of Practice. The LTER researchers will
also host K-12 teachers as part of the GCE Schoolyard Program and work with them
to use this experience in the classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the
effects of disturbances like Hurricane Irma is difficult because they are hard
to manipulate experimentally and can act differently on different parts of the
landscape. The investigators hypothesize that: 1) the effects of the storm surge
will be greater in upstream as opposed to downstream areas, with the greatest
effects and longest recovery times in tidal fresh sites; 2) areas that have had
previous exposure to salt water will show greater effects based on their
history; and 3) changes will be more likely in areas that are at the borders
between different wetland habitats (i.e. the edge between salt marsh and
brackish marsh plants). They will test these hypotheses by 1) augmenting
sampling of the GCE-LTER wetland monitoring sites, which are distributed along
and extend inland from the central Georgia Coast; 2) taking advantage of an
ongoing GCE-LTER field experiment to determine how prior saline disturbance
treatments affect responses to the hurricane storm surge; and 3) collecting
aerial imagery that will allow them to look at landscape level shifts in
vegetation type compared to pre-storm maps, and doing additional sampling in
pre-established transitional plots. The LTER researchers speculate that rare but
severe events like this storm are the major occasions that re-set the
distribution of habitats in these valuable intertidal wetlands.