* 1803482
* Interplay of Mass Transport and Chemical Kinetics in the Electroreduction CO2
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Chao Wang, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2), a way of carbon recycling or
carbon reuse, represents a promising solution for energy and environmental
sustainability. Despite the great potential for storage of renewable energy and
sustainable production of hydrocarbon chemicals and fuels, the electroreduction
of CO2 is challenged by the lack of efficient electrocatalysts. Both the surface
structure of the catalysts and mass transport through the nanostructured
electrodes play important roles in CO2 reduction to higher order carbon
products. This research will develop fundamental understanding of the interplay
between mass transport and chemical kinetics in the electroreduction of CO2 by
integrating experimental and simulation studies. The project will also foster
the growth of the next generation of engineers to address global challenges in
energy and environmental sustainability. This will be achieved by training
graduate students with state-of-the-art experimental and theoretical skills and
developing their independent research philosophy, providing undergraduate and
high-school students with hands-on experiences at the cutting-edge of science
and engineering research, and educating and mentoring K-12 students from diverse
backgrounds to consider careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
fundamental engineering science project will advance the mechanistic
understanding of the mass transport and chemical kinetics in CO2 electrolysis.
This project integrates experimental and computational studies through the
following efforts: i) synthesis and characterization of a model high surface
area catalyst consisting of highly dense copper (Cu) nanowires grown on 2D Cu
mesh; ii) systematic electrocatalytic studies using Cu nanowires prepared under
different reaction conditions and with distinct nanoscale and surface
structures; iii) characterization studies of the surface structures and
properties of the Cu nanowires to understand the structure effect on the
chemical kinetics; and iv) transport modeling that takes into account the
diffusion, migration and reaction consumption of chemical species through the Cu
nanowires to understand the mass transfer effects on the electrocatalytic
performance of high-surface-area electrodes. The expected outcomes of this
project will reduce the knowledge gap by correlating the nanostructures of Cu
electrocatalysts to their catalytic performances. The mass transport modelling
effort emphasizes the importance of understanding both spatial architecture-
dependent mass transport and surface-structure dependent chemical kinetics. The
fundamental understanding to be developed in this research serves as guidelines
for the further development of advanced electrocatalysts toward improved energy
efficiency, power performance and product selectivity of CO2
electrolyzers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.