* 1803758
* Collaborative Research: Electrochemical Production of NH3 Using Proton-Conducting Ceramic Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Steven McIntosh, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 247,208.00

Ammonia synthesis is essential for production of fertilizers used in food
production, along with many other applications. The present method for producing
ammonia, the 100-year-old Haber-Bosch process, is based on natural gas and
consumes 1-2% of total global energy. It is a high-pressure, high-temperature
process that is only economical if used for large-scale production. There would
be significant advantages to producing ammonia directly from renewable forms of
electricity at the location where it is needed. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate that this can be accomplished with high efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will seek to develop an electrochemical
method for production of ammonia from hydrogen and nitrogen using a proton-
conducting, ceramic, solid-oxide electrochemical cell. The central hypothesis is
that atmospheric-pressure, ammonia synthesis can be realized by
electrochemically driving hydrogen onto catalytic surfaces that are normally
limited by high nitride coverage. The project will seek to develop electrode
catalysts that are able to dissociate molecular nitrogen, the rate-limiting step
in conventional Haber-Bosch synthesis, while simultaneously showing low activity
for hydrogen recombination so as to achieve a high hydrogen fugacity at the
electrode surface. The project will take advantage of the infiltration methods
previously developed for electrode synthesis in Solid Oxide Fuel Cells which
allows a wide range of materials to be used for the electrodes. The project will
explore mixed electronic-protonic conductors that can be added to the electrode
to enhance the three-phase boundary where the electrochemical reaction can
occur. The choice of electrocatalysts will be guided by complementary
theoretical studies. Small-scale demonstration cells will be produced. If
successful, the project will have a dramatic impact on the energy demand and
carbon dioxide emissions from ammonia synthesis. The project will support both
graduate and undergraduate students in conducting the research, and the PIs will
develop faculty-led peer mentorship programs that aim to increase retention of
underrepresented undergraduate students in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.