* 1803614
* NSF-BSF: Controlling Phase Selectivity and Electrocatalytic Activity of Transition-Metal Dichalcogenide Overlayers in Core-Shell Nanoparticles for CO2 Reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Ashwin Ramasubramaniam, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 340,884.00

The discovery and optimization of inexpensive catalyst materials is fundamental
to fulfilling the urgent need for clean and sustainable sources of energy. In
particular, conversion of carbon dioxide (CO2) to valuable chemical feedstocks
and fuels, when complemented by renewable sources of energy, offers a promising
route for sustainable management of carbon emissions, but the process is
currently inefficient due to the lack of suitable catalysts. To address this
challenge, this project, funded under the National Science Foundation (NSF) and
US-Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) collaborative opportunity NSF
17-520, will support investigation of a new class of catalysts that enable the
efficient conversion of CO2 to higher-value chemicals and fuels. A team of
researchers from the University of Massachusetts Amherst and Ben Gurion
University will analyze and evaluate catalysts that are engineered from
materials that are abundant in the Earth's crust and inexpensive to process at
large scales. The broader societal impacts of this project include recruitment
and mentoring of underrepresented minority students at UMass Amherst, and
outreach to the communities in Western Massachusetts and Israel. US-Israel
scientific collaboration will be enhanced by graduate student exchanges between
the partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrochemical reduction of CO2
is a promising avenue for closing the carbon cycle but is stymied at present by
the lack of catalysts that are both active and selective at low overpotentials.
This project focuses on earth-abundant electrocatalysts, based on semi-metallic
phases of the molybdenum (Mo) and tungsten (W) family of layered transition-
metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), with the goal of addressing these demanding
catalytic performance requirements. An integrated theory-synthesis-
characterization approach facilitates rational design of transition-metal core-
TMDC shell nanoparticles in which the electrochemically-active, semi-metallic
phases of Mo and W TMDCs are preferentially stabilized over the ground-state,
semiconducting phases. In particular, stabilization of the semi-metallic phases
does not rely on conventional kinetic trapping approaches, being achieved
instead by charge-transfer interactions between the metallic cores and the TMDC
shells, which provides a greater degree of robustness against the undesirable
semimetal-to-semiconductor phase transition. Fundamental advances in the
development of such phase-engineered, core-shell nanoparticles project far-
reaching scientific impact in the fields of two-dimensional materials and
nanoscale catalysis, while also enabling renewable energy technologies. The
research program is integrated with formative research opportunities for
undergraduates from minority-serving institutions thereby nurturing the next
generation of materials scientists and engineers. Presentations to the students
and the broader public in Western Massachusetts and Israel on issues associated
with nanotechnology and its applications in renewable energy further extend the
impact of this research. US-Israel scientific collaboration will be enhanced by
personnel exchanges between partner institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.