* 1803165
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Identifying the roles of atomically dispersed Rh, support interactions, and environmental conditions in automotive NO reduction catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* David Hibbitts, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,435.00

Heterogeneous catalysis plays a vital role in keeping the environment clean. For
example, catalytic converters in automobiles significantly reduce the
environmental impact of the transportation sector by converting exhaust
components to less harmful gases. Dramatic improvements in air quality since the
1970s in locations such as the Los Angeles basin underscore the enormous impact
of heterogeneous catalysis on everyday life. Critical to the development of more
efficient catalytic processes and the design of new catalytic materials is
understanding the relationship between a catalyst's atomic structure and its
function. It is expected that insights obtained during this research project
will provide necessary information to guide the design of more effective
catalysts, thereby enabling improvements in the performance and efficiency of
catalytic converters. To promote unique educational opportunities provided by
this research project, graduate students from the University of California-Santa
Barbara and the University of Florida will visit Ford Motor Company's Research
and Innovation Center in Dearborn, MI for three months each summer to continue
research as visiting scholars. Undergraduate students will be involved in the
research project and will learn from the topic through in-class modules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-way catalysts are the workhorse components of
catalytic converters that achieve simultaneous oxidation and reduction of
pollutants to less harmful species. Typical metals at the active sites of three-
way catalysts are Platinum (Pt), Palladium (Pd) and Rhodium (Rh). While Pt and
Pd typically promote oxidation reactions, Rh plays a crucial role in commercial
catalysts because of its ability to reduce nitrous oxide (NO) to dinitrogen
(N2). Despite its commercial importance, the mechanism of NO reduction on Rh
active sites has remained largely elusive under relevant automotive working
conditions. In this project, academic researchers will interface with an
industrial partner to gain crucial mechanistic insights into the role of
atomically dispersed Rh species in commercial three-way catalysts. Rigorous
comparisons of the performance and mechanism of NO reduction chemistry under
realistic conditions on atomically dispersed Rh and Rh clusters, as a function
of environmental conditions and support composition, will be made. The research
approach will combine kinetic studies, in-situ infrared and X-ray absorption
spectroscopy, and density functional theory calculations. Results of this study
will help guide the design of three-way catalysts and catalytic converter
control systems for improved performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.