* 1803874
* NSF-BSF: Creating and Studying Plasma Structures for Extreme Optics
* MPS,PHY
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Jonathan Wurtele, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 378,567.00

The goal of this effort is to develop methods to compress and manipulate laser
pulses to reach unprecedented intensities. Such new capability will enable
access to new regimes of high-energy density science, including studies of
materials under extreme conditions that exist in stars and planetary interiors.
The constraints on laser intensity arise because conventional optical components
are damaged or destroyed when exposed to high intensity lasers. This research
will investigate how these limits can be overcome when conventional optical
elements are replaced with plasma structures. At a fundamental level, the
project investigates the control of nonlinear systems with large numbers of
interacting components as a theme that runs through many branches of physics and
is one of the greatest challenges in modern science. This research is also
expected to have a significant impact on optical science by allowing for new
regimes of optical manipulation of intense laser pulses and may lead to new
ideas for inertial fusion and plasma-based ion accelerators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike conventional structures, where an electric field
triggers changes in structure behavior, plasma can be sculpted using light
manipulation techniques to create novel, robust, optical elements on nanosecond
timescales. Within this broad area of inquiry, the research supported by this
award will focus on generating Bragg reflectors by manipulating ion acoustic
waves. Theoretical research will examine structure dynamics and their utility
for intense pulse compression. Such structures may be stationary or moving. The
United States-Israel Binational Science Foundation will support closely coupled
collaborative experimental and theoretical research on the autoresonant
excitation of large amplitude ion acoustic waves that serve as the backbone of
the proposed structures. Ideas that have been theoretically studied and
experimentally tested on a small scale at the Hebrew University laboratory may
be investigated on a larger experimental set-up at Lawrence Livermore National
Laboratory. This wave excitation study will involve state-of-the art research on
the control of nonlinear collective systems within the context of both multi-
dimensional and multi-wave effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.