* 1803022
* Developing second-generation hyper-producers of butanol from biomass by activating dormant pathways
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Thaddeus Ezeji, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2023
* USD 318,903.00

Renewable production of fuels and chemicals is growing. One strategy involves
producing fuels and chemicals using microbes. Unfortunately, these chemicals
often exert toxic effects on microorganisms at high concentrations. Butanol is
one example of this. It has excellent properties as a transportation fuel. At
high concentrations, it poisons the microbes that produce it. The central goal
of the project is to enhance the ability of butanol-producing bacteria to
withstand high concentrations of butanol. Undergraduate and graduate students
will receive hands-on research training and mentorship. International outreach
will focus on delivering a course on biofuels production in Nigeria. These
experiences should prepare the students for successful careers in a global
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major challenge for bioconversion of
lignocellulosic biomass hydrolysates (LBH) stems from the toxicity posed by
microbial inhibitory compounds (MICs) generated during metabolic processing of
LBH. The long-term objective is to develop a rational approach for engineering
inhibitory compound tolerance in Clostridium beijerinckii. A two-pronged
strategy will be pursued. Interdependent utilization of two different waste
products, glycerol and LBH, for improved solvent generation in the presence of
MICs will be characterized. Also, DNA repair competence of C. beijerinckii will
be increased. We hypothesize that cellular reductants [NAD(P)H] needed for
detoxification of MICs and for butanol synthesis can be generated by activating
a dormant pentose phosphate pathway coupled with glycerol utilization. This
proposal seeks to repurpose existing pathways in C. beijerinckii to overcome
metabolic hurdles. By combining metabolic engineering and reverse genetics, the
project aims to uncover new determinants for butanol production by C.
beijerinckii, and generate a broader framework for better microbial conversion
of renewable feedstock to fuels and chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.