* 1803657
* A novel predictive dual scale model to accurately and efficiently simulate phase interfaces in turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Marcus Herrmann, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 312,076.00

Turbulent flows with phase interfaces occur in almost every aspect of our daily
lives, ranging from energy systems using liquid fuels to pharmaceutical sprays.
Many of these flows involve atomizing a liquid into small-scale drops forming a
spray. The performance of the overall system depends strongly on the quality of
this spray. For example, in aircraft or internal combustion engines improvements
in the quality of the spray can result in efficiency gains and reduction in
pollutant production. In medical sprays, precisely controlling the spray drop
sizes of aerosols can significantly improve the delivery of pharmaceuticals into
the lung. Unfortunately, no efficient model derived from first principle
currently exists that can predict and simulate the complex process of spray
formation in turbulent flows. Thus an incremental design improvement philosophy
is prevalent in many applications because experiments of radically new designs
are very costly and numerical simulations lack a predictive model for turbulent
atomization processes and thus require tuning with existing experimental data.
The goal of this project is to develop an efficient predictive model to simulate
atomization processes in turbulent flows. Such a model has the potential to
initiate a bold new design philosophy that targets radically new designs because
the cost of pre-selection feasibility studies using the new model would be
significantly lower than experimental studies. The project also incorporates
significant educational activities, including involvement of undergraduate
researchers and outreach targeting local Title-One schools through on-campus
activities and off-campus classroom visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new model
is based on the idea of a dual scale approach, circumventing the limitations of
classical modeling approaches for turbulent flows that rely on the existence of
a cascade process from large to small scales. Such a cascade is likely not
dominant for atomizing phase interfaces since surface tension forces that are
dominant on the small scale can both generate and annihilate small scale
interface structures. The proposed dual scale approach takes this into account
by employing a multi-scale decomposition that combines features of direct
numerical simulations resolving the small scales with large eddy simulation for
the larger scales in an efficient way. This approach inherently incorporates the
interaction and competition between different forces and atomization mechanisms
acting on multiple length and time scales and enables the explicit closure of
terms requiring modeling on the larger scales by applying explicit filters to
the resolved scale phase interface geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.