* 1803912
* Probing the Structure of Exotic and Conventional Hadrons
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Richard Lebed, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2024
* USD 504,807.00

Quantum Chromodynamics (QCD)is the microscopic theory of the strong interactions
based on the theory of quarks and gluons that allows us to understand how
hadrons (baryons, including the protons and neutrons that make up an atomic
nucleus, and mesons and their excitations) are formed. For over a half century,
the only known hadrons fit into the categories of either 3-quark compounds
(baryons) or quark-antiquark compounds (mesons). Since 2003, almost 3 dozen new
"exotic" hadrons, fitting into the categories of 4-quark tetraquarks and 5-quark
pentaquarks, have been discovered. That said, fundamental questions like the
reason for the multiplicity and spacing between masses of these new particles,
as well as the question of how the quarks inside them arrange themselves, are
still unresolved. The goal of this project is to develop a physical paradigm
(pioneered by the PI and his collaborators) called the dynamical diquark picture
into a fully predictive model that will be used to compute the physical
properties of exotic hadrons. This model will be developed with the
participation of a graduate student mentored by the PI.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary project research is the development of a predictive model
to describe the heavy-quark exotic hadrons that have been (and continue to be)
discovered in the charmonium and bottomonium sectors. Even fundamental issues
about exotics like their basic structure are not yet settled. Recently, the PI
and his collaborators developed the "dynamical" diquark picture -- in which
combinations of two quark (or antiquark) combinations called diquarks rapidly
separate from each other, but are still bound by QCD color confinement -- as a
possible structure for tetraquark states. The development of a full model
implementing this picture forms the PI's principle research in this project. The
model will be developed using an effective field theory based upon the Born-
Oppenheimer (B-O) approximation, partly in collaboration with senior researchers
at other academic institutions. Parameters for the potential energy functions
needed in the B-O approximation can be gleaned from the results of lattice
numerical simulations. Working out all the implications of this model will form
the Ph.D. project for a student mentored by the PI. The masses, decay modes, and
internal structure of exotics predicted by the model will then be compared
directly to experiment. Numerous yet-unseen states are likely to be
predicted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.