* 1803983
* Study of Thermal Transport in Single Oligomer and Polymer Chains
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Edgar Meyhofer, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 329,839.00

The principal goal of this research project is to experimentally study how heat
is transported through single molecular chains. In contrast to bulk materials,
researchers have only been able to make theoretical calculations regarding the
flow heat through individual molecules, which include the surprising prediction
that the resistance to heat flow is independent of the length of the molecule.
Direct experimental measurements of the heat flow in single molecules have
remained impossible due to the lack of appropriate instrumentation techniques to
stably hold or confine single molecules and record the minute heat currents with
sufficient resolution. In this proposal recent, groundbreaking experimental
advances in picowatt-resolution calorimetry, high-resolution temperature
measurements and experimental platforms will be used to tackle these challenging
measurements with a systematic, experimental approach. In addition to the
technical work, the proposal also incorporates extensive outreach activities to
engage undergraduate and graduate students as well as underrepresented
minorities in neighboring communities in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal
transport in single molecules and polymer chains, excellent approximations of
one-dimensional systems, is of great current interest. Theoretical and
computational studies, starting with Fermi, Pasta and Ulam in the 1950s, suggest
that Fourier?s law is generally not valid for one-dimensional chains and imply
the existence of a length-dependent, divergent thermal conductivity. To test
these predictions detailed experimental measurements on single one-dimensional
chains are essential to answer the following questions: What is the thermal
conductance of single polymer molecules, how does it depend on the chain length
and does the thermal conductivity diverge for all 1-dimensional systems? Can the
thermal conductivity of single polymer molecules be modulated by changing the
side groups? Can an exponential decrease in thermal conductance with increasing
chain length be realized in custom-designed, disordered polymer
chains?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.