* 1803946
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--2000 Years of Variability in the Southern Annular Mode from Tree Rings and Ice
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2019,01/31/2023
* Kevin Anchukaitis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 01/31/2023
* USD 149,929.00

This project aims to use new data from King Billy pine trees (Athrotaxis
selaginella) located on subalpine ridges in southern Tasmania, Australia, in
combination with two high-resolution East Antarctic ice cores, to reconstruct
the behavior of the Southern Annular Mode (SAM) over the last 2,000 years. This
is important because the SAM influences not only Southern Hemisphere climate but
also carbon and heat uptake and Antarctic ice melt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SAM
is the leading mode of climate variability in the middle to high latitudes of
the Southern Hemisphere, where it affects the strength and position of the
westerly winds and, therefore, precipitation and temperature anomalies across
oceans and continents. The SAM controls the strength and position of the
Southern Hemisphere westerlies, and therefore links large-scale climate
anomalies across multiple continents and oceans. These subpolar winds also
modulate the uptake of heat and carbon by the Southern Ocean and affect the
cryosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While investigations of Northern Hemisphere
climate dynamics have benefitted from a robust network of annually resolved
climate proxies, the Southern Hemisphere has far more limited paleoclimate data
during the Common Era, particularly in the Indian Ocean sector, the most climate
data-sparse region globally. The recently discovered sub-fossil wood from King
Billy pine trees provides a new opportunity for generating multi-millennial
reconstructions of regional temperature and sea level pressure - key indicators
of the SAM at mid-latitudes. This network of tree sites builds on and
complements another emerging network of high-resolution climate records from
east Antarctic ice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new environmental reconstruction,
centered on the Indian Ocean sector of the Southern Hemisphere, will help
address significant uncertainties in existing SAM reconstructions from the
Pacific sector and allow an assessment of the role of internal dynamics and
natural forcing of Southern Hemisphere climate prior to human modifications of
the atmosphere. Further, new data and reconstructions help make possible
identification and quantification of uncertainty related to proxy type,
location, and seasonality, and the influence of these on inferences about the
timing and emergence of trends in the SAM. New environmental and climatological
reconstructions also help explore what drives variability in this dynamical
feature. These new reconstructions may extend existing reconstructions of SAM
from the Antarctic Peninsula by at least 1,000 years. Greater understanding of
the long-term variability of SAM and its links to Indian Ocean and ENSO
dynamics, as well as to external forcing mechanisms (e.g ozone depletion,
greenhouse gases) using data-model comparison techniques is possible.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project strengthens international collaborations
between American and Australian scientists as well as across paleoclimate
disciplines (tree rings and ice cores).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.