* 1803294
* Collaborative Research: Kinetic-based self-transitioning turbulence modeling for pulsatile flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Yiannis Andreopoulos, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 159,068.00

Pulsatile flows are omnipresent in nature and engineering systems. Understanding
turbulence in pulsatile flows is critically important to both knowledge
advancement and technological innovation. However, challenges have remained due
to the lack of appropriate turbulence computational models that solve the
inherent unsteadiness with successive transitions from laminar to turbulent, and
then back to laminar flow during pulsation. The prevailing flow criteria of
either laminar, or transitional, or turbulent flow developed from stationary
pipe flows are not appropriate for pulsatile flows; the existing turbulence
models based on Kolmogorov theory for fully-developed turbulence are not
suitable, either. With the support of laboratory experiment, this project is to
establish a new self-transitioning turbulence modeling method for time-wise
pulsatile flows. An important impact of this research will be on the precision
medicine of image-based patient-specific noninvasive diagnose and assessment of
cardiovascular diseases. The project will provide various opportunities for
multidisciplinary training for graduate/undergraduate students, as well as for
curriculum development at both Indiana University-Purdue University,
Indianapolis and City College of New York. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to develop and validate a new kinetic-based self-transitional
turbulence model for solving the laminar-turbulent-laminar transition in
pulsatile flows, in which the need of modeling for small scale motion is
automatically activated/deactivated when the spatial or temporal resolution is
insufficient/sufficient to resolve the entire range of scales when flow is
accelerating/decelerating in a pulsation. Explicit filtering is applied to
resolved-scale solutions in transitional flows to adapt the sub-grid scale model
to dynamic temporal and spatial resolution requirements. The sub-grid scale
model is embedded in the kinetic-based lattice Boltzmann method to achieve
disruptively fast computation speed through massive parallelization on graphic
processing units. In-depth understanding of turbulence in pulsatile flows under
various influences of inertia and viscous effects, pulsating frequency,
geometric curvature and bifurcations will be explored through concurrent
numerical simulation and laboratory experiment. General criteria of laminar,
transitional, and turbulent behaviors in unsteady pulsatile flows will be
unveiled, which are critically important to software-based computational fluid
dynamics for pulsatile flows where, conventionally, laminar or turbulent flow
must be predefined before the simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.