* 1803058
* Engineering the Ionic Polymer Phase-Fluid Interface of the PEM Fuel Cell Catalyst Layer for Higher Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Trung Nguyen, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2023
* USD 308,454.00

A hydrogen-oxygen proton exchange membrane fuel cell (PEMFC) is a device that
converts chemical energy of hydrogen reacting with oxygen into electrical power.
One of the primary barriers to full-scale commercialization of PEMFCs for
transport propulsion and distributed power applications is the inability to
operate at high power density and high energy efficiency. Low power density
keeps the system cost high, and low energy efficiency makes its operational cost
high. High power density operations are currently limited because water produced
in the oxygen catalyst layer wets and fills the gas pores of polymer binder in
the catalyst layer of the cathode. This blocks the transport of oxygen to the
catalyst reaction sites. This work will determine what controls the surface
wettability of this ionic polymer binder phase, and based on this understanding,
will modify the surface of this ionic polymer binder to be either hydrophilic or
hydrophobic. In the case of the PEMFC application, a hydrophobic surface is
preferred because it helps repel the by-product water from the pores of the
catalyst layer and allow oxygen gas better access to the active sites in the
catalyst layer to generate more power. If this work is successful, it will lead
to large-scale commercialization of fuel cell vehicles. Moreover, discoveries in
membrane/fluid interfacial property could benefit other areas such as water
treatment, chemical separations, and large-scale energy storage applications,
thus strengthening our scientific knowledge and technological advancement and
leadership in the world and economic and national security. Finally, this work
will generate the human resources needed to develop and commercialize these new
technologies and sustain the scientific and technological
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this fundamental engineering science project,
a novel process is researched to create a fuel cell catalyst layer that is
optimal for two-phase (incoming gaseous oxygen reactant and outgoing liquid
water product) transport. The process is based on recent discoveries with
perfluorosulfonic acid (PFSA) polymers, which have shown that the surface
morphology of PFSA polymers changes when varying the relative humidity (RH) of
the gas in contact with the polymer. Most recently, the PI's group developed a
new heat treatment process for PFSA membranes to create a permanent hydrophobic
or hydrophilic surface structure. Therefore, it is hypothesized that by
controlling the heat treatment conditions of the ionic polymer binder within the
fuel cell catalyst layer one can engineer the polymer-gas interface inside the
gas pores of the catalyst layer to be either hydrophobic or hydrophilic. Heat
treating the catalyst layer such that the ionic sulfonate groups accumulate at
the polymer-gas interface (under high RH in the cathode gas pores) will result
in a hydrophilic polymer-gas interface. Whereas, heat treating to create a
polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)-rich polymer-gas interface (under low RH) will
lead to a hydrophobic polymer-gas interface. Subsequent cooling of the cathode
catalyst layer will then crystallize the polymer's PTFE phase and lock-in the
surface morphology. A hydrophilic ionic polymer-fluid interface is preferred for
electrodes with liquid reactants, such as the PEM electrolyzer. A hydrophobic
polymer-fluid interface is preferred for electrodes with gaseous reactants, such
as the hydrogen-air PEMFC. Electrodes with hydrophobic catalyst layer, relevant
to PEM fuel cells, will be fabricated, and using the PI's layer-by-layer removal
method, the polymer layer morphology of their inner porous structures will be
characterized by the SEM, XPS, neutron reflectometry (NR), and surface-enhanced
Raman scattering (SERS). These electrodes will be tested in a PEMFC to determine
the catalyst layer and electrode-membrane-assembly fabrication process
conditions that will lead to the highest power density and energy efficiency
performance. The effect of the solvent type used in the catalyst ink on the
crystallinity of the modified polymer structure will be investigated, and the
long-term durability of the polymer interfacial property will be evaluated using
the water boiling and high temperature humidity cycling tests. Finally, a model
of the cathode catalyst layer of a PEMFC will be developed to study the effect
of the hydrophobic ionic polymer-gas interface on two-phase fluid transport in
the catalyst layer gas pores, oxygen transport through the polymer layer, and
fuel cell performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.