* 1803200
* INFEWS: U.S. - CHINA: Solar-driven Carbon Dioxide Utilization for Environmental Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Feng Jiao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus, from a global perspective, can be described
as interconnected resource systems of food, energy, and water. As the world's
population expands to the expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be a need to
balance different resources across these three systems to obtain different user
goals without putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide these
resources. Both food and water sectors rely heavily on the availability of
inexpensive energy. As a consequence, carbon dioxide emissions resulting from
water treatment and transport, agricultural practices, and food processing,
storage, packaging, and transportation represent an entry point to relieve some
of the stresses of interrelated food, energy, and water systems. In
collaboration with researchers at Tianjin University in China, the Jiao research
laboratory will design an electorlysis system that uses a copper catalyst to
convert carbon dioxide and water to carbon-based fuels. This device, once scaled
up, could potentially reduce greenhouse gas emissions through the use of the
carbon-neutral solar electricity. Such a system could lower the environmental
impact of the fossil-fuel industry and reduce the need for water and land-
intensive alternatives such as biofuel crops, and thus, increase the nation's
energy, food, and water security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Food-Energy-Water
(FEW) Nexus is the compilation of the nitrogen, carbon, phosphorous, and water
cycles interacting in equilibrium. Due to optimization of individual components
of FEW systems in isolation, these cycles are quickly being pushed beyond the
limit of their natural equilibria. One remedy to this challenge is to bring the
four major cycles back into equilibrium by developing novel, renewable energy
powered and efficient technologies. Through close collaboration with the Chinese
research partners at Tianjin University, the Jiao research group at the
University of Delaware will design a solar-driven catalysis system capable of
producing liquid carbon fuels from CO2 and H2O. The key objectives of the
proposed work are to: (1) rationally design and synthesize catalysts for
electrochemical CO2 reduction with a high selectivity for liquid C2/C3 products;
(2) develop and evaluate an integrated PV/CO2 electrolysis reactor prototype;
(3) perform techno-economic analysis to identify the key technical gaps for
implementation; and (4) conduct life-cycle analysis to determine the reduction
in CO2 emissions and environmental impacts. Starting with a computationally-
driven Cu-catalyst design, the US and Chinese researchers will synthesize and
analyze nanostructured CO2 catalysts for a solar-powered electrolyzer device. To
test multiple designs, the Chinese researchers will 3D print different
electrochemical cells for performance screening to optimize the design for CO2
reduction. The Jiao laboratory, using modeling methods, will evaluate these
different prototypes for optimal performance to reduce the number of design
iterations. The proposed research has the potential to be transformative and
impact many fronts. Specifically, the research will develop a computation-driven
approach to enable and accelerate the rational design of advanced
electrocatalysts for CO2 conversion and beyond; (2) create a new strategy of
reaction and process design to overcome the fundamental challenges associated
with electrochemical CO2 conversion, which could be extended to other important
chemical processes, such as dinitrogen reduction to ammonia and methane partial
oxidation reaction; (3) generate insights into design and engineering solar-
powered CO2 electrolysis processes at the device and system level; (4) provide
the research community with reliable models to assess the potential economic and
environmental impacts of CO2 electrolysis technology. This collaboration will
lead to new knowledge that will help both the US and China greatly reduce their
greenhouse gas emissions, thereby providing an effective tool to close the
carbon cycle and relieve a major stress on the FEW Nexus. Further, the ties
fostered via this collaborative effort between the US and the Chinese teams will
enhance the understanding of researchers of the other country?s
academic/research environment and lead to shared future
endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.