* 1803314
* The Impedance-Transduced BioResistor (ITBR): A Biosensor Architecture for Rapid, Sensitive, Label-Free Quantitation of Proteins.
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Gregory Weiss, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2021
* USD 330,000.00

The goal of this project is to electrically detect the binding of protein
molecules to virus particles as a means for detecting these proteins at very low
concentrations, down to one picomolar. This detection process involves a new
biosensor architecture called the Impedance-Transduced BioResistor consisting of
an electrically conductive and very thin plastic film in which are embedded
virus particles. These virus particles are responsible for recognizing and
binding to the proteins the authors are detecting. The electrical resistance of
this virus-plastic film is then monitored using two metal electrodes, and the
resistance increases when the protein of interest is detected. The goals for
this project are to improve the performance of the Impedance-Transduced
BioResistor, to broaden the range of molecules that can be detected, and to
discover the detailed mechanism and principle of sensor operation. It is also
proposed to design a multi-channel sensor that provides the capability to
simultaneously and rapidly measure ten different proteins. In coordination with
this research program, the investigators will operate a summer outreach program,
called NEXTech 2018: Nano Electrochemistry eXtensions to Technology for high
school students focusing on electrochemistry and applications to nanoscience.
Laboratory experiments that demonstrate key principles will also be carried out
by these students under the supervision of the graduate students funded by this
grant. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; How can one design electrical interfaces that
enable communication between nanoscopic biological structures and an electrical
circuit? In this proposal, the authors seek to electrically detect the binding
of protein molecules to virus particles as a means for detecting these proteins
at concentrations down to 1 pM. This is accomplished using an extremely simple
sensor architecture called the Impedance-Transduced BioResistor that consists of
a conductive PEDOT (or poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) film that contains a
high volume density of M13 virus particles engineered to recognize and bind a
particular target protein. As one example, the Impedance-Transduced BioResistor
detect the protein human serum albumin (66 kDa) at a concentration of 10 nM and
at higher concentrations up to 800 nM. The response time of these sensors is in
the 5 second range. A major advantage of this sensor design compared with field-
effect transistor-based protein sensors - is that its performance is not
degraded by the presence of salt in the solution, even at high concentrations of
1M. Even in this case, large amplitude, high precision electrical responses to
the presence of these protein molecules are measured. &lt;br/&gt; The goals for
this project are to further improve the performance of the Impedance-Transduced
BioResistor, to broaden the range of molecules that can be detected, and to
discover the detailed mechanism and principle of sensor operation. It is also
proposed to design multi-channel versions of the sensor that provide the
capability of measuring ten different proteins in parallel, at the same time. A
deeper understanding of the mechanism by which the Impedance-Transduced
BioResistor operates will be sought. This component of the research will involve
testing a series of hypotheses that isolate several candidate
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt; In coordination with this research program, the authors
will operate a summer outreach program, called NEXTech 2018: Nano
Electrochemistry eXtensions to Technology for high school students focusing on
electrochemistry and applications to nanoscience. Laboratory experiments that
demonstrate key principles will also be carried out by these students under the
supervision of the graduate students funded by this
grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.