* 1803677
* Collaborative Research: SusChEM: Engineering the thermotolerant yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus for the synthesis of biobased chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Nancy Da Silva, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 375,391.00

This project seeks to develop the yeast Kluyveromyces marxianus as a platform
microorganism for industrial biomanufacturing. A critical area of the US
industrial biotechnology sector is the conversion of biomass and other renewable
feedstocks to high value and commodity chemicals. K. marxianus can grow at high
temperature in high acidity, and on a wide range of different sugars. These are
important traits for economic bioprocesses. The project will develop new genetic
engineering tools for this yeast and apply these tools to engineer the bio-
production of two important classes of chemicals that are traditionally produced
from petroleum feedstocks. The project will also contribute to the training of
graduate and undergraduate students, as well as the development of new
educational outreach programs for high school and community college students
from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal is to establish
K. marxianus as a platform host for the production of a broad range of biobased
chemicals. Critical to advancing K. marxianus is the development of new
synthetic biology tools that can rapidly create strains with multiple genome
edits and that can accurately control transcription of native and heterologous
genes. This project addresses these challenges by (1) developing new enabling
tools and methods for rapid strain development and genome engineering in this
yeast species, and (2) applying the tools for metabolic engineering of pathways
leading to commercially significant native (acetate esters) and non-native
(polyketide) products. Phenylethyl and isoamyl acetate are valuable
fragrance/flavor compounds and are used as industrial solvents. Polyketides have
significant value as pharmaceuticals, including as antibiotic, anticancer, and
cholesterol-lowering drugs. The rationale behind this project is that K.
marxianus is a highly promising microbial host for non-aseptic (and aseptic)
bioprocesses that can convert a range of different sugars into high-value and
industrially-relevant chemicals and proteins. This research is transformational
because it develops new synthetic biology tools and metabolic engineering
approaches to harness and enhance the native traits of K. marxianus, enabling
new bioprocesses for the conversion of renewable feedstocks to valuable
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.