* 1803255
* GOALI: Collaborative Research: Electrochemical CO2 Separation and Capture through Design of  Carbonate-Selective Catalysts and Ionomers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Michael Hickner, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 275,000.00

The project will explore electrochemical reactor technology capable of capturing
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from power plants. Through a research
collaboration between the University of South Carolina, the Pennsylvania State
University, and Proton OnSite - a Connecticut small business that is a
specialist at bringing electrochemical technologies to market - the project will
combine elements of reactor design, catalysis, and separations to make critical
scientific and engineering advances required for commercialization of CO2
capture at the industrial scale. The project will also provide opportunities for
young researchers - including both high school and college students - to learn
about electrochemistry, polymer science and applications of CO2 in academic,
industrial and global contexts. The combined research and educational aspects of
the study will help secure our Nation's future as a leader in clean energy
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to advance anion-exchange
membrane (AEM) based CO2 separation reactors through: 1) realization of advanced
catalysts that improve the rate of CO2 reaction and separation; 2) design of
membranes that can control the chemical pathways in the cell; 3) high-
performance cell design - aided by computer modeling; and 4) construction of
commercial-fidelity reactors for testing under realistic environments. The
research combines engineered materials, catalysts, and membranes to control the
chemical state of CO2 as it is transported through the AEM. This is important
because the reaction kinetics dictate the operating voltage and a combination of
mass transport and thermodynamics act to control the power requirements through
the anionic balance in the AEM - with hydroxide, bicarbonate and carbonate
anions all being present. Bicarbonate anions are the preferred species for CO2
separation. On the catalyst side, the surface chemistry of transition metal
oxide catalysts will be investigated to uncover the reaction mechanisms for
direct electrocatalytic (bi)carbonate formation. On the polymer side, new
alkaline ionomers will be synthesized to control the effective base dissociation
constant (pKb) of the polymer at levels needed to maintain the
electrocatalytically derived bicarbonate anion in its native form during
transport through the reactor. The project will also simulate the behavior of
such a CO2 separation reactor as an integrated component of a 500 MW coal-fired
power plant, and will assess its current and future economic feasibility. Thus,
the intellectual drivers of this work will encompass both the physical science
of materials and electrochemical systems, as well as engineering design and
economic considerations. Beyond the immediate thrusts, the research will have
relevance in the materials, catalysis, and electrochemical communities as well
as broader areas of carbon capture and economics of fossil energy
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.