* 1803833
* Liquid Jet Atomization at Supercritical Pressure
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* William Sirignano, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

New technologies such as advanced gas-turbine engines and other advanced engines
involve injection of liquids at higher pressures, which can reach levels that
are hundreds of times greater than atmospheric pressure. There is a demand for
new predictive capabilities to describe the sizes, shapes, and locations of
small droplets breaking from the surface during the liquid-stream breakup
(atomization) process. This project seeks an explanation of the physical
mechanisms and to control of the breakup process and of the resulting spray.
Graduate and undergraduate students will conduct the project. Topical
development will allow strengthening of various graduate courses in the topic of
fluid dynamics and a future third edition of a textbook. Through existing UCI
minority support programs, the Principal Investigator and his graduate students
can support project work and give public talks on topics of interest.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to provide a satisfactory
computational analysis of the liquid stream breakup at a supercritical pressure
and to determine the important mixing length scales with real-gas equations of
state and phase-equilibrium laws. The amount of gases dissolving into the liquid
and the new, substantially higher critical pressure will be determined,
establishing when two distinct phases exist. Both liquids and gases will be
compressible and have variable density at high pressures. The analysis will give
predictions of relevant characteristic time and scales (e.g., diffusion times,
frequencies, most unstable wavelengths, and growth rates). The sensible
enthalpy, as a function of pressure and temperature; transport properties;
surface tension; and energies of vaporization will be determined. Three-
dimensional Navier-Stokes solutions, with interface tracking through volume-of-
fluid or level-set methods, followed by ?2 vorticity-dynamics analysis will
explain the sequence of smaller structures that appear in the breakup cascade.
This approach will describe and explain the behavior whether the jet breakup is
in a two-phase or supercritical gaseous state; in either case, the smaller
structures appear. Atomization, at the Reynolds and Weber numbers of practical
interest, will be analyzed and properly viewed as transitional
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.