* 1803917
* Transforming Noble Metal Nanostructure Synthesis Using Unconventional Synthetic Levers
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Svetlana Neretina, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 07/31/2021
* USD 299,869.00

Non-Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Underpinning the electronics industry is a
wafer-based processing science that is able to form intricate patterns of
dissimilar materials with well-defined properties and interfaces that
collectively perform a useful function. One of the biggest challenges is the
establishment of a corresponding processing science that integrates these wafer-
based technologies with the extraordinary optical, electronic, and chemical
properties derived from metallic nanoparticles. Device prototyping has, however,
been stifled by an inability to define complex metal nanostructures in organized
patterns where interactions are possible between adjacent structures and with
the underlying wafer material. The project being carried out aims to overcome
this impediment by redefining the methodologies, instrumentation, and processing
science needed to define wafer-based metal nanostructures, and in doing so,
provide the capabilities inaccessible through conventional methods. The research
activities are being integrated with undergraduate education that involves the
supervision of research internships geared toward the advancement of laboratory
instrumentation by students from the College of Engineering. Outreach activities
place emphasis on the matriculation of women into the engineering
profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The research
being carried out aims to provide an understanding of the altered chemistry that
arises when well-understood seed-mediated noble metal nanostructure growth modes
are subjected to four unconventional synthetic levers that become accessible
when seeds are immobilized on a rigid crystalline substrate. It is founded on a
synthetic strategy that is able to realize periodic arrays of complex noble
metal nanostructures through a three stage synthetic scheme that uses (i) a
lithography-defined shadow mask to fabricate nanostructured precursors at site-
specific locations, (ii) directed assembly to transform them into single crystal
templates, and (iii) solution-based chemistry to further transform them into
complex nanostructures. Within the scope of this strategy lies the opportunity
to incorporate a new set of synthetic levers into nanostructure synthesis that
fundamentally alter well-established growth modes. The project is advancing the
use and understanding of four such synthetic levers: (i) a flow of reactants
past an anchored substrate, (ii) synthetically-active substrate materials, (iii)
substrate-imposed epitaxy, and (iv) lithographically-imposed barriers to growth.
Graduate students are being trained in nanostructure synthesis and
characterization, lithographic techniques, and the preparation nanostructured
surfaces. This work is, hence, contributing to the grander vision that sees the
extraordinary physicochemical properties of nanomaterials united with the wafer-
based materials, processing techniques, and electronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.