* 1803428
* GOALI: Manufacturing USA: Elastomeric Microparticle-Packed Bed Reactor for Continuous Metal-Mediated Pseudo-Homogeneous Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jan Genzer, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,000.00

A team of researchers from North Carolina State University and Eastman Chemical
Company will design and fabricate catalytic microparticles for applications in
energy-efficient synthesis of fine chemicals, natural products, and
pharmaceuticals using environmentally friendly solvents. The microparticles will
act as polymer microreactors with an embedded metal catalyst center. A highly
flexible elastomeric microparticle-packed bed reactor will be designed that can
simultaneously exhibit the benefits of both homogeneous and heterogeneous
catalysis. The research efforts will focus on uncovering design principles that
will facilitate the development of highly efficient modular microreaction
vessels with high synthetic flexibility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The efficiency of
metal-mediated chemical transformations depends critically on the chemical
structure of the reacting species and the reaction environment. The proposed
catalytic system is based on crosslinking poly(hydromethyl siloxane)s with
functionalized dienes and embedding palladium (Pd) catalysts in such spherical
elastomeric scaffolds. A novel catalytic reactor system will be developed that
is modular and highly tunable. These attributes are achieved by varying the
chemistry of the crosslinker, degree of crosslinking, type, loading, and
accessibility of the Pd catalyst, and chemical microenvironment surrounding the
Pd catalyst. The elastomeric microparticles will be loaded with Pd nanocatalysts
and provide a controlled reaction environment. The Pd catalyst will be ligand-
free and thus very reactive; it resides firmly inside a very flexible
elastomeric microparticle, which makes the Pd catalyst center mobile locally
while simultaneously protecting the microreaction vessel from the outside
environment. Chemical adjustability in conjunction with mechanical and
structural flexibility, deformability, and swellability in various solvents are
key attributes that can make the proposed catalytic system efficient, robust,
and scalable for the continuous organic synthesis of fine chemicals and
pharmaceuticals. In addition to the scientific and technological impact of the
proposed research, the project will be used to train one graduate and two
undergraduate students. The research team plans to pursue outreach activities
through the Science House program at North Carolina State University aimed at
attracting local K-12 students to pursue careers in STEM fields. There is also a
plan to recruit women and members of underrepresented groups in STEM fields to
participate in the proposed research and outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.