* 1803786
* Dynamics and equilibria of weak in-cell interactions
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Martin Gruebele, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2022
* USD 771,108.00

In order to survive, cells must transmit signals, such as "attack this virus!"
or build tiny structures, such as the spliceosome, a microscopic particle that
cuts and splices the genetic code to get it ready to make proteins. All this
involves proteins and nucleic acids folding and assembling inside the cell. In
the past, this has been measured primarily in test tubes, but it really happens
inside cells. This project will look inside single cells to measure accurately
just how much folding and binding differ between cell and test tube. In addition
to showing us how these molecular-level events happen in real life inside human
cells, the project will train several PhD students and a postdoctoral fellow in
modern techniques of molecular biophysics. It also supports training of
undergraduate researchers to gain hands-on research skills long before the PhD
stage. Lab members will participate in diversity-in-science outreach and
meetings, to help the research enterprise reflect the diversity of US
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research goals, focusing on protein
and RNA interactions inside living cells and organisms, will be achieved by
combining new perturbation microscopy techniques (where temperature, osmotic
pressure, and solvent conditions around cells are suddenly jumped) with large
scale atomistic simulations of the interior of the cell (using supercomputers
capable of simulating millions of atoms over hundreds of microseconds). The key
systems to be investigated all revolve around biomolecule-biomolecule assembly
(binding) and signaling. Assembly of tubulin protein dimers (part of the cell's
skeleton) will be imaged inside cells, using a special tubulin variant that does
not disrupt other tubulin activity in healthy cells. Assembly of viral capsids
from hundreds of capsid proteins will be studied inside live cells. How does
this assembly reaction manage to move backward when a virus infects, but forward
when it is replicated and ready to leave the cell? Assembly of the U1A
spliceosomal particle, which cuts pre-messenger RNA to make mRNA, will be
monitored in its complex cycle both inside and outside of the nucleus. Assembly
of heat shock chaperones with their clients and auxiliary factors to save
proteins from misfolding will be compared in-cell and in the test tube. Folding
of a two-domain protein inside a living vertebrate organism will be imaged for
the first time. How do different tissues promote protein folding differently?
Microsecond reaction-diffusion experiments in the whole cell at once will enable
comparison with whole-cell models, as well as with molecular dynamics
simulations of parts of the cytoplasm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.