* 1803423
* The 2018 NAACL Student Research Workshop
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2020
* Samuel Bowman, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 03/31/2020
* USD 15,000.00

The Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) is the primary international
organization for computational linguistics and natural language processing,
which in turn is one of the primary application areas for research in machine
learning and artificial intelligence. The annual meeting of the North American
chapter of the ACL (NAACL) is one of the most prestigious and selective
international conferences in these fields. The proceedings of this meeting is
among the most cited publications in computational linguistics, and the meeting
itself is the most important meeting for North American researchers in the field
on years when it is held. This project will subsidize travel, conference and
housing expenses of students selected to participate in the NAACL Student
Research Workshop, which will take place during the main NAACL conference June
1?6, 2018 in New Orleans, LA. The Student Research Workshop helps create a new
generation of researchers with a more thorough understanding of their field,
with connections and collaborations across institutions, and with innovative and
exciting research programs. This contributes to America's pool of researchers
with the needed scientific and engineering knowledge and skills. The workshop
encourages a spirit of collaborative research and builds a supportive
environment for a new generation of computational linguists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Student Research Workshop solicits two categories of
submissions: research papers and research proposals. The research proposal can
have only one author who must be a student. The research papers can have
multiple authors, with the first author being a student (at either the graduate
or undergraduate level). The workshop is a venue for students to receive
constructive critical feedback on their work from experts outside of their
institution, and to connect with other students and senior researchers in their
field. The students gain exposure by presenting their work earlier than they
would otherwise (i.e., in a form not yet ready for the main conference). This is
particularly valuable for students from smaller institutions and undergraduate
students. In addition, the workshop is organized and run by students. The
student organizers gain valuable opportunities for professional growth and
interaction with the researchers on the organizing committee of the main
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.