* 1803690
* J-aggregate nanotube integrated hydrogel sheets for sensing the release of dopamine from cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Jiyu Fang, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 07/31/2022
* USD 341,521.00

Dopamine is an important neurotransmitter that is responsible for transmitting
signals between the neurons of the brain. The fluctuation of dopamine
concentration can cause several neurological disorders including Parkinson's
disease. Several analytical methods have been developed for the detection of
dopamine. However, they are often time consuming, involve multistep reactions,
and require expensive equipment. To date, there is a demand for the development
of low-cost and user-friendly sensors for the detection of dopamine. The
objective of the project is to develop a simple, rapid, and easy-to-use sensor
platform for the detection of dopamine released from neurons under the
stimulation of releasing agents. The sensor platform will use an optical probe
composed of a nanotube structure known as "J-aggregate nanotube" integrated in
polymer hydrogel sheets. The high sensitivity of the sensor platform for the
detection of dopamine is a result of the highly efficient photoinduced electron
transfer of J-aggregate nanotube probes. The project will provide research
opportunities for training graduate and undergraduate students including the
students from underrepresented groups in the interdisciplinary field of
engineering, physical sciences and biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photoinduced
electron transfer is commonly used in designing optical probes for biosensor
applications. The proposed research will focus on the synthesis of J-aggregate
nanotubes with efficient photoinduced electron transfer characters and the
integration of them into polymer hydrogel sheets to fabricate a simple and
robust sensor platform for in situ detecting the release of dopamine from
neurons stimulated by amyloid beta peptides. The approaches for achieving the
goals of the proposed research includes the use of the co-assembly of bile acids
and cyanine dyes with systemically varied chemical structures to form
J-aggregate nanotubes, the characterization of the polarization behavior and the
delocalized excitation length of J-aggregate nanotubes, the fabrication of
J-aggregate nanotube integrated hydrogel sheets through the thermal-induced
gelation of agarose solution with the nanotubes, the measurement of the
sensitivity and selectivity of the sensor platform for the detection of dopamine
in aqueous solution in the presence of interference species, and the in situ
detection of the release of dopamine from neurons under the stimulation of
amyloid beta peptides. The proposed research will aid the fundamental
understanding of the formation mechanism and physical properties of J-aggregate
nanotubes from the co-assembly of cyanine dyes and bile acids, which will open
an opportunity to synthesize highly sensitive J-aggregate nanotube probes. The
proposed sensor platform synergizing the features of both J-aggregate nanotubes
and agarose hydrogels can be used to in situ detect the release of dopamine from
neurons. The understanding of the release kinetics of dopamine from neurons
stimulated by different releasing agents will provide the basis for the design
of releasing agents and improve therapies for Parkinson?s
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.