* 1803812
* Highly Selective, Active, and Stable Metal Nanoparticle Catalysts with Ultra-Thin Porous Ceramic Shells for Size-Selective Chemical Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Jee-Ching Wang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2022
* USD 348,049.00

Size-selective catalysts with metal cores and porous shell structures can
increase reaction selectivity through molecular discrimination of reactants. The
selectivity of a catalyst can be improved by tuning the pore size of the porous
films. However, selectivity is generally improved at the expense of catalytic
reactivity. The proposed project is aimed at developing methods for preparing
nanostructured size-selective catalysts that exhibit both high selectivity and
activity. The proposed strategy for size-selective catalyst preparation can be
applied to a great variety of supported metal catalysts and may also find
applications in other fields, including sensors, fuel cells, batteries, and
supercapacitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this project
are: (a) to develop a novel nanostructured size-selective catalyst with a
nanoscale (less than 5 nm thick) porous ceramic overlayer capped on every metal
nanoparticle surface and (b) to gain a fundamental understanding of the
structure-activity-selectivity relationships of the catalysts. A unique
molecular layer deposition (MLD) technique will be utilized to synthesize the
highly porous overlayers with precise thickness control and well-defined porous
structures. The sizes of pores can be controlled by altering MLD chemistry,
oxide types, and formation methods of porous structures. There is a plan to
introduce results from this project into the Chemical Engineering curriculum at
Missouri S&amp;T and develop a new course: "Nanotechnology in Catalysis".
Graduate and undergraduate students will be recruited to participate in this
research project with special emphasis on recruiting underrepresented minorities
through a collaboration with Lincoln University of Missouri - an 1890
Historically Black College &amp; University. An annual " Nanomaterials Show"
will be developed and used to stimulate interest of general audiences and K-12
students in the field chemical engineering and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.