* 1803765
* The Rheology of Complex Suspensions In Viscoelastic Suspending Fluids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Eric Stefan Shaqfeh, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Particles suspended in fluids are omnipresent in all aspects of human life,
including playing key roles in industrial processing and manufacturing as well
as within the body itself. Many of the fluids in which these particles are
suspended are elastic - meaning the fluids have a memory in time that is not
short compared to the time scales associated with the flow. For example, the
tail-like hairs on cells, known as cilia, that line human airways beat in mucus
to sweep it from the lungs. Mucus is an elastic fluid, and the elasticity of the
mucus directly affects the ability of cilia to move mucus out of the airway. In
another context, many common composite plastic parts are molded in the liquid
state and, thus, are elastic fluids that flow and contain rigid particle
additives. Further, drilling muds and fracking fluids, used by the oil industry,
are typically guar gum solutions containing proppants or drilled "shavings" and,
again, involve suspensions in elastic fluids. While the science of suspensions
in small molecule or "Newtonian" fluids (like water or most oils) has a long,
well-developed history, the science of particle suspensions in viscoelastic
fluids is in its infancy. Without fundamental understanding of the function of
these elastic fluids, suspensions are frequently created on a trial-and-error
basis for a given application. Accordingly, the goal of the project is to
develop computational tools that enable the simulation of the complex physics
associated with the collective effects of particles in viscoelastic fluids.
These tools will enable one to engineer the fluid properties of a suspension
directly and has vast implications for the economical and safe use of
viscoelastic fluids in industrial applications. The research will be integrated
into high school curriculum by engaging a K-12 teacher each year in a hands-on
summer research program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the
project is to examine the rheology of a series of increasingly complex
particulate suspensions in viscoelastic fluids that are of direct importance to
the energy industry, advanced manufacturing, and medical/biofluids applications.
The rheology, or macroscopic stress-strain relationship, is the key feature in
understanding the function of these materials since it governs their macroscopic
flow under applied or internal forces. Employing large-scale, parallel
computing, the first objective of the project is to examine spherical particles
in viscoelastic shear and extensional flows associated with molding applications
as well as drilling muds or proppants in oil applications. The rheology will be
measured at increased particle loading and then simulated in the appropriate
flow - with the macroscopic relationships determined from the correct ensemble-
averaging of the microscopic picture. This 3-D coupling of the particle motions
to the elastic fluid and resulting stress field (particle-induced fluid stress)
is critical to the engineering application of the fluids. The second objective
of the project is to use the same approach to study orientable particles (rigid
spheroids of varying aspect ratio) and deformable particles. For the latter, a
new computational tool using an Immersed Finite Element solution of flexible
particulate solids in elastic fluids with unstructured grids has been developed.
The third objective examines "active matter" suspensions, including undulating
and amoeboid suspensions such as nematode worms, sperm, and bacterial swimming.
The latter objective will, for the first time, shed light on how elasticity in
the suspending fluid affects the collective motion of "active suspensions" with
realistic particle-level resolution of the swimming. Thus, the goal of
foundational understanding of the physical principles governing these
applications, and even the biology of these evolved elastic fluid suspensions,
will be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.