* 1803878
* Interfacial directed assembly and attachment of interconnected nanoparticle networks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

Nanoparticles are particles with diameters roughly one thousandth the width of a
human hair. This award supports research to investigate how nanoparticles
assemble and attach at the surface of a fluid. The process is not unlike how
some fine powders can form a layer that floats on top of the surface of
quiescent water. Nanoparticle building blocks with programmable size, shape, and
composition have become available thanks to recent advances in chemistry.
Connecting these building blocks to each other to form "sheets" can give rise to
new classes of materials and devices with emergent properties that have
intrigued scientists and engineers alike. Unfortunately, assembly instructions
are not yet available. This project will close this knowledge gap with a
combination of experiments and computer models. This synergistic approach will
unveil key details of the mechanism by which the building blocks self-assemble
and attach. Hence, the results will lead to strategies to design new building
blocks that assemble into desirable patterns with minimal defects. This project
will produce new knowledge of scientific and societal importance and may lead to
the development of new nanostructured materials. Graduate students will receive
extensive training in advanced experimental and modeling approaches, and
research opportunities will be provided for undergraduates. Interactive learning
modules for local K-12 programs will also be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
combination of self-assembly and directed attachment of colloidal nanoparticles
at fluid interfaces presents scientifically interesting and technologically
important research challenges. Remarkable strides have been made in the
synthesis of polyhedral nanoparticle building blocks with precisely defined
shapes and their self-assembly into highly ordered superstructures. Recent
advances have revealed intriguing synergies between interfacial self-assembly
and directed epitaxial attachment into ordered and connected superstructures.
Access to superstructures with programmable symmetry opens new opportunities to
create materials with properties by design. The main goal of this work is to
attain a better understanding of the basic kinetic and thermodynamic factors
governing the interplay of self-assembly and directed-attachment. The
investigators hypothesize that the key to predicting and creating coupled
assemblies with programmable structures lies in understanding and controlling
the nanoparticle orientation at the fluid interface as well as the interactions
among particles. The nanoparticle orientation at the liquid-liquid interface and
subsequent directed attachment is a complex function of the interfacial
energies, the nature of multi-particle interactions and the coupled dynamics of
interfacial nanoparticle diffusion, ligand displacement from the nanoparticle
surface and epitaxial fusion of adjacent nanoparticles through mutually exposed
facets. The mechanism describing how the nanoparticle assembly transforms into
an epitaxially connected superstructure presents an interesting unresolved
scientific question, and competing hypotheses will be tested via a combination
of experiments and simulations. In fact, this provides both a challenge and an
opportunity to closely integrate in-situ X-ray structure analysis with multi-
scale modeling. The proposal presents a hypothesis-driven collaborative approach
with two objectives that aim to understand: (1) how specific nanoparticle
superlattice polymorphs assemble at fluid interfaces and (2) how directed
attachment can transform the assembled superlattice into an epitaxially
connected quasi-2D solid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.