* 1803593
* Collaborative Research: Reevaluating Pre-denitrification BNR for Low Molecular Weight Dissolved Organic Nitrogen and its Impact on Phytoplankton Bloom Dynamics in Coastal Waters
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Chul Park, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Coastal waters are contaminated by nutrient-rich run-off that stimulates the
dense growth of aquatic plants known as algal blooms. In some cases, algal
blooms cause oxygen depletion, fish death, and food web changes that threaten
the sustainability of these waters. Significant reductions in the nutrient-rich
run-off from urban areas has been achieved by advanced or upgraded wastewater
treatment plants (WWTPs) that can effectively remove these contaminants.
However, despite past successes, many coastal systems still have excessive algal
blooms. The investigators hypothesized that the cause of continued growth of
algal blooms are engineering nutrient treatment processes that lead to the
production of different forms of these nutrients that continue to stimulate
their growth. To examine this hypothesis, this research will investigate the
potential linkage of advanced WWTP discharge and algal bloom formation in
coastal waters, with the goal of developing new and more effective nutrient
reduction strategies. This research is significant because it could potentially
provide an explanation for persistent oxygen depletion in coastal waters even
after significant decreases in nutrient inputs from WWTP discharge. If
successful, this research could help develop new strategies for WWTPs to
mitigate nutrient effects in impaired coastal ecosystems to better protect the
Nation's water security.

The objectives of this research are: 1) to evaluate pre-denitrification
biological nutrient removal (BNR) processes, the most common way to reduce
inorganic nitrogen (N) discharge from WWTPs, for the formation of low molecular
weight dissolved organic N (LMW-DON); and 2) to better understand the impact of
BNR processes on suspended algal (phytoplankton) production and composition in
coastal waters. The hypotheses are that: 1) the pre-denitrification BNR
processes are prone to produce significantly larger amounts of LMW-DON than
conventional activated sludge systems; 2) LMW-DON leads to unexpectedly larger
phytoplankton biomass yield compared to inorganic N; and 3) LMW-DON selectively
affects phytoplankton community composition, favoring harmful bloom taxa. To
test these hypotheses, this research proposes four specific aims: 1) document
LMW-DON in WWTP effluents; 2) investigate the production of LMW-DON in pre-
denitrification BNR; 3) investigate phytoplankton community responses to
effluents laden with different level of LMW-DON; and 4) investigate the effect
of cation-enhanced bioflocculation on effluent LMW-DON. This collaborative
research combines expertise in Environmental Engineering with Environmental
Biology and Ecology. This research will employ in situ and laboratory-based
bioassays on Neuse River estuary (NC) and Long Island Sound (NY-CT) water to
investigate the qualitative and quantitative effects of N in effluents on
phytoplankton production and community structure. This research will also
explore the addition of cations in wastewater systems as a potential solution
for minimizing production of effluent LMW-DON. This interdisciplinary
collaborative research will have far-reaching impacts for the understanding of
the role of WWTP-driven LMW-DON in both eutrophication and structuring of
phytoplankton communities in coastal waters. Furthermore, the project will shed
light on mechanisms coupling specific N inputs to coastal eutrophication and
harmful bloom dynamics. The results of this research can transform how N is
managed to mitigate eutrophication in coastal waters.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.