* 1803246
* Efficient and Modular Methane Upgrading to Liquid Aromatics by Coupling Dehydroaromatization with Reactive Hydrogen Separation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/14/2018,07/31/2023
* Raul Lobo, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed research project aims to develop an efficient process for
converting methane to liquid aromatic compounds. Efficient conversion of methane
to liquid hydrocarbons, such as aromatics, has been a long-standing problem in
the petroleum industry with renewed interest due to recent advances in shale gas
technologies and the abundance of natural gas feedstocks. The proposed direct
conversion of methane to aromatics via catalytic dehydroaromatization (DHA) is
compatible with modular manufacturing technologies that can take advantage of
distributed feedstocks. However, the conversion of methane and the yield of
aromatic compounds via DHA are severely thermodynamically limited. The PI
proposes to combine DHA with a chemical loop capable of reactively separating
hydrogen from hydrocarbons to circumvent this thermodynamic limitation and
substantially increase the aromatics yield.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The low
conversion of methane in DHA cannot be solely addressed by the development of
better catalysts that improve selectivity to aromatics, due to the inherent
thermodynamic limitations that lower the overall conversion. By pairing with a
redox chemical loop, reactive separation of hydrogen (a product from DHA) can be
achieved, which alleviates the thermodynamic limitation. The project will
combine DHA with a chemical loop in four steps: 1) DHA of methane, 2) selective
oxidation of hydrogen from the DHA effluent, 3) water removal, and 4)
regeneration of hydrogen. The removal and regeneration of hydrogen will occur in
separate reactors. The feasibility of each step in the proposed cycle will be
demonstrated first and both the operating conditions and materials will be
optimized to maximize the efficiency of each step. A laboratory-scale semi-
automated setup will be constructed to evaluate the yield of aromatics with the
proposed strategy in multiple cycles. Solid redox pairs with a core-shell
structure will be designed, synthesized and evaluated for the selective hydrogen
oxidation in aromatics-containing feeds. In addition to training graduate
students, the project includes integration of research results into the chemical
engineering curriculum and outreach activities aimed at educating the general
public on climate change, sustainability and recent advances in renewable energy
technologies. A mobile device based software platform will be developed to
connect with targeted student groups, provide educational resources and promote
research-related career options, with special emphasis on attracting and
retaining students from underrepresented groups in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.