* 1803995
* P2C2: Spatiotemporal Variability in Western United States Snowpack During the Common Era
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kevin Anchukaitis, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 397,055.00

Annual snowpack and snow meltwater supplies have deteriorated across the western
United States since 1950. While climate projections indicate these trends will
continue throughout the 21st century, short instrumental snow records prevent an
assessment of whether these recent declines fall outside the natural range of
long-term snowpack variability or if they are exceptional relative to prior
centuries. A lack of long snow observations also makes it difficult to identify
and characterize decadal-scale and longer-term climatic drivers of annual snow
accumulation, changes in those drivers over time and space, and the magnitude of
internal variability in the snow system. Yet information at these timescales are
most important for effective climate change adaptation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
address these critical knowledge gaps, this project will develop gridded spatial
field reconstructions of snow water equivalent spanning the western United
States that explicitly capture the period of negative snow trend within model
calibrations using tree rings. The researchers aim to test the ability of
climate models to simulate the range of forced and internal snow hydroclimate
variability in western United States over the last
millennium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include the
generation of long Snow Water Equivalent (SWE) tree ring chronologies to test
different hypotheses of environmental forcing on the pre-industrial timescales
and their comparison with last millennium climate model output; the testing of a
possible anthropogenic fingerprint on changes in SWE over the last thirty years
relative to pre-Industrial forcing and the possible implications for water
resource management in the future; and support of an early-career scientist who
has helped pioneer the tree-ring SWE discipline. The project also supports an
undergraduate student, a post-doctoral research scientist, and outreach to water
resource managers in Western North America.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.