* 1803757
* Molecular Motions in Flowing Semi-dilute Polymer Solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Charles Sing, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2022
* USD 290,765.00

Polymers are large, chain-like molecules that are the building blocks of both
industrially-relevant products (i.e. plastics, coatings, and fibers) and state-
of-the-art advanced materials for devices such as flexible photovoltaics and
displays. For many of these applications, the polymer must be processed with an
eye towards its final properties; for example, in order to create strong fibers,
a "drawing" process is used to align polymer chains. Similarly, coating flows
can control molecular packing (and thus charge transport) in semiconducting
polymers. For both situations, polymers are manipulated in a liquid solution by
applying strong flows. However, it remains challenging to understand how exactly
flow influences molecular motions. This challenge arises because long polymer
chains interpenetrate, so that any given molecule interacts with many others
both directly and via solvent flows. The proposed research will use new
computational algorithms to understand the connection between polymer motions,
molecular-level fluid dynamics, and applied flows. This understanding will serve
as the foundation for molecular control in polymer solution processing, by
showing how concentration and strong flows can be used to tune molecular
structure and correspondingly material properties. This project will also serve
to train the next generation of scientists, through the interdisciplinary
training and mentorship of students. In addition, this project will involve the
development of outreach events that incorporate interactive
experimental/computer simulation into hands-on activities designed to promote
the participation of underrepresented students in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer solutions are typically processed in the
?semi-dilute? regime, where individual coils overlap significantly. Semidilute
solutions are characterized by significant solvent-mediated hydrodynamic
interactions (HI) and topological ?hooking?. Current theory is capable of
capturing equilibrium properties (relaxation time, molecular structure) but has
not been extended to flowing solutions. A new conformational-averaging procedure
is capable of efficiently simulating large systems, enabling exploration of how
HI and chain topology affect highly out-of-equilibrium polymer conformations in
flow. This proposal will address two aims: (i) Understand how concentration and
hydrodynamic interactions affect chain dynamics in flowing semi-dilute polymer
solutions and (ii) capture how non-linear polymer architectures and shear flows
lead to molecular ?hooking?. The first aim will characterize the distortion of
hydrodynamic screening by strong flows and extend equilibrium scaling concepts
to out-of-equilibrium systems. The second aim will use topological invariants to
characterize hooking interactions, and how they affect the distributions of
molecular conformations. The proposed work will thus provide insight important
for flow-controlled solution processing of polymers, ranging from flow coating
to inkjet or 3D printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.