* 1803437
* A Novel Platform for the Tunable Production of Proteoglycans
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Matthew Kipper, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2023
* USD 450,000.00

On the surface of most all mammalian cells are proteins that have amino and
sugar groups (glycosaminoglycan; GAGs) attached as side chains. These proteins,
known as proteoglycans, are important to human health. How the structure of
these proteins influences their function is still poorly understood. We will
develop a tobacco cell that can be tuned to produced different GAGs so the
relationships between chain length, GAG composition, and core protein on
function can be understood more clearly. The ability to control the production
of GAGs with defined structure will enhanced their potential use in therapeutic
applications. Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained, and students
from underrepresented groups will be actively recruited to perform research in
the labs. Students will gain expertise that will better prepare them for
productive participation in the expanding biomanufacturing
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this project is to
demonstrate the production of the core proteoglycan structure in tobacco without
sulfation or other modifications. To accomplish this, we will need to expand the
molecular tool box for plant synthetic biology, enabling additional control over
protein expression. The long-term goal is to develop a proteoglycan production
platform in N. benthamiana that will enable us to produce proteoglycans with
defined GAGs, chain length, composition and core proteins. This modular approach
to proteoglycan production will enable future discoveries into the structure-
function relationship of proteoglycans in a variety of biological contexts.
Which in turn will allow for the development of a new class of functional
biological macromolecules, fostering a revolution in the field of glycomics.
This novel technology will enable researchers to explore the enormous, untapped
potential of GAGs and proteoglycans for the development of new biological and
medical technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.