* 1803662
* The Role of Hydrodynamics in the Behavior of Active Matter
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* John Brady, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 335,000.00

A distinguishing feature of many living organisms is their ability to move, to
self-propel, to be active. Constituents of "active matter" systems are capable
of independent self-propulsion by converting fuel into mechanical motion.
Examples of active matter include both microscopic entities like microorganisms
and motor proteins within our cells and large bodies like fishes and birds.
Inanimate, nonliving bodies can also achieve self-propulsion using mechanisms
that are different than living organisms. The outcome of the collective behavior
of these nonliving active systems is not necessarily different from living
active systems. Indeed, active matter systems of all scales have the tendency to
associate together and move collectively, from colonies of bacteria, swarms of
insects, flocks of birds, schools of fish, to herds of cattle. The question
addressed in this research is the micromechanical, hydrodynamic, origin for
living (and nonliving) organisms to exhibit collective and coherent motion and
how it can be explained and modeled using simple physical principles. Such
insight will enable the prediction, design, and control of active soft matter
systems and their exploitation in nature and in
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intrinsic activity imparts new behaviors to
active matter that distinguish it from equilibrium condensed matter systems.
Active matter systems generate their own internal stress, which drives them far
from equilibrium and thus frees them from conventional thermodynamic
constraints, and by so doing can control and direct their own behavior and that
of their surrounding environment. Active matter is always at least a two-
component system - the active body and the embedding medium off of which the
active body self-propels. In this research fluid-mediated hydrodynamic
interactions among self-propelled bodies are incorporated for the first time.
Hydrodynamics significantly affect the forces active particles exert on
boundaries or other objects and can profoundly affect the phase separation in
active systems by modifying the mechanical "swim pressure." The swim pressure
provides a pressure-concentration relation for active matter that can
quantitatively predict condensation and phase separation in active systems and
provides a route for determining the amount of work that can be harvested from
the often random motion of active systems. We also show that, in general, the
swim stress has off-diagonal or deviatoric contributions, especially when an
active system is subject to shearing motion. The swim stress predicts that,
under very general conditions, active particles can reduce the suspension
effective viscosity to zero, enabling spontaneous flow of active matter. The
mechanical swim stress perspective allows one to understand, analyze and exploit
a wide class of active soft matter systems, from swimming bacteria to catalytic
nanobots to molecular motors that activate the cellular
cytoskeleton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.