* 1803527
* Modeling and Optimization of Sustainable and ResilienT FEW (MOST FEW) Networks
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Oleg Prokopyev, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2023
* USD 305,764.00

Food, energy and water (FEW) systems are inextricably linked with high degrees
of interdependence and interconnectedness. The overall goal of this project is
to develop a systems-level modeling and optimization framework to understand the
sustainability, resilience, and structure of the FEW nexus with a focus on the
U.S. national food system. The project is targeted to provide an understanding
of the resilience of the U.S. domestic food flow network in conjunction with
embodied water and energy flows, leading in turn to insight into the ecology,
behavior, sustainability, and resilience of the FEW
nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three main research
objectives. The first objective examines the U.S. national food system with an
emphasis on inter-state food trade. Specifically, the project will model the
embodied water and energy associated with traded food by combining, integrating,
and reconciling publically available data sets on domestic food production,
trade, and life cycle environmental impacts. The second objective will focus on
developing and applying existing and novel network theory based techniques and
metrics to understand the overall topology, sustainable, and resilience of the
U.S. FEW networks. The third objective will develop and apply optimization-based
approaches for sustainable and resilient design of FEW systems. Specifically, it
will permit the integration of information from network science and optimization
techniques for identifying and evaluating interventions for enhancing the
sustainability and resilience of the FEW nexus. By combining data on domestic
food trade, embodied water and energy flows with network theory and
optimization-based tools and techniques, the project seeks to discover novel
sustainability and resilience insights, and opportunities for the highly
integrated FEW systems. Interdependencies, interconnectedness, and vulnerable
points of the FEW nexus will be identified, which will support planning for the
sustainable management of these integrated systems. The research aims to result
in two significant contributions towards understanding and supporting the
sustainability and resilience of the FEW nexus. First, an understanding of the
structure of the FEW nexus is to be developed, describing its
interconnectedness, interdependencies, and vulnerable points. Second, rigorous
optimization-based approaches for optimizing the structure of the domestic food
trade network will be developed, with a view towards enhancing its
sustainability and resilience. The research aims to play a pivotal role in
satisfying the need for understanding sustainability and resilience of the FEW
nexus via integration of network theory techniques with rigorous optimization-
based approaches and life cycle oriented methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.