* 1803044
* RAPID:  Impacts of Hurricane Maria on tropical forest biogeochemistry: short-term response and long-term trajectory
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Whendee Silver, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Blood
* 12/31/2018
* USD 150,000.00

This research will study the immediate effects of Hurricane Maria on the
dynamics of organic carbon and nutrients in a tropical forest and the streams
draining that forest to better determine how short-term impacts affect the long-
term trajectory of forest and water resources following single and repeated
disturbances. Hurricane Maria led to widespread canopy damage and litter
deposition on the soil surface and in stream channels within the Luquillo
Experimental Forest (LEF) in Puerto Rico. Understanding how organic carbon,
phosphorus, and nitrogen within plant detritus are modified during their
movement through soils and into streams, including any exchanges with the
atmosphere, is critical to determining long-term ecosystem response to
disturbance. The research conducted as part of this project will provide
insights into the resilience and resistance of the LEF ecosystem, part of the El
Yunque National Forest in the US National Forest System. The PI team will work
closely with scientists and students in Puerto Rico and facilitate local student
and faculty research needs. The investigators will build the project results
into a portfolio of presentations and outreach activities centered on the
impacts of climate variability on terrestrial ecosystems. The project will
promote diversity in science by supporting Puerto Rican students as laboratory
personnel, providing training to other Hispanic students and post-doctoral
scientists, and promoting gender equity in science through outreach and
mentoring activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research makes use of a pre-
existing hurricane simulation experiment allowing the researchers to test
hypotheses about the effects of single and repeated hurricane disturbance on
ecosystem processes, including biogeochemical translocations of carbon and
nutrients through soil profiles and microbial activities in response to
substrate availability and moisture conditions. The research team will quantify
the amount of litter deposited on the soil, measure soil carbon and phosphorus
fractions, nitrogen mineralization, iron species, aluminum, and pH in soil
profiles, soil lysimeters, and stream water. Microbial activity will be assessed
while also targeting gene expression related to macromolecular carbohydrate
degradation and nitrogen and phosphorus cycling. Transcript data sequenced via
Illumina HiSeq will be mapped to assembled scaffolds from pre-existing
metagenomes and provide a means of assessing changes in gene expression. The
research will provide the first comprehensive experiment of hurricane effects
that characterizes the pre- and post-environmental conditions and biogeochemical
cycling with soil depth, and across single and repeated disturbances. This group
will also be the first to employ novel analyses of microbial activity,
transcriptomics, and link this directly with biogeochemical indices in the
context of disturbance and recovery.