* 1803781
* Collaborative Research: Bioengineering thymus organoids towards generation of humanized mice models
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2018,11/30/2022
* Ipsita Banerjee, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 11/30/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Humanized mice (aka, mice with absent or limited immune responses that are
transplanted with human immune cells, tissues and stem cells, etc.) are widely
used as preclinical models to develop and evaluate novel therapies without
putting the patients at risk. Over the past two decades, substantial progress
has been made in developing humanized mouse models for modeling various human
diseases (e.g., infectious diseases and cancer). Despite all of these successes,
replicating human immune responses in humanized mouse models proves to be
challenging. A major hurdle is the mouse host's lack of a human thymus gland --
the tissue that is responsible for the generation of T cells, which play such a
key role in the human immune system. Human T cells developed in the mouse thymus
are defective in engaging other human immune cells and fail to mount proper
immune responses. The goal of this research project is to use human pluripotent
stem cells (stem cells that can develop into numerous cell types) to generate an
artificial thymus that can be used as a substitute to reconstruct the human
immune system in humanized mice. Two key technologies will be developed and
optimized: 1) novel biomaterial intervention methods to generate thymic cells
from human pluripotent stem cells; and 2) innovative bioengineering processes to
construct a functional artificial thymus. Successful replication of human immune
responses in humanized mice with artificial thymus transplants will have
tremendous scientific and translational impacts, including: 1) as a powerful
tool to evaluate and optimize the effectiveness of immunotherapy; 2) to further
understand disease cause; and 3) to develop novel immune interventions that are
ready for clinical translation. This cross-disciplinary project will provide an
excellent opportunity for minority women and individuals from underrepresented
groups to participate in research and educational activities. The project is a
culmination of diverse engineering techniques, encompassing biomaterials, stem
cells and immune engineering. Hence, it will provide the participants with well-
rounded training opportunities. Collaborative educational and outreach efforts
include a joint summer internship program for underrepresented minority
undergraduate students and development of course modules in Immune-engineering
and Stem Cell Bioengineering that will be incorporated into online educational
resources for K-12 students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to generate a humanized mouse model by implanting bioengineered human
thymus organoids in CD34+ hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) engrafted NOD-
scid.Il2rgnull (NSG) mice in order to promote human T cell development and
adaptive immune responses. Preliminary studies have demonstrated the feasibility
of establishing normal immune function in athymic mice by reconstructing a
decellularized thymus with primary murine thymic epithelial cells (TECs). This
project will take the next step by generating human thymus organoids from human
pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) and then using these organoids to produce a
humanized mouse model. The Research Plan is organized under three aims. The
first aim is to generate functional thymus organoids with hPSC-derived TECs. The
hPSCs will be differentiated into TECs while encapsulated in alginate cultures.
The derived hPSC-TEPCs will then be used to reconstruct decellularized thymus
scaffolds. The functionality of thymus organoid constructs will be characterized
in-vitro (to determine gene markers of mature TECS and early T-Cell development)
and in-vivo (under the kidney capsules of nude mice). Ex vivo studies will be
performed to test the functional efficiency of thymus organoid generated from
hPSC-TEPCs to support ex-vivo T cell development. The second aim is to engineer
compartmental organization of TECs (cortical (cTECS) and medullary (mTECS)
regions) within the bioengineered thymus organoids. The hESC-TEPCs will be
segregated into cTEC and mTEC spheroids that will be used to reconstruct the
thymus organoid with the goal of reestablishing both cell-cell contact and
compartmental organization. The 3D cellular organization, with reestablished
cell-cell and cell-ECM communication, is expected to enhance long-term survival
and function of the TECs within the thymic scaffold and to improve the selection
and differentiation of subpopulations of T-cells. The third aim is to generate
humanized mouse models with bioengineered thymus organoids. Humanized mice will
be generated by transplanting cord blood CD34+ HSCs into myelosupressive agent
preconditioned NSG mice, which are subsequently transplanted with thymus
organoids bioengineered from hESC-derived TEPCs. Development of multiple
hematopoietic lineages, especially the development of CD4+ and CD8+ T cells,
will be characterized and the function of the cells will be examined. The models
will be followed for 24 weeks post reconstruction. Successful development of a
long lasting, functional human immune system in a mouse model will be
advantageous for studying human immune responses and for developing proper
therapeutics for cancer, infectious diseases, and autoimmune
disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.