* 1803496
* New Strategies for Electrochemical Water Desalination Using Bi as a Cl-Storage Electrode
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Kyoung-Shin Choi, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 328,516.00

Population growth has increased demand for freshwater to critical levels.
Desalination of seawater has the potential to address this issue. However,
current technology does not have the efficiency needed for sustainable
operation. The goal of this project is to develop two types of novel
electrochemical desalination cells for highly efficient desalination of brackish
and seawater. The novel desalination technology manages energy, water, and
dissolved salts different from existing desalination methods. If successful,
this technology has the potential to provide efficient desalination to
sustainably meet the increasing demands for freshwater in the
Nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will use bismuth (Bi) as a
new chloride (Cl)-storage electrode in two novel desalination strategies. The
first strategy is to create a membrane-free desalination battery by combining Bi
as a Cl-storage electrode with a sodium (Na)-storage electrode. This battery can
store and release salt ions while simultaneously storing and releasing energy,
thus minimizing the net energy requirement for desalination. The second strategy
is to construct an electrodialysis (ED) cell composed of Bi and BiOCl
electrodes. Compared to conventional ED cells, the operating voltage of the
Bi/BiOCl ED cell can be markedly lowered because the forward Bi chlorination and
reverse BiOCl dechlorination redox reactions are used as the electrode
reactions. The operation of the proposed desalination cells is based on
electrochemical redox reactions involving simultaneous electron and ion
transfer, ion storage, and phase transformations. This is a highly novel
approach compared to conventional desalination methods. The proposed research
will establish atomic level mechanistic understanding of kinetics, cyclability,
and capacity of Cl-storage/release on the Bi and BiOCl electrodes. This
knowledge is essential to enhance desalination efficiency with a minimum energy
input. If successful, the electrochemical desalination processes can be easily
integrated with various other electrochemical processes, including
electrochemical water disinfection and electrochemical production of fuels and
other chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.