* 1803066
* Tailoring Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with  Structure-Selective Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Robert Weisman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 07/31/2022
* USD 499,805.00

Professor Robert B. Weisman of William Marsh Rice University is supported by the
Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program of the Division of
Chemistry to develop new methods to control and manipulate the optical and
chemical properties of single-wall carbon nanotubes using laser light sources of
specific wavelengths. Carbon nanotubes are an exciting class of nanomaterials
that are technologically important for their unique physical and chemical
properties and their many potential real-world applications, including uses in
energy, health care, and the environment. Current carbon nanotube preparation
methods result in mixtures with many structural forms and properties. Separation
and sorting of these mixed components are often needed to obtain samples
suitable for specific applications. The project selectively alters the surface
chemistry of targeted nanotube species to allow them to be physically separated
with greater ease and scalability than is currently possible. The aim is to
generate samples with tailored optical properties and compositions, enabling
advanced and deeper understanding of carbon nanotube reactions, interactions
with light, and potential practical applications. In addition to training
students in the advanced spectroscopy and analytical chemistry of nanomaterials,
high school teachers and a professional visual artist are involved in the
project. The teachers are hosted in the laboratory to conduct summer research,
thereby gaining knowledge and perspective to enrich their teaching. The artist
is incorporating fluorescent carbon nanotubes into his artwork to engage and
educate the public about nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project,
optical transitions at short-wave infrared wavelengths are used as a tool to
control the composition of single-wall carbon nanotube mixtures. Samples
containing nanotubes of many different diameters and chiralities are irradiated
with lasers at specific short-wave infrared wavelengths chosen to selectively
excite the S11 transitions of targeted nanotubes within the sample. In the
presence of appropriate reactants, those excited nanotubes become chemically
functionalized. The resulting selectively functionalized nanotube structures
exhibit altered physico-chemical properties and suppressed fluorescence yields.
In this way, targeted portions of the sample's emission spectrum are "carved
out" to generate customized spectral profiles suited for use in basic research
and applications development. Subsequent processing of the sample using methods
such as aqueous two-phase partitioning or controlled centrifugation isolates the
functionalized targeted structure from the rest of the sample. The isolated
fraction is then defunctionalized using thermal and chemical methods to recover
the physically separated structure in its pristine form. The ultimate goal is to
generate structurally sorted carbon nanotube samples with tailored optical
properties and compositions. These are investigated to arrive at a deeper
understanding of carbon nanotube spectroscopy, photo-processes, and
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.