* 1803872
* Understanding of therapeutic cells functions: A single-cell lab on a chip
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Tania Konry, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,548.00

The human body is capable of killing cancer cells without the assistance of
drugs. This occurs frequently and is credited to cells that are part of the
immune system. They are referred to as natural killer (NK) cells. The mechanism
of their interaction with cancer cells is not understood well. One major
difficulty is that the interaction is occurring within the body, and we usually
do not detect it until a large population of cancer cells (a tumor) is present.
At that point, a large number of tumor cells is interacting with a large number
of NK cells. A lot more could be learned about the functions of the NK cells if
they were observed interacting individually with a single cancer cell. This
project will design a device that should enable those observations to be made by
creating droplets containing one NK cell and one cancer cell. The device will be
used to measure several aspects of the interaction. It will also allow the
observation of NK cells with cancer cells that are in many different stages of
development, and activity in the presence of different drugs. If this project is
successful, it could lead to dramatic improvements in strategies for cancer
immunotherapy, leading to longer and healthier lives after a cancer diagnosis.
In addition, this project will support research experiences for high school and
college students. It will also train community college faculty in many of the
research techniques used, greatly amplifying the positive impact on developing a
highly skilled biotechnology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
focus on a novel microfluidic chip that will integrate large arrays to guarantee
sufficient number of reactions for screening, and parallel designs to achieve
multiplexing capabilities. The parallel device designs will enable screening of
different combinations of drugs/concentrations/cells across multiple storage
arrays of bio-reactions. These designs simplify the number of inlets required
for operation of the micro-chip and create micro-channels with unified flow
resistance for synchronous generation of bioreactors with the same
dimensions/volumes. Furthermore, the design incorporates an on-board gradient
generator that creates a series of drug concentrations and enables testing of
different therapeutic cell lines against one target specimen. The single cell
resolution and the dynamic measurement of multiplex biomarkers allows the
dynamic assessment of the specific state of any cell type before during and
after therapy. This allows regulation mechanisms of activation and inhibition
and the causality of events to be determined. Thus the proposed on-chip approach
allows concurrent assessment of vaccine therapeutic potential, correlating
mechanistic and functional information to gain greater insight into cell
functions and responses at multiple levels. The methods developed by the
proposed studies will further allow us to answer important biological questions.
These include the contribution of stochasticity in regulating cell-based
therapies, and cell responses and variation in response to a broad range of
immunomodulatory stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.