* 1803045
* Molecular Basis of the Effects of Hydrostatic Pressure on Biomacromolecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* George Makhatadze, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2024
* USD 789,532.00

Professor George I. Makhatadze of Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute is supported
by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of Chemistry to
develop and experimentally test models of how biomacromolecules such as proteins
and DNA respond and adapt to high hydrostatic pressure. The Molecular Biophysics
Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, and the Physics
of Living Systems Program in the Division of Physics also contribute to this
award. Hydrostatic pressure is an important environmental variable that plays a
role in biological adaptation for many extremophilic organisms - organisms that
can tolerate and even thrive under extreme environmental conditions. On Earth,
pressure-tolerant barophiles generally populate the deep ocean floor, where the
pressures on their bodies can reach 110 MPa (~1,100 atm). This project is
utilizing a combination of computational modeling and biochemical and
biophysical experiments to determine the pressure-dependence of protein and
nucleic acid stability in extremophilic organisms. They also examine the role of
hydrostatic pressure in modulating protein-DNA interactions. The results of this
project may enable prediction of pressure-dependent growth phenotypes of diverse
organisms. The project may also help in the design of next-generation,
environmentally-friendly catalysts and robust biomaterials. Research topics and
recent findings from the lab are integrated into Professor Makhatadze's teaching
as part of the Biochemistry and Biophysics major at RPI. The project engages
graduate students, and high school students and undergraduates in
interdisciplinary research, providing specialized training in a diverse and
unique scientific skill set.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this
project are to probe at the structural proteome level the differences in
volumetric properties of thermophilic, psychrophilic and barophilic organisms.
The research provides quantitative understanding of the effects of hydrostatic
pressure on protein-DNA interactions and nucleic acids. This understanding is
being achieved by uniquely combining biochemical and biophysical experiments
with computational tools to interrogate and compare volume changes upon protein
unfolding in specific barophilic organisms at the structural proteome level. The
research team also investigates the effects of hydrostatic pressure on stability
of alpha-helices, and compares model predictions against high-pressure cell
measurements of volume changes due to helix-coil transitions. Dr. Makhatadze
analyzes the effects of hydrostatic pressure, including hydration, on the
stability of nucleic acids as the progenitor building blocks of life and
investigate the effects of hydrostatic pressure on protein-DNA interactions, for
comparison with high-pressure fluorescence experiments. In addition to training
graduate researchers in interdisciplinary computational and experimental
research at the intersection of biophysics and biochemistry, the team mentors
high school and undergraduate students as active, ongoing participants in
laboratory research. Outreach to minority undergraduates through summer
internships are provided by the Rensselaer's Louis Stokes Alliance for Minority
Participation (LSAMP) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.