* 1803989
* Collaborative Research: Intermittency in Multi-Phase Flows in 2D and 3D Porous Media: Coordinated Experiments and Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Kenneth Christensen, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2023
* USD 333,643.00

Understanding how fluids move through porous media is of great importance. Much
of the water we rely on comes from groundwater which passes through soils. For a
significant part of our energy needs we must extract oil and gas from the
subsurface. In addition, some of the most promising proposed methods to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions to the atmosphere rely on injecting CO2 back into
porous media in the subsurface, where it can be trapped forever. Similarly, many
industrial processes that provide essential products or clean our air and water
supplies rely on passing fluids through engineered porous media. Virtually all
of these flows are complex, because they can involve multiple fluids interacting
with highly heterogeneous porous geometries. While scientists have a reasonable
understanding of how a single fluid might move through such systems, when two
different fluids are involved our predictive skills deteriorate significantly.
And yet, understanding and better predicting these flows will enhance our
ability to improve access to clean water, extract and use energy resources more
efficiently, protect our future environment and design more effective industrial
processes. This project focuses on such complex flows. By combining state of the
art experiments and theory, the investigators will develop and enhance our
current understanding of multiphase flows through porous media and develop novel
methods and models to predict their complex behaviors. Graduate and
undergraduate students will receive training as part of this research effort,
and a high resolution, high fidelity visual teaching experience on environmental
fluid mechanics will be developed in collaboration with Notre Dame's Digital
Visualization Theater and shared openly with other
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A coordinated experimental and numerical
program will be undertaken to advance understanding of and ability to model
transport in multi-phase flows in 2D and 3D porous media. Particle tracking in
both single- and multi-phase flow in 2D and 3D porous models across viscous and
inertial flow regimes will be conducted leveraging a novel refractive-index-
matching approach. Additionally, to enable a broader and more efficient sweep of
the parameter space, a complementary series of cutting edge Lattice Boltzmann
simulations, validated with experimental data, will be conducted. These
innovative experiments and simulations, tightly coupled to state-of-the-art
transport modeling, will validate and advance modeling strategies, transforming
our understanding of intermittency in single- and multi-phase flows in 2D and 3D
porous media and improving predictions of transport processes at the macro-scale
for a range of engineering and environmental
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.