* 1803010
* 2018 Photosensory Receptors and Signal Transduction, Il Ciocco, Italy March 3-9, 2018
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2018,12/31/2018
* Katrina Forest, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2018
* USD 15,000.00

Light-sensing mechanisms impact the lifecycle and physiology of all branches of
life. Researchers at the 2018 Photosensory Receptors and Signal Transduction
Gordon Conference study biological molecules that absorb light and cause changes
in cellular behavior in response to it. Examples range from the mechanisms of
human vision to the ability of bacteria to interact with plants. This work has
wide-ranging implications: the basic science discoveries in this area have and
will continue to lead to understandings of the human circadian clock,
optimization of biofuel production, and light-driven artificial controls of
neuronal response. Over the past 20 years, this biannual meeting has been the
site of a remarkably fruitful exchange of results, new ideas, and technical
progress among researchers who are experts in a wide variety of experimental
techniques. This mixing leads to creative novel proposals. Moreover, the meeting
has a strong attendance by junior scientists, female scientists, and an
internationally diverse group of researchers. This demographic keeps the meeting
lively and promotes the careers of future leaders in Photoreceptor
Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how different photoreceptor systems
orchestrate biological processes - from mammalian vision through plant growth to
bacterial symbioses - requires integration of diverse methodologies and
expertises. We request funds to support the 2018 Photosensory Receptors &amp;
Signal Transduction Gordon Research Conference and its closely associated Gordon
Research Seminar, in Il Ciocco, Italy March 3-9, 2018. Our vision is to provide
a platform for photobiologists from diverse disciplines to showcase recent
advances, integrate in lively debate and share new applications. Specifically,
participants will discuss how molecular photoreceptors are changed by
interaction with light and how these structural changes are amplified through
signaling networks to affect diverse physiology. The 2018 GRC will specifically
integrate research on photoreceptors from animals, plants and microbes and will
cover time scales from femtoseconds to evolutionary eons. The nine sessions
represent a diversity of topics including emerging areas of understanding (e.g.
Carotenoid-dependent signaling proteins). Diversity will be maximized through
integration of disciplines (e.g. biophysics, structural biology; signaling)
across biological systems.