* 1803245
* Molecular and Morphology Engineering of Non-Fullerene Organic Solar Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Samson Jenekhe, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2021
* USD 330,000.00

Organic solar photovoltaic cells are promising low cost, scalable, and
sustainable solar energy based electrical power generation technologies. Major
innovations in semiconductor materials are needed to create energy conversion
and energy storage devices based upon organic photovoltaics. This project aims
to discover fundamental knowledge needed for creating organic semiconductor
materials with improved properties and for designing more efficient organic
solar cells. The project develops engineering strategies to design, synthesize,
and process new materials with the aim of enhancing how they absorb light,
generate charge, and transport charge through thin films and in devices. The
project also provides opportunities for training future scientists and
engineers, including women and underrepresented minorities in STEM, in the
interdisciplinary fields of semiconductor materials, optoelectronic devices, and
energy technologies. The project also enables improvements to the curriculum by
integration of research findings into the graduate and undergraduate courses
taught at the University of Washington. As part of this project, a symposium on
solar energy frontier research will be organized for a future American Chemical
Society or Materials Research Society meeting. Researchers involved in this
project also will participate in a program organized by the Pacific Science
Center of Seattle focusing on renewable energy and solar technologies.

Photovoltaic devices have generally been made by blending a p-type (donor)
semiconducting polymer with an electron-conducting (acceptor) fullerene
derivative. This project studies new non-fullerene acceptors that are expected
to be more chemically, photochemically and mechanically rugged, more economical,
and more readily manufactured on a large scale compared to their fullerene
counterparts. The project also involves new morphology engineering approaches
for understanding and achieving high performance non-fullerene organic solar
cells. The following objectives are being pursued: (1) The design, synthesis,
and characterization of a series of cyclopentaquinoxaline-based small-molecule,
non-fullerene, acceptor materials; (2) The design, synthesis, and
characterization of new amorphous wide bandgap p-type semiconducting copolymers
with optimal properties suitable for high performance solar cells; and (3) The
investigation of the morphology, photophysics, charge transport, charge
recombination and photovoltaic properties of blends of the new acceptor
materials with donor polymers. The results of these studies will generate new
fundamental understanding of light absorption and charge transport in n-type
organic semiconductors and will provide new physical insights into charge
photogeneration, transport, and collection in organic solar cells.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.