* 1803470
* UNS: Simultaneous 4D Flamelet and Velocity Diagnostics for Resolving Flamelet/Flow Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2017,06/30/2019
* Lin Ma, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* John Daily
* 06/30/2019
* USD 163,532.00

CBET - 1505112&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ma, Lin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Turbulent combustion
is a fundamental process of significant scientific and practical importance.
Turbulent flames are inherently three-dimensional in space and dynamic in time.
Until now, experimental techniques to measure turbulent flames have been limited
to measurements at a point, along a line, or across a plane, and they do not
fully resolve the three-dimensional structure of the flame. This project will
conduct four-dimensional measurements that resolve the flame in all three
spatial directions and time with precise resolution, which will improve our
understanding of turbulent combustion. Turbulent combustion is the key process
in many devices that dominate energy production. Improving our understanding of
turbulent combustion will lead to the design of more efficient and cleaner
energy devices. The project will also employ internet resources to develop
learning platforms for a larger audience, to disseminate results to a wider
community, and to increase public awareness of energy, environmental, and
information technology issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this project
is to obtain instantaneous and simultaneous 4D measurements of multiple
properties key to the turbulent combustion processes. The project will apply 3D
tomographic diagnostics recently developed by the PI to resolve flamelet/flow
interactions in turbulent flames. The target properties include 3D flame surface
density, flame volume, flame curvature, fractal dimension, 3D3C (three-
dimensional, three-component) velocity fields, and also potentially local strain
rate and turbulent flame speed. The success of this project will enable
measurements of such properties in 4D for representative turbulent flames, and
to establish multidimensional datasets that can be used for the development of
computational tools for designing new energy devices. Furthermore, the project
combines several distinct disciplines, including optical imaging, computed
tomography, combustion, and the processing and analysis of large datasets.
Results from the project will benefit practitioners in energy, photonics, and
information technology.