* 1803146
* Conference on the Interplay of Harmonic Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2018,03/31/2019
* Loredana Lanzani, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Yunping Jiang
* 03/31/2019
* USD 26,000.00

This award provides funding to help defray the expenses of US-based participants
in the meeting ``Conference on the Interplay of Harmonic Analysis and Geometry''
(CIHAG), which will be held at Scuola Normale Superiore di Pisa in Cortona,
Italy during the week of June 25-29, 2018. Additional information about the
conference can be found on the website
http://www.math.wisc.edu/fricci2018&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2018 CIHAG meeting
is devoted to recent developments in harmonic analysis and many applications to
other disciplines. This week-long conference will bring approximately 25
internationally-recognized analysts to Cortona, Italy. Each of them will give a
one-hour talk. The 2018 CIHAG meeting will also provide numerous junior
participants with the opportunity to give short talks or present posters about
their work. The 2018 CIHAG meeting will include a session for discussions of
important open problems in harmonic analysis. Priority for funding will be given
to early career mathematicians, women, members of underrepresented groups and
those without other means of support. This is an important conference in
harmonic analysis and its applications that will offer participants the
opportunity to learn of state-of-the-art research in harmonic analysis with
applications to engineering and other sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.