* 1803844
* Photon- and Electron-Driven Atomic Collision Processes: General Theory and Accurate Numerical Calculations
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Klaus Bartschat, Drake University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2022
* USD 310,000.00

This project deals with the interaction of light (mostly lasers) and charged
particles (mostly electrons) with atoms and ions. The results are of importance
for the understanding of fundamental collision dynamics, and they also fulfill
the urgent practical need for accurate atomic data to model the physics of
stars, plasmas, lasers, and planetary atmospheres. The short-pulse intense-laser
part of the project requires accurate solutions of the time-dependent
Schroedinger equation on a numerical space-time grid. With the rapid advances
currently seen in computational resources, such studies can now be conducted for
realistic, as opposed to idealized, model systems. This work is important to
facilitate further developments in the imaging and control of submicroscopic
reactions, which in turn are expected to have broad impact by reaching out from
physics to chemistry and ultimately biology. Another topic is quantum
entanglement created in electron-atom collisions. This area has potential for
applications in quantum information technology. Many experimental efforts
worldwide are supported through the present project, which will also train a
post-doctoral associate and a number of research
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the numerical calculations will be based
upon the non-perturbative R-matrix (close-coupling) method using a highly
flexible B-spline implementation with non-orthogonal orbital sets, as well as
direct solutions of the time-dependent Schroedinger equation using various grid-
based approaches and basis-function expansions. For single and double ionization
of complex atoms by intense atto/femto-second laser pulses, the methods will be
combined in such a way that individual parts of the "big problem" can be treated
in highly efficient and optimized ways. One example is the use of time-
independent multi-electron Coulomb and dipole matrix elements from the B-spline
R-matrix method in a propagation scheme for the solution of the time-dependent
Schroedinger equation in a few-cycle laser pulse. This general strategy will be
extended to the treatment of double ionization involving inner shells. Much
emphasis will be placed on the testing of numerical methods and the
visualization of the results, both of which are ideal for student
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.