* 1803378
* Physics-based Scale Enrichment for Eddy-Resolving Turbulence Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Sanjiva Lele, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2021
* USD 336,636.00

Computational models are widely used in design and analysis to support new
technologies in aerospace, energy and transportation sectors. Many of these
applications require accurate prediction of turbulent fluid flows often with
complex geometries. For example, improved aerodynamic designs for aerospace
vehicles require prediction and management of the drag force of turbulent flow
on the vehicle surfaces. Eddy-resolving turbulence simulations, which are an
important tool for fundamental scientific research, are only beginning to be
used in engineering applications largely due to their very high cost. This
project will develop a physics-based modeling approach to significantly improve
turbulence simulations in a cost-effective manner. The new method should provide
significant potential for cost-effective predictions of unsteady loads, fatigue,
surface vibrations, and acoustic radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
approach is based on combining eddy-resolving turbulence simulation, such as
large-eddy simulation, albeit of limited bandwidth, with an efficient, physics-
based scale-enrichment scheme applied at each of the computational cells. The
enrichment scheme generates a physically consistent realization of the finer-
scale eddies locally which dynamically respond to the resolved larger scales and
enable statistical predictions of physical quantities with a substantially
larger bandwidth, thus enabling predictions of quantities not accessible
previously. A novel computational modeling strategy is proposed with potential
applications to diverse fields such as wind energy, and aerospace
design/optimization involving structural vibration and fatigue. Beyond these,
the proposed approach may have applications in broader fields such as dynamic
meteorology and ocean and atmospheric sciences. The tools and software being
developed will be open source and is expected to initiate collaborations and use
across diverse groups from the computational science
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.