* 1803256
* Interface chemistry and electrochemistry in magnesium-ion batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Guozhong Cao, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 299,999.00

Improved energy storage technologies are required for large-scale, stationary
applications such as grid load leveling and energy storage for intermittent
renewable electricity generation. Magnesium batteries are among the most
compelling alternatives to lithium-ion batteries, with significant advantages in
terms of safety, resource abundance, and possible higher capacities by virtue of
the divalent magnesium ion. Magnesium batteries are far less explored than the
technologically mature lithium-ion battery. Interest in this technology has
increased as limits in lithium ion battery energy density are reached. In this
research project, researchers will address key scientific challenges facing
magnesium batteries and pave the way for new energy storage technologies. This
fundamental research project will educate and provide research experiences to
graduate and undergraduate students in the field of sustainable clean energy
materials and manufacturing technology. The project will also foster a positive
culture among graduate and undergraduate students that accepts, respects and
tolerates differences of others.

This research project investigates the anode-electrolyte and cathode-electrolyte
interfaces, rather than the three components individually. The strategy is to
view the combined three components as a system to provide additional insights
about the interfaces to address two of the biggest problems for magnesium
batteries: passivation of the anode and the dearth of high-energy cathodes. The
project team has demonstrated a fluoride coating that functions as the first
solid-electrolyte interphase layer to conduct magnesium ions, and the layer will
be characterized in greater detail to understand and improve upon its
electrochemical performance. The project will include the design of
electrochemical protocols to measure the true cathode performance and
standardize cathode testing across different laboratories. The analysis and
characterization templates allow for rapid electrochemical screening of
prospective materials and characterization with XRD and new in situ EXAFS
techniques. The most promising magnesium cathode materials will be subjected to
defect engineering strategies previously developed by the researchers for
lithium-ion battery materials. Some of these tools include cation or anion
doping, introducing vacancies through controlled annealing, modification of
surface chemistry with ion exchange, and synthesizing amorphous materials.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.