* 1804699
* Chemical and Biochemical Bases for EDTA Biodegradation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Luying Xun, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 08/31/2022
* USD 488,947.00

This award from the Environmental Chemical Sciences Program in the NSF Division
of Chemistry supports a collaborative effort of Professors ChulHee Kang and
Luying Xun at Washington State University (WSU) to study the environmental fate
of Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). This compound is being introduced
into the environment through extensive use in industrial applications.
Currently, EDTA is the most abundant organic pollutant in surface waters around
the world, including the US. EDTA forms strong complexes with toxic heavy metals
and mobilizes them, which increases exposure of humans. Several EDTA-degrading
bacteria exist in nature. However, applying those bacteria in remediation is not
practical because they are not efficient enough. Studies of the key enzymes and
uptake system for the bacterial EDTA-degradation pathway reveal the factors that
limit the biodegradation. This knowledge is used to modify the genes to increase
catalytic efficiency and helps generate effective solutions for bioremediation.
The research provides the participating students with interdisciplinary training
in enzymology, microbiology, and biophysical chemistry, serving as an important
bridge among the key STEM units at WSU. In addition, through existing NSF-funded
K-12 outreach programs and the BXC Center at WSU, expertise is provided to high
school classrooms, the local Palouse Discovery Science Center and local
undergraduate institutions. This enhances the training of students of diverse
economic, ethnic, and geographic backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
substrate-specificity, catalytic mechanism and molecular interactions of the
transport and binding proteins and enzymes in the EDTA-degradation pathway of
Chelativorans sp. BNC1 are investigated. This provides guidance for designing a
new recombinant system with enhanced degradation capacity. Those improved EDTA-
uptake and metabolizing genes are cloned into phosphite-dependent E. coli to
enable the recombinant strain to degrade EDTA in wastewaters. The merit of this
approach is not only in its contribution to the study of EDTA biodegradation,
but also in its applicability to similar pathways for the degradation of other
anthropogenic compounds. The research also addresses the chemical basis of
evolutionary adaptations to non-natural chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.