* 1804554
* Rare earth element extraction from secondary sources: understanding environmental impacts and economic feasibility
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Gabrielle Gaustad, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 295,105.00

Rare earth elements (REEs) are essential in a variety of important high-tech
applications. Lack of diversity in the supply chain for REEs, coupled with
significant environmental impacts of primary mining, have made extraction of
REEs from secondary sources an attractive alternative. REEs exist in a variety
of secondary products, in particular 1) coal combustion products such as fly
ash, bottom ash, and incinerator ash, 2) industrial byproducts like slags,
dross, phosphogypsum, and red mud, and 3) electronic wastes including nickel-
metal hydride batteries, hard drives from laptops and desktop computers,
cellular phones, speakers. The objectives of this work are to 1) quantify the
material and energy flows of emerging secondary REE extraction processes and
their primary alternatives, 2) create a framework to compare economic and
environmental performance of primary and secondary sources of rare earth
elements, and 3) make recommendations for development of viable domestic supply
chains and manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methodologies from life-cycle
assessment, commodity market modeling, material characterization, and techno-
economic analysis will be synthesized to assess processes to recover REEs from
byproducts, e.g. coal ash, phosphogypsum, red mud, and electronic waste. The
intellectual merit of this research includes 1) establishment of a framework and
results to inform research and development for processes to recover REEs from
waste products, 2) improved accounting of co-product allocation in REE, 3)
enhancing methods to address uncertainty in environmental/economic assessment of
developing processes, and 4) addressing variability driven by the quality of the
waste, including construction of an open database of REE content of different
waste streams. A combinatorial scenario analysis method will be employed that
clarifies combinations of parameter values necessary to achieve economic
feasibility and environmental benefits. The broader impacts of this work include
the potential to enhance U.S.-based manufacturing and reduce environmental
impacts of green technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.