* 1804313
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Nanoparticle analysis of antibody colloidal interactions and their influence on viscoelastic properties of concentrated antibody solutions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Marissa Mock, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2022
* USD 225,000.00

Most of the best-selling drugs today are monoclonal antibodies, which are being
used to treat a wide range of human disorders. Antibodies are molecules that
interact specifically with objects in the body as part of the natural immune
system. One reason for the high cost of drug development is the long and
unpredictable process of trying to find the right molecule. Many molecules that
are tried do not work. One way in which they fail is that the drug solutions
become so thick that they cannot be delivered to the patient. This project aims
to develop technologies for rapidly and cheaply determining which drug
candidates have this problem as well as how to modify drugs to make them more
effective. These findings can potentially lower drug development costs and
thereby the cost of new drugs to patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The viscous
nature of concentrated antibody solutions results from pairwise and higher order
interactions between antibodies. In this project, these antibody interactions
will be measured using a nanoparticle-based technique previously developed by
the investigators. By engineering changes to solvent-exposed regions on the
antibody surface and measuring the total effective intermolecular interaction,
it will be determined how different parts of the antibody surface combine
together to give rise to the overall behavior. The viscous response of antibody
solutions will also be predicted using antibody interaction measurements as
inputs to computer simulations. The investigators will also use computer
simulations to determine how antibody interactions cause abnormally high
solution viscosities. The combined experimental and computational findings are
expected to lead to better methods for predicting how changes in antibody
sequence and structure impact viscosity. Therefore, this project holds
significant potential to enable the rational design of new antibody molecules
with drug-like properties. The project will train undergraduate and graduate
students in key aspects of physical science and engineering at scales ranging
from molecular to macroscopic. Another key focus of this work is the development
of outreach programs to underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.