* 1804030
* The Atlantic's role in ice age inception and termination: Assessing carbon storage and release with new Brazil Margin profiles from MIS 2 to MIS 6
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2022
* David Lund, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Daniel McCorkle
* 12/31/2022
* USD 433,137.00

The driver of glacial-interglacial carbon dioxide (CO2) cycles remains one of
the most important unresolved questions in the field of paleoclimatology. Lower
atmospheric CO2 levels correspond to ice sheet expansion, while rising CO2
levels are a primary driver of ice sheet retreat. Although it has long been
assumed that ocean-atmosphere exchange mediates CO2 levels, the underlying
mechanisms have remained elusive. During the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM; ~20,000
years ago), the deep Atlantic was more stratified than today, which likely
enhanced carbon storage in the abyss. If earlier glacial intervals were
characterized by a similar pattern, it would suggest that stratification is
fundamental to deep ocean carbon storage and therefore glaciations. Recent
studies also suggest the deep Atlantic circulation slowed during the last
deglaciation, which may result in carbon accumulation in the surface ocean and
atmosphere. If this mechanism is a key driver of ice sheet retreat, then
evidence for a weaker deep Atlantic circulation should exist during each
deglaciation of the last 140,000 years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal
of this project is to use data from multiple cores in the Southwest Atlantic to
assess changes in ocean circulation and carbon storage during the last full
glacial cycle. Using sediment cores from approximately 1500 m to 4000 m water
depth, the research will assess: 1) the strength of the Atlantic's meridional
overturning circulation (AMOC), 2) water column stratification in the South
Atlantic, and 3) their relation to oceanic carbon storage. AMOC strength and
water column stratification will be reconstructed by analyzing carbon and oxygen
isotopic ratios in the shells of benthic (bottom dwelling) foraminifera. Carbon
storage will be assessed by analyzing the boron to calcium ratio (B/Ca) in
benthic foraminifera during key glacial and interglacial intervals of the last
140,000 years. Each core will be dated using oxygen isotope stratigraphy, a
well-known tool in the field of paleoclimatology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work could transform our understanding of the climate system by
creating the first integrated picture of deep Atlantic circulation and carbon
storage spanning the last full glacial cycle. The results will therefore provide
a unique framework for understanding the source of atmospheric CO2 variability
over long timescales. The results should also be useful to the broader
paleoclimate community by providing an internally consistent depth transect of
cores that can be studied using analyses beyond the scope of the current
project. The educational impact of the proposed work includes the participation
of a graduate student and two undergraduate students at the University of
Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.