* 1804118
* Engineering a stable water microbiome in direct potable reuse distribution systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kara Nelson, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 339,706.00

Many cities face growing water scarcity. In response, these cities are
developing innovative strategies to tap into alternative local sources of
drinking water. One promising local source is treated wastewater that can be
purified through advanced treatment processes. Like desalinated seawater, this
purified water is also missing a natural community of bacteria that is present
in all other drinking water sources. A lack of natural bacteria in purified
water could provide an opportunity for unhealthy bacteria to grow. This study
will compare the stability of bacteria in purified drinking water from seawater
desalination to bacteria in water from traditional water sources. Additionally,
the study will conduct laboratory tests to determine whether deliberately adding
benign bacteria to purified wastewater can prevent instability of bacterial
communities like those found in water infrastructure. The findings of this work
will help engineers plan for the safe distribution of highly purified water to
protect the public and help secure the Nation's water supply. The research will
broaden participation in engineering by providing opportunities for research and
career advancement for underrepresented students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
advanced treatment of wastewater for direct potable reuse (DPR) generates
extremely pure water. While the chemical conditioning of DPR water to prevent
pipe corrosion is already under study, little work has investigated the
potential impacts of DPR on the microbiology of drinking water distribution
systems (DWDS). All DWDS harbor biofilms, and the addition of DPR water
containing few cells may create biological instability and the potential for
growth of opportunistic pathogens. Inoculating water with benign microorganisms
via seeding may be effective for decreasing microbial risks in the DWDS. This
study will examine whether deliberately seeding advanced treated water with a
filter media-derived microbial community results in a more stable distribution
system microbiome. The scientific objectives are to: 1) survey full-scale
distribution systems in the U.S. to examine current biostability; 2) compare the
microbial communities of two current systems, one conventional and one that uses
RO-treated water, during distribution; 3) characterize changes to the microbial
communities of mock-distribution systems during the introduction of blended
conventional water and DPR water that is either microbially seeded or unseeded;
and 4) examine the effect of disinfectant residual concentrations on the
microbiome in seeded and unseeded mock-distribution systems. This study will use
flow cytometry-based cell counting coupled to molecular methods, including
amplicon and metagenomic sequencing, to observe microbiological changes in the
full-scale and mock drinking water distribution systems. This study will provide
insight into theoretical microbial ecology, the water microbiome, and produce
valuable information to improve the design and operation of advanced treatment
plants for direct potable reuse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.