* 1804302
* Microfluidic systems for DNA extraction, purification and concentration
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* Anthony Ladd, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2024
* USD 317,090.00

Because genetic information can lead to the development of effective therapies
to improve human health, it is important to develop methods for the cost-
effective sequencing of an entire genome. Most biological molecules, such as
proteins and DNA, carry a charge and can be readily transported through fluids
by application of an electric field, a phenomenon known as electrophoresis.
Microfluidic technologies can essentially miniaturize a chemical factory to the
scale of a few centimeters and are widely used for genome sequencing and
mapping. However, the samples still must be prepared using a labor-intensive
process, involving cycles of chemical treatment, washing and centrifugation. A
microfluidic system that could prepare samples by separating the DNA from
proteins and other cellular debris would be faster, cheaper, and less error
prone than currently used techniques. This research project combines theoretical
and experimental investigations into the challenges involved in using electric
fields within microfluidic devices to trap and separate DNA from cell samples.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a polymer is subjected to a shear flow, it stretches
and rotates to align at an angle to the flow. If an electric field is then
applied in the opposite direction to the fluid flow, a charged polymer will
migrate perpendicular to the axis of the fields. This action creates a strongly
inhomogeneous distribution of DNA within the cross section of a capillary tube,
and it can be exploited to trap DNA within a microfluidic device by suitable
tuning of the flow and electric fields. This migration is specific to long,
flexible, and charged molecules, of which DNA is the only such class of
molecules in living cells. Hence, DNA is trapped within the device, while other
molecules, such as proteins, pass through. The proposal aims to develop a better
understanding of DNA (or other polyelectrolyte) migration in combined flow and
electric fields, by using experiments and numerical simulations to validate the
hypothesis that polyelectrolyte migration is driven by electrically-induced
flows. The research will determine the magnitude of the cross-stream migration
under a wide variety of conditions to optimize the design of microfluidic
devices for DNA extraction and concentration from samples of whole blood. If DNA
can be successfully purified from the lysate, this will be an important step
towards integrating sample preparation and analysis on a single microfluidic
chip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.