* 1804712
* The Strong-Metal Support Interaction: Insights from Molecular Theories and Experiments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Dmitry Zemlyanov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Catalysts play an essential 'behind-the-scenes' role in many aspects of modern
society. For example, catalysts lower the energy loss of producing high
performance gasoline from crude oil. In the production of plastics, catalysts
selectively lead chemical reactions down a certain pathway to produce desired
products. The number of potential pathways in catalytic reactions is large, and
the catalyst structure itself may change significantly during the reactions. Due
to this complexity, molecular-level aspects of many phenomena in catalysis have
not been fully elucidated. Despite being discovered nearly thirty years ago, the
strong metal-support interaction (SMSI) is one such phenomenon that remains
poorly understood at a molecular level. SMSI refers to the strong interaction
between a catalytic metal nanoparticle and an oxide support, to which the metal
is anchored. Under reaction conditions that are relatively common, a portion of
the oxide support may actually form a film that partially covers the catalytic
nanoparticle. This film can either promote or inhibit catalytic processes,
depending upon the particular catalytic materials involved, and a general
strategy to understand and control its properties does not exist. The central
goal of this project is, therefore, to unravel the molecular science of how the
different components of these catalyst systems work together to enhance catalyst
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To use SMSI to promote catalysis by
leveraging molecular-level insights, this project will combine periodic Density
Functional Theory calculations with surface science experiments and measurements
on model nanoparticles to study trends in the structure, energetics, and
electronic properties of ultrathin (hydroxy)oxide films on transition metal
substrates. Rigorous models of the films' structures as a function of ambient
pressures and temperatures will be developed. The predictions will be performed
on single crystal substrate models, and will be refined against a series of
ultrahigh vacuum surface science experiments. The trends that emerge from these
combined theoretical and experimental studies will then be validated on
nanoparticle models. It is anticipated the project will provide a wealth of
information about ultrathin (hydroxy)oxide/metal interfaces and will suggest new
strategies for controlling and exploiting the SMSI. This fundamental knowledge
may, in turn, lead to the development of robust catalysts for energy and health
applications. The work will be carried out by two graduate students who will be
trained in state-of-the-art techniques in theoretical and experimental
catalysis. The students will be assisted by high school interns from
economically disadvantaged backgrounds who will also be exposed to these
forefront scientific methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.