* 1804825
* Consistent models for large eddy simulation on anisotropic grids
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Johan Larsson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Turbulence is an important phenomenon in many natural and man-made systems. Our
ability to make accurate predictions of turbulent flows is important in a wide
range of scientific and engineering disciplines, including atmospheric flows,
aerospace, naval, automotive, wind and nuclear energy, etc. In all these fields,
we rely on supercomputers to 'simulate' turbulence in order to predict
tomorrow's weather, the lift and drag of a future airplane design, and so on.
These types of turbulence simulations solve a set of mathematical equations on a
grid of smaller cells. In the vast majority of applications, these cells are
anisotropic, i.e., they have different lengths in different directions. In
contrast, the vast majority of the underlying mathematical and physical theory
upon which these turbulence simulations are based was developed for the
assumption of isotropic (i.e., perfectly cubic) cells. This project is aimed at
reconciling this gap, which is expected to lead to more accurate and trustworthy
turbulence simulations across the wide range of disciplines in which they are
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop models for
turbulence-resolving simulations (mainly, large eddy simulations) that behave
consistently and accurately on anisotropic grids. Consistency is defined here as
having the right behavior in the limits of increasing anisotropies, while
accuracy is defined as making effective and efficient use of the given grid
resolution. Models of both eddy-viscosity and tensorial forms will be
considered. A key component of the project is to perform a comprehensive and
conclusive assessment of how different grid anisotropies affect the accuracy,
and to communicate this to developers and practitioners in the field. This
should raise awareness and hopefully stimulate further work throughout the
field, beyond the planned model developments in the present project. The
assessment will be performed on multiple canonical flows, including channel
flow, a temporally developing mixing layer, and a transitional boundary layer.
Crucially, the assessment will be performed using three different numerical
codes, to ensure the robustness of the findings and avoid code-specific
conclusions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.