* 1804723
* In Operando Noninvasive MRI Monitoring of Electrochemical Processes in Rechargeable Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Alexej Jerschow, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Rechargeable batteries lie at the heart of transformative technology for
applications such as electric vehicles or energy storage for renewable energy
sources. There is a pressing demand for high-performance rechargeable battery
power that can operate safely under increasingly stringent conditions.
Determining the state of charge and the state of health of a battery cell, as
well as the projected lifetime is difficult. This project will develop a new
scanning technology, based on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), as a robust and
reliable nondestructive tool for batteries. The fact that it can detect changes
in materials' properties and behavior inside batteries in a noninvasive manner
during device operation and provide information on certain battery failure
mechanisms, sets it apart from the techniques used today. The fundamental study
of device properties during operation will enable the development of new cell
materials and quicker and more accurate assessment of the qualities of different
components, which will be critical for the next step in battery science. For
educational impacts, the PI will emphasize opportunities for undergraduate
research emphasizing women and underrepresented minorities in STEM by working
with Primarily Undergraduate Institutions (PUIs). The project will also enrich
an original outreach program to students of art restoration programs with the
use of the MRI/NMR (nuclear magnetic resonance) techniques on the use of
chemistry in art restoration.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The fundamental research of
this project is based on the detection of small induced magnetic field changes
within cells in lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). The technique will work with other
cell chemistries as well. These measurements provide a direct link to
quantifying electrode lithiation levels and to the current distributions in
cells during charging. This project will conduct fundamental research on a
diagnostic tool for studying battery cells during operation, and thus will
facilitate the development of next-generation battery technology. The project
aims are: (1) Determine cell susceptibility through non-destructive MRI; (2)
Measurement of localized and component-based susceptibility distributions
throughout charging/discharging and (3) Detect current distributions within the
cells by MRI. The expected outcome of this project is a robust and versatile MRI
methodology for testing and assessing advanced battery chemistries during device
operation. The measurements are based on imaging magnetic susceptibility and
electrical current distributions inside cells. The techniques will be applicable
to a broad range of electrochemical devices beyond the immediate ones studied in
this work. Upon successful completion of the project, the technology will allow
monitoring in operando the state of charge and state of health of batteries, as
well as a number of cell failure modes, and thus aid in the development of next-
generation, energy-efficient and safe batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.