* 1804098
* Collaborative Research: The fingerprint of abrupt temperature events throughout Greenland during the last glacial period
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2024
* James White, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 07/31/2024
* USD 399,814.00

The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (or AMOC) is an important part
of the global three-dimensional ocean circulation (global ocean conveyor belt)
that includes the well-known, northward-flowing Gulf Stream current that
redistributes heat and thereby affects climate. The AMOC is expected to weaken
or even collapse in the coming centuries, with several recent studies suggesting
that this weakening has already begun. The AMOC collapse would not only severely
impact climate in the North Atlantic region but would also weaken the monsoon
rains that a large portion of the global population depends on for their
livelihood. Studying ice cores can shed light on past changes in the strength of
the AMOC and can help scientists better understand the stability and behavior of
this important ocean circulation system. Greenland ice cores and ocean sediment
records show that during the last Ice Age (100,000 to 20,000 years ago) the AMOC
repeatedly collapsed and restarted, resulting in a series of extreme climate
oscillations commonly known as Dansgaard-Oeschger (D-O) cycles. Each D-O event
consists of an abrupt (decadal-scale) warming episode (increase of 8-15 degrees
Centigrade) observed in Greenland ice cores, leading to a few millennia of
warmer climate followed by a gradual cooling back to full glacial conditions.
The proposed research will develop temperature records from two Greenland ice
cores to determine both the geographic distribution as well as the intensity of
the D-O events throughout Greenland. These records will provide a spatial
?fingerprint? of the D-O events, which can be used a forensic tool to determine
the location of D-O warming and the migration of the sea-ice edge around
Greenland during these events. These data will be included in climate
simulations using state-of-the-art global climate models to improve our
understanding of the physical nature of these enigmatic events. The research
will contribute to reliable timescales for the two ice cores, with benefits to
the wider ice core community. The work will support an early-career scientist
and a graduate student and will also provide outreach to public schools.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the physical processes that drive the
Earth?s climate system throughout a Dansgaard-Oeschger (D-O) event remains an
important open scientific question in paleoclimate research. The spatial pattern
of D-O warming holds clues to the origin of D-O events, in particular whether
the critical geographic area is located in the Labrador Sea or in the GIN
(Greenland, Iceland, Norwegian) seas. Ultra-high-resolution stable isotope
records from these ice cores document changes in the hydrological cycle
associated with these abrupt warming episodes. Climate models show that the
southern Dye-3 ice core is more sensitive to abrupt climate change than
previously analyzed ice cores, giving the possibility of observing for the first
time the temperature imprint of a Heinrich event (a natural phenomenon in which
large armadas of icebergs break off from glaciers and traverse the North
Atlantic Ocean), as well as the largest D-O warmings ever observed. Isotope
enabled climate model simulations will provide improved interpretation of
changes in second-order isotope parameters (deuterium- and 17O excess) through
D-O and Heinrich-events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.