* 1804271
* Collaborative Research: Predicting Current-Use Pesticides and Emerging Flame Retardants in a Changing Arctic - Fate and Phototransformation
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2019,02/28/2022
* Jennifer Guerard, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 02/28/2022
* USD 249,654.00

The Arctic is experiencing rapid changes such as longer ice-free seasons. One
issue that must be navigated in this changing landscape is the fate of the many
synthetic organic chemicals that ultimately end up in the Arctic. Little is
known about the fate of these chemicals once they reach the Artic, and any of
these substances can harm organisms and people. The exposure risk of these
compounds is tightly coupled to their environmental fate. This research will
assess the abundance of these synthetic compounds and the ability of the Arctic
environment to break down these substances. To support the education of future
scientists on this emerging topic, a high school module will be delivered for
the Alaska Summer Research Academy on Arctic environmental chemistry.
Additionally, the research groups of Jennifer Guerard and Yu-Ping Chin will
recruit a teacher for the Polar TREC (Teachers and Researchers Exploring and
Collaborating) Program. If successful, this project will help direct contaminant
mitigation efforts that will be required in the rapidly evolving Artic
landscape. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic chemicals from industry and agriculture
have been recently detected throughout the Arctic in the tundra, air, water,
organisms, and people. However, little is known about the Artic fate of current
use pesticides (CUPs) or emerging brominated flame retardants (EBFRs). This
collaborative work between the University of Alaska Fairbanks and the University
of Delaware seeks to understand how the Arctic's unique environment influences
the fate and transformation of CUPs and EBFRs. Photolysis may play a critical
role in the fate of these substances due to continuous solar irradiance in
summer months coupled with the presence of dissolved organic matter (DOM). These
factors can catalyze contaminant attenuation through reaction with photo-derived
reactive oxygen species (ROS) or other pathways. This project tests the
hypotheses that: 1) Concentrations of CUPs and EBFRs in surface waters will be
highest during and immediately following melt of snowpack; and 2) The formation
of analyte-DOM complexes will render these substances more susceptible to
photodegradation. The CUPs chlorpyrifos and chlorothalonil, and EBFRs
1,2-bis(2,4,6- tribromophenoxy)ethane and tetrabromobisphenol A, will be
measured by atmospheric and aqueous sampling over two field seasons at Toolik
Field Station. Partitioning to suspended solids, DOM, and phototransformation
pathways influenced by Arctic DOM will be quantified through field and
laboratory experiments. Critical measurements will be made of physical and
biogeochemical parameters that can be incorporated into an Arctic-specific
chemical fate model, including parameters for partitioning into environmental
compartments and attenuation rates by photolytic pathways. A chemical fate model
for CUPs and EBFRs in Arctic lakes will be developed to predict chemical
behavior in Arctic waters under various physical and environmental conditions.
Quantifying the persistence and transformation of these compounds will be
indispensable for risk assessment and long-term policy development for Arctic
region contaminants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.