* 1804048
* Max-Planck-Princeton Center for Plasma Physics: A Collaboration in Plasma Astrophysics
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Anatoly Spitkovsky, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 600,000.00

Most of the visible matter in the Universe is a plasma, that is a dilute gas of
ions, electrons, and neutral particles. Many fundamental and important physical
processes that occur in plasmas remain poorly understood. This, in turn, limits
our ability to understand diverse phenomena in space such as how stars form or
how the particles flowing from the Sun affect the upper layers of the Earth's
atmosphere. It also impacts our ability to engineer and operate experiments on
Earth such as magnetically confined fusion devices. The Max-Panck Princeton
Center for Plasma Physics (MPPC) was established as a joint venture of the Max
Planck Society in Germany, Princeton University, and the Department of Energy's
Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory (PPPL) in order to forge new collaborations
between Universities, the national plasma labs, and international partners in
order to investigate some of the most pressing problems in plasma physics. By
supporting students and early career scientists, the MPPC serves to train the
next generation of experimental, computational, and theoretical plasma
physicists, and its international scope provides unique training for early
career scientists. The center provides unique opportunities for the public, as
well as students and teachers at public and regional schools, to engage in
scientific inquiry in ways that enhance their understanding of science concepts
and scientific ways of thinking through a well established outreach program at
PPPL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MPPC effort at Princeton University is focused on
three cross-cutting problems in plasma astrophysics: cosmic ray transport and
feedback, the interplay between turbulence and reconnection, and dynamo action
in accretion disks, stellar convection, and galaxies. New fluid closure models
for cosmic rays will be developed and applied to models of the interstellar
medium in galaxies to understand the role of cosmic-ray feedback on galaxy
formation. New theoretical and computational studies of magnetic field
amplification by dynamo action driven by the magneto-rotational instability in
accretion disks, and convection in rotating stars, will be undertaken. Using new
computational tools developed by members of the MPPC, new studies of plasma
turbulence in the kinetic regime, relevant to conditions in the solar wind, will
be developed. The Center fosters interdisciplinary collaboration between the
plasma and astrophysics communities, as well as international collaboration
between these communities in the US, Germany, and elsewhere. Its international
scope provides unique training for graduate students and postdocs. This award
provides renewed support for Princeton University's participation in MPPC, with
support for PPPL's participation provided by the Department of
Energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.