* 1804845
* Collaborative Research: Impedance-Enabled Microfluidic Renal Proximal Tubule Biochip Platform
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,12/31/2022
* Else Vedula, Charles Stark Draper Laboratory Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 12/31/2022
* USD 242,250.00

PI: Zhang, Xin / Charest, Joseph&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 1804787 /
1804845&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to study the negative effects of drugs or
other therapeutics on human kidneys, screening methods have been developed to
evaluate potential toxicity during preclinical testing. Despite current methods
for preclinical screening, the occurrence of kidney injury due to drug toxicity
in clinical practice remains unacceptably high, accounting for nearly 20% of all
episodes of acute kidney injury. To date, a major limitation in the early
determination of the toxicity of drugs is the reliance on experiments in animals
whose responses to drugs often cannot predict human responses. This project aims
to develop innovative devices and methods that combine the culturing of human
kidney cells and impedance (a complex form of resistance)-based sensing
techniques in a microfluidic system. These microfluidic systems will be
developed to replicate the physiological behavior needed for studying the
toxicity of drugs upon the human kidney, thus serving as an advanced drug
screening method with the potential for increased accuracy and lower cost. The
unique interdisciplinary nature of the research provides rich educational
opportunities. K-12 students along with undergraduate and graduate students,
including women and underrepresented groups, will be included in the development
of the drug screening system through multiple programs designed to foster
interest in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses
on the development of microfluidic proximal convoluted tubule biochips as in
vitro models for preclinical toxicology screening of drugs in the pharmaceutical
development process. To improve the efficiency and decrease the costs associated
with the screening process, microfluidic chips imbedded with human kidney cells
will be developed and validated. To simulate the proximal tubule, biochips will
be developed featuring a central, topographically patterned, porous membrane
within this bilayer microfluidic device. Impedance sensing-based components will
be integrated into this system using microfabrication techniques. Human renal
proximal tubular epithelial cells (hRPTEC) and human microvascular endothelial
cells (hMVEC) will be co-cultured and maintained on the chip, forming the
primary sites for active clearance, reabsorption, intracellular concentration,
and accumulation of drugs in the kidney. The co-cultured cells will be exposed
to a series of well-known nephrotoxins of varying concentration over time. For
each exposure, the impedance spectra of the model cells will be recorded and
calibrated, making use of data on cell damage derived from conventional
assessments of toxicity and cell viability. Beyond the application to in vitro
kidney models, the insights gained from integrating impedance-sensing technology
with these systems may be broadly applied towards diverse 'organ-on-a-chip'
technologies as well as myriad cell-based biosensors and 'lab-on-a-chip'
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.