* 1804996
* Manufacturing USA: GOALI: Designing Catalytic Membrane Reactors (CMRs) for Low Temperature CO2 Utilization and Methane Dry Reforming
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shiguang Li, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2021
* USD 360,000.00

With continued reliance on fossil fuels for most electricity production and
increasing concerns about carbon dioxide emissions, carbon dioxide utilization
for syngas production via dry reforming of methane (which is abundant in the
U.S.) has become a very attractive possibility. The objectives of the proposed
project are to design high performance catalytic membrane reactors (CMRs) for
low temperature dry reforming of methane (DRM) using processible polymer-based
membranes, and to build understanding of the effects of selective hydrogen
removal on carbon dioxide conversion, carbon deposition and catalytic activity
in this process. This GOALI project will be supported by a key industry partner
(Gas Technology Institute, GTI), with one graduate student serving as an intern
at GTI to evaluate the CMRs in an industrial setting. This project directly
addresses a focus area of the DOE-funded Rapid Advancement in Process
Intensification Deployment (RAPID) Institute through process intensification for
energy-efficient manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research plan
aims to design, prepare and characterize coke resistant catalysts with high
activity at low temperatures, and mixed matrix materials (MMMs) containing Pd
nanomaterials in polybenzimidazole (PBI) with superior H2/CO2 separation
performance. The catalysts will be subsequently integrated in CMRs and tested at
laboratory scale. Models will be developed to describe the effects of selective
H2 removal on the DRM reaction. The proposed work is novel in three key
respects: (1) Design and preparation of nano-catalysts for DRM with improved
low-temperature activity and resistance to coking using a unique flame-based
aerosol process; (2) development of CMRs for low-temperature DRM using thermally
stable, processible polymer-based membranes, and (3) understanding of the effect
of H2-selective removal on the DRM reaction at low temperatures (including CO2
conversion, carbon deposition and catalytic activity). CMRs based on hollow
fibers will be prepared and thoroughly characterized for the DRM reaction;
predictive models will be developed to uncover the effect of material and
operating parameters on CO2 conversion; catalysts will be optimized for low
temperature hydrogen-poor conditions; and preliminary techno-economic analysis
will be performed, leading to a fuller understanding of the potential of CMRs
for the DRM reaction. The graduate and undergraduate students participating in
this program will be exposed to interdisciplinary research of reaction
engineering, separation and materials science. The results will be incorporated
into courses at the University at Buffalo, a popular textbook, and user-friendly
teaching modules. Outreach activities will provide access to educational modules
and research training to high school and undergraduate students from
underrepresented groups in the Buffalo area and inspire them to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.