* 1804591
* A Computational Study of Cell Locomotion in Complex Environments: Towards a Fluid Mechanical Understanding of Cancer Progression
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Prosenjit Bagchi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 386,653.00

Cancer remains the second highest cause of mortality in the US. More than 90% of
cancer-related deaths are due to progression of the disease to secondary
location(s) away from the primary tumor, a process known as metastasis. In order
to metastasize, cancer cells first detach from the primary tumor and migrate
through the surrounding tissue to reach to a nearby blood or lymphatic vessel.
Migration of cancer cells through the surrounding tissue is a critical step in
cancer progression, and is the focus of this study. One specific mode of
migration is termed as amoeboid migration, in which individual cancer cell
squeezes through the surrounding tissue by using finger-like protrusions of the
cell body known as pseudopods. Amoeboid migration is the most aggressive
mechanism of cancer progression with reportedly the highest migration speed.
Additionally, metastatic cells can convert to amoeboid motility to avoid certain
chemotherapy treatments. The surrounding tissue, resembling a porous medium,
creates a complex, three-dimensional and crowded environment through which the
cells navigate. It has been known that flexibility of the cells, and the
mechanical properties of surrounding tissue determine the migration
characteristics. However, because of its complexity, the mechanisms underlying
amoeboid migration are poorly understood. The research objective of this
proposal is to provide a fluid mechanics-based understanding of amoeboid
migration through tissue. The project will also include outreach program for
high-school students and research experience for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to conduct a
high-fidelity computational modeling study to understand the simultaneous roles
of cell rheology and tissue geometry on amoeboid motility. The modeling involves
resolving extreme deformability of the cells with dynamically changing cell
shapes due to growing and retracting pseudopods, coarse-graining protein
reactions using a dynamic pattern formation model, coupling the cell membrane
deformation with cytoplasmic and extracellular fluid, and resolving
microstructural details of the surrounding tissue. An immersed-boundary method
is used coupling cell membrane deformation, tissue microstructures, fluid flow,
and protein reaction-diffusion. Simulations will be performed by varying the
cell rheology and tissue microstructure (for example, porosity and pore shape)
to understand how they affect overall migration dynamics. In parallel, cell
motility experiments in artificial scaffolds will be considered to validate the
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.