* 1804654
* Collaborative Research (RUI): Understanding Potential Structures and Ion Dynamics Near Sheaths in Electronegative and Electropositive Multiple Ion Species Bounded Plasma
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Noah Hershkowitz, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 345,000.00

The common states of matter on Earth are solids, liquids and gases. Putting
energy into gases can result in the 4th state of matter known as plasma, which
consists of electrically charged particles (electrons and ions, both positive
and negative) and neutral atoms and molecules. While uncommon on the Earth,
plasma makes up more than 99% of the visible matter in the universe. Where
plasma comes in contact with material boundaries, a thin region near the plasma
boundary usually forms to isolate the plasma from the boundary. This thin region
is called the plasma sheath. Experiments to be performed under this award will
improve our understanding of plasma sheaths and associated phenomena as
fundamental to understanding all bounded plasmas. Plasmas studied in this work
are similar to those used in plasma applications such as the etching of
semiconducting materials to make computer chips, in plasma space propulsion
satellite engines, and in experimental plasma fusion devices. The majority of
experimental studies will be carried out at the University of San Diego (USD),
which is primarily an undergraduate institution. The award will also support
outreach activities to promote engagement of students with diverse backgrounds
in science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments to be carried out at USD, in
collaboration with University of Wisconsin - Madison, will address important
questions associated with sheaths and the Bohm Criterion in multiple ion species
plasma, both electropositive and electronegative, many for the first time. In
previous work, this collaborative group discovered anomalous sheath edge
velocities while testing the Bohm Criterion in two ion species plasma. This
effect has now been theoretically explained via the introduction of ion-ion
streaming instabilities. As a result, many different aspects of sheath formation
must be reevaluated in light of the new theory. Moreover, there are as yet no
such corresponding measurements for electronegative plasma with multiple ion
species. This project will pursue experiments to perform such measurements,
measurements that determine the presheath and sheath plasma potential profiles
with emissive probes. Ion velocity distribution functions (IVDFs) associated
with ion acceleration will be determined with tunable diode lasers using the
laser-induced fluorescence (LIF) technique. The award will also support transfer
of cutting edge research techniques to the classrooms and teaching laboratories
for undergraduate and graduate students at the University of San Diego, and at
the University of Wisconsin-Madison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.