* 1804332
* Collaborative Research: Active Transport of Lipid Vesicles in Osmotic Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kyle Bishop, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 290,001.00

The membranes of living cells are highly and selectively permeable to water.
Variations in the osmotic pressure due to dissolved molecules drives water
transport across the membrane, thereby inducing fluid flows and membrane
motions. Such flows are critical to biological processes such as the regulation
of cell water content, the transport of intra- and extracellular compartments,
and the migration of cells in tissues. Despite their importance, the fundamental
fluid mechanics underlying these processes remains poorly understood. This
project aims to advance our understanding of fluid flows and membrane motions
driven by osmotic gradients. Such knowledge will further enable biotechnologies
involving the extraction, separation, and delivery of extracellular vesicles,
which are actively pursued as diagnostic and therapeutic tools for treating
human diseases. The project will also provide educational opportunities to
middle and high school students from underrepresented groups through laboratory
tours and summer research experiences.

The central goal of the proposed work is to develop experimental platforms and
theoretical models that elucidate the physical mechanisms underlying the motion
of lipid vesicles in osmotic gradients ? a process called osmophoresis. Using
microfluidic systems, we will quantify vesicle velocity as a function of
membrane properties such as vesicle size, permeability, rigidity, tension /
excess area, and surface charge as well as environmental properties such as
solute type, gradient magnitude, fluid viscosity, and confinement. Notably, we
will use lipid membranes incorporating aquaporin water channels to create high
permeability vesicles that mimic native exosomes. The proposed experiments will
provide definitive data with which to enhance our understanding of osmophoresis
and its impact on vesicle transport in biology. The proposed theory will
integrate previous work on the osmophoresis of rigid spherical membranes with
models of membrane dynamics that account for deformation and flow within
incompressible lipid bilayers. Our theoretical investigations will ultimately
reproduce and explain experimental observations of rapid vesicle motions in
osmotic gradients. Finally, the proposed demonstration of osmophoretic vesicle
sorting will provide a fundamental basis for biotechnologies involving the
separation and characterization of extracellular vesicles.

This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of
support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader
impacts review criteria.