* 1804741
* Manufacturing USA: Biomanufacturing of Cell Microparticles from Stem Cells As Novel Thrombotic Therapeutic Agents
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Donna Woulfe, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2023
* USD 590,000.00

Cell and gene therapies can be used to treat a large array of diseases. Therapy
is based on using whole cells or viruses to deliver genes or proteins to the
patient. Membrane sacs, known as extracellular vesicles (EVs), are a promising
new delivery system. They can target specific types of cells for delivery of
their cargo, and can carry proteins, fats and ribonucleic acids. This project
will develop EV technology based on specialized cells in the bone marrow that
generate platelets. Development of this technology could lead to new strategies
for solving long-standing problems in Transfusion Medicine by providing a stable
and abundant source of platelets. High school and college students from
underrepresented groups will engage in research experiences to stimulate their
interest in engineering and biomanufacturing careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop foundational science and engineering for
preparing functional extracellular vesicles (EVs) to enable novel cell and gene
therapies. EVs are submicron membrane vesicles that carry RNAs, proteins and
lipids from their parent cells. Cells use EVs to communicate with other cells,
delivering signals through their content, and targeting a rather narrow range of
cell types through receptor-recognition mechanisms based on surface proteins. It
is now widely accepted that extracellular vesicles are excellent candidates for
enabling safe and potent cell and gene therapies. This project will focus on
megakaryocytic microparticles (MPs; a type of extracellular vesicles), which
target and deliver cargo to hematopoietic stem &amp; progenitor cells (HSPCs).
The most important feature of these MPs is that they specifically target HSPCs
and program them to generate more megakaryocytes, the precursors of platelets.
This project will develop characterization methods and assays for these MPs so
that they can be used to develop robust protocols for generating large MP
quantities. Finally, the project will also assess the biological efficacy of
these MPs as thrombotic agents using a simple murine
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.