* 1804158
* Prokaryotes-phage interactions in engineered bioreactors-a new paradigm in system microbial ecology.
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Ramesh Goel, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2024
* USD 354,261.00

Bioreactors can remove contaminants from wastewater while providing valuable
products such as biofuels. Bioreactor function relies on an appropriate
bacterial community structure for efficient conversion of waste. However, the
bacterial community can be affected by bacteria present in the incoming waste
stream. A less known way that the bioreactor bacterial community can be affected
is by the presence of bacteriophage, viruses that only infect bacteria. Although
phages are known to affect bacterial populations in marine environments, very
little is known about bacteria-phage interactions in engineered bioreactors. The
proposed research will evaluate the role of bacteriophage life-cycle on
bioreactor bacterial communities based on the basic science of bacteria-phage
interactions. This research will also shed light on whether phages participate
in gene transfer with the bacterial communities. Results from this research will
help define mechanisms for the removal of nitrogen, carbon, and pollutants from
waste streams to protect ecological and human health, while producing valuable
products like biofuels to enhance the Nation's energy
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to study
the genomic content of viruses infecting key bacteria from activated sludge
processes (ASP) and anaerobic digester microbial communities in lab-scale
reactors and anaerobic digesters. Three broad questions have been proposed: (1)
What is the genomic content and diversity of viral communities infecting key ASP
bacteria and microbiomes in organic waste valorization anaerobic bioprocesses?;
(2) How does phage genomic content change with process configuration, and what
is the role of phages during process upsets?; and (3) Are the bacteriophages
present in ASP bioreactors and anaerobic digesters contributing to gene
transfers between different prokaryotes? Three sets of lab scale reactors will
be used to simulate commonly used treatment scenarios in the wastewater
community. These reactors will be subjected to various external perturbations
and disturbances to study bacteriophages dynamics in these reactors. High
throughput sequencing of bacterial and phage DNA, followed by a genome
extraction exercise, will allow the study of bacterial-phage interactions in
engineered bioreactors. Overall, this project will answer several fundamental
questions related to phages in engineered bioreactors and add to the science of
wastewater treatment. The fundamental knowledge gained in this research will be
applicable in other natural and engineered systems This research project will
contribute to graduate and undergraduate education, and U.S graduate students
will learn new techniques related to ecosystem research and
virology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.