* 1804224
* Crystal orientation and defect control in active and passive plasmonic systems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Jonathan Fan, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2022
* USD 350,000.00

Nontechnical description: Noble metals are important materials in electronic and
optical systems because they can conduct electrical currents with exceptional
ease. Material defects strongly dictate the electronic, optical, thermal, and
structural properties of these metals. To date, the precise role of defects in
device performance is not well understood, in part because there do not exist
robust and scalable ways to define defects in metallic structures. This research
project aims to investigate the role of individual defects in the electronic and
optical properties of gold devices. This work leverages a new technique for
metal growth that specifies single defects in a simple and scalable way. An
experimental understanding of how to control and characterize defects in noble
metals provides new insights into how noble metal devices can be made to be more
energy efficient, optically responsive, and mechanically robust. Experimental
quantification of defect properties also enables theoretical researchers to more
accurately model devices. The education component of this project targets
engineering education at the high school level, by working with teachers in the
lab to provide them with a research perspective in nanotechnology education, and
by engaging with high school students through seminars and
discussion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description: In this research
project, the principle investigator explores methods to control the crystal
orientation, grain boundary orientation, and grain boundary position in single-
and bi-crystal gold metal microstructures. These material systems serve as model
systems to explore the role of defects in active and passive plasmonic devices.
A crystal growth technique called rapid melt growth specifies crystal
orientation and defects in the metal. In this technique, a silica microcrucible
encapsulates polycrystalline gold and a platinum seed, where the gold is first
heated to its melting point and is then cooled. Liquid phase epitaxy initiates
from the seed region, is directional, and specifies the crystal orientations of
the metal microstructures based on the seed crystal. As such, this method serves
as a versatile and scalable platform for defining the crystallographic
properties of metals through lithographic patterning. For example, two seed
structures at each end of a gold stripe produce bi-crystals with a range of
tilt-boundary angles. The principle investigator aims to correlate parameters,
such as tilt-boundary angle, with plasmon transport, using optical and
electronic microscopy techniques. The education component of this project
focuses on high school engineering education, by providing teachers with
nanotechnology experience and students with summer laboratory programs and
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.