* 1804929
* Modeling and analysis of material transport in complex geometry of neurons
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Yongjie Zhang, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 416,000.00

To survive and function, neurons must transport essential materials down long
projections called neurites. Neurites bring information to and from other
neurons. The transport of materials down neurites must be controlled to make
sure that the right type and amount of material is delivered to the right
destination. Using new engineering models, methods, and software, this project's
goal is to explain how material traffic is routed and balanced in the complex
geometry of neurons. This will enhance understanding of how neurons operate
their material transport systems and, more importantly, how to control neuronal
structure and function. Successful completion of this project will 1) advance
fundamental knowledge of neurobiology and neural engineering on how materials
are transported in the complex geometry of neurons; 2) provide new insights into
mechanisms of material transport related to neurological diseases such as
Alzheimer's disease; and 3) produce software required for developing related
drug delivery solutions. The engineering tools developed will be distributed
freely and openly in order to further advance related basic and translational
research. Research in this project will be closely integrated with teaching to
provide students with interdisciplinary training opportunities. Educational
materials related to basic knowledge of neurobiology and neural engineering will
be developed and disseminated to the public through the internet as well as
through local education and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to elucidate how material transport traffic is routed and
balanced in the complex geometry of neurons through developing and applying new
engineering models, methods and software. Studies are designed to test the
hypothesis that traffic routing and balancing are actively controlled based on
the local geometry of the complex neurite network. The research plan has three
aims. 1) To determine how traffic is routed within the neurite network. Network
geometry and transport patterns will be obtained by collecting time-lapse movies
of transport of amyloid precursor and synaptic vesicle proteins and mitochondria
at neurite junctions of drosophila sensory neurons and rat hippocampal neurons
and counting the number of cargoes going into different branches. Data analysis
features include developing neurite tracing software, vector characterization of
traffic routing distributions at each branch, testing different traffic routing
models based on different assumptions of the cytoskeletal structure at the
junctions, and using single particle tracking. The imaging and data analysis
techniques developed will then be applied to determining if damage of specific
neurite branches (laser ablation) and the Alzheimer's condition (amyloid-beta
peptide induced) will influence traffic routing. 2) To determine how traffic is
balanced within the neurite network. The topological structure of the network
will be represented as trees and the theoretical framework for understanding
traffic balance will be inspired by flux balance analysis of metabolic networks.
The focus will be on how traffic is balanced in single branches and subnetworks.
Comparable to Aim 1, studies will be performed to determine how traffic is
balanced in damaged and Alzheimer's disease neurons. Computer simulations will
be used to understand relations between traffic routing and balancing. 3) To
develop and apply open-source software for computer simulation of material
transport in complex 3D geometry of neurons. A new isogeometric analysis (IGA)
based numerical technique will be developed to simulate material transport
within the complex geometry. The simulation software will be validated and
tested through integration with experiments and then used to design
intracellular delivery strategies for related neurological diseases whose
geometries can be obtained in existing databases. The results of this project
have the potential to advance both neurobiology and neuroengineering fields;
neurobiology advances come in the form of new understanding of the structure and
function of neurons; neuroengineering advances come in the form of new
understanding about how to utilize and control the material transport process
for applications such as repair and renewal of damaged or degenerative neurons.
The image acquisition, data analysis and modeling tools developed may be widely
applicable in other areas of investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.