* 1804940
* Collaborative Research: Active Colloids under AC Electric Fields: From Single Particle Motion to Collective Dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Aleksandar Donev, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 225,002.00

The active transport of microscopic objects is essential for maintaining the
bioactivities of living species. Although nature has evolved to possess complex
biochemical motors, the development of synthetic motors lags far behind.
Recently, a new type of synthetic motor driven by an alternating current
electric field was developed, which hold promise for on-demand control of
intelligent micro-machines. However, current electrokinetic theory cannot
consistently explain their propulsion behavior under different field conditions.
A complementary experimental and computational study will be performed to model
the hydrodynamic flow surrounding the motors and thus reveal the underlying
physical mechanisms that govern the motion of both individual and a large
ensemble of motors. This research will provide the fundamental knowledge
necessary for the development of technologies to manipulate micro- and nano-
scale objects with both spatial and temporal regulations. Education and outreach
activities, such as the development of learning modules for K-12 public schools
and research summer experience programs for undergraduates, will also be
developed with the goal to encourage the participation of underrepresented
groups toward university science and engineering programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand how the
electrohydrodynamics of asymmetric particles influence their active behavior
ranging from single particle motion to small cluster formation to emergent
collective dynamics. Three specific research tasks will be performed: (1)
Elucidate the electrohydrodynamic propulsion mechanisms of dielectric particles
at both low and high frequencies; (2) Reveal the intricate interplay between
hydrodynamic interaction, steric effects, Brownian motion, and electrostatic
interaction in the assembly of small clusters; and (3) Investigate the
collective behavior of thousands of linear motors and rotating spinners. The
experimental framework, by creating asymmetric properties in particles and
tuning different field conditions, will allow systematic studies of the
propulsion of asymmetric particles and reveal potentially different propulsion
mechanisms at low and high frequencies, thus significantly advancing the field
of electrokinetics. The computational methods with tunable resolution will also
be able to achieve a balance between accuracy and cost, as required for studying
the length and time scale of interest. A detailed comparison between experiments
and numerical modeling will provide crucial insights and help reveal the
underlying physics of electrohydrodynamic motors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.