* 1804186
* Deformation and flow of highly polydisperse amorphous solids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Eric Weeks, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2022
* USD 306,428.00

This is an experimental study of how disordered materials flow. The flow of
materials like mud, cement, foam, and dirt in landslides is quite different from
the flow of liquids. These materials have been studied before but their
complexity makes it difficult to determine general principles about how these
interesting substances flow. Some past studies used simple systems to try to
mimic these complicated materials: a standard simple system is a liquid full of
round particles with a specific size. It is clear that these simple systems fail
to reproduce many of the interesting flow behaviors of the real materials. This
work studies the flow of materials with intermediate complexity: liquids with
particles with a wide variety of sizes in the same sample. Optical microscopy is
used to examine the motion of the particles and see how they rearrange, for
example, how small particles are forced to move around large particles. These
observations will be used to develop basic ideas about the flow of other
disordered materials, which will lead to better understanding of how to move,
mix, and process complex materials of industrial relevance. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be engaged in conducting the research. Additionally, the
researchers regularly host field trips of visiting students (first grade through
high school) to teach them about soft squishy materials and how scientists study
these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
understand how amorphous solids flow, in particular to connect particle-scale
rearrangements to macroscopic flow profiles and rheological behavior. The
samples are highly polydisperse emulsions, where the largest droplets are ten
times the radius of the smallest droplets (or more). Flowing and sheared samples
are studied with video and confocal microscopy. This enables the motion of
individual droplets to be measured. When a large strain is applied, droplets
rearrange irreversibly. These rearrangements can be quantified in terms of
topological changes, magnitudes of displacements, and how non-affine the flow is
locally. The project connects these details of droplet rearrangements to the
size of individual droplets. More broadly, these details likely depend on the
overall droplet size distribution. Additionally, the microscopic details must
connect with macroscopic rheological properties. Complementary experiments can
be done with solid particles, and simulations provide a third route to explore
these questions. The overall motivation is to bridge the gap between prior model
systems that studied mixtures of particles of fairly similar sizes, and complex
real-world materials such as mud and cement. This will lead to new microscopic
understanding of the shear of amorphous materials with large size
polydispersity. At least one undergraduate and one graduate student will be
involved with the research. The research team will also host field trips each
year to demonstrate to visiting students that cutting edge science can be done
with simple materials which they can literally get their hands
on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.