* 1804117
* TIM Protein-Mediated Ebola Virus-Host Cell Adhesion: Experiments and Models
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Anand Jagota, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2022
* USD 308,186.00

Viruses cause diseases ranging from the common cold to the deadly and highly
infectious Ebola disease. Their "modus operandi" is to enter healthy cells,
often like a Trojan Horse, by hijacking normal physiological processes, tricking
the cell to let them in. For this reason, a principal difficulty in designing
therapies against viruses lies in the fact that attempts to stop them from
entering a cell are also likely to affect normal physiological processes. For
example, the Ebola virus infects healthy cells by disguising itself as debris
(wastes or remains) from dead cells. Healthy cells whose normal function is to
clear up this debris mistakenly take up Ebola and are thus infected. But there
are always some differences between a virus and debris particles suggesting
that, if studied carefully, it might be possible to design therapies that can
block specific virus entry while leaving normal physiological processes
essentially intact. In order to be successful in this attempt, it is necessary
to understand virus uptake processes in quantitative detail both experimentally
and theoretically, and particularly the latter, which is the main goal of this
project. Building on separate studies that use microscope based technologies to
measure binding forces between molecules, the focus of this project is to
develop understanding of the behavior of collections of adhesion molecules
(proteins on cell surfaces that cause cells to bind to other cells or
particles), and ultimately to develop a predictive model for how an entire virus
particle attaches to a cell prior to its uptake. An important part of this work
is modeling the deformation of virus and cell particles in order to
quantitatively measure their properties. If successful, this project will
contribute to establishing an experimentally validated, quantitative connection
between biology based models for virus entry into cells and the properties of
the virus and the cell. The interdisciplinary nature of this research program
will provide an excellent educational and research opportunity for graduate and
undergraduate students. Working with the Da Vinci Science Center in Allentown,
the investigators will design a new exhibit demonstrating the physical and
mechanical details of virus uptake and how its study could lead to potential
therapies or a cure. (The Da Vinci Science Center is an independent non-profit
organization that promotes hands-on science learning through inquiry, highlights
vibrant and important career opportunities in science available to every young
person, and encourages all people to be curious and creative.)
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish an experimentally
informed predictive and quantitative model of the Ebola Virus (EBOV)-host cell
interactions at the molecular through single-virus levels. While EBOV-host cell
attachment has been shown to depend critically on the molecular biophysics of
interaction between receptors on the cell surface and the outer coat of the
virus, the quantitative understanding essential for guiding the development of
therapies that would prevent EBOV from attaching to, and thus from entering a
cell, is completely lacking. Recent work has established the importance of TIM
family proteins and the geometry and mechanical properties of its mucin-like
stalk domain (MLD). Building on these recent findings, further progress can be
made by using experimental and theoretical molecular biophysics to uncover a
quantitative understanding of the molecular, cellular, and biophysical
mechanisms of EBOV attachment to a host cell. Building on separate studies that
utilize single-molecule force spectroscopy to characterize experimentally how
TIM family proteins interact with EBOV, this project will develop biophysical
models that show how single-molecule biomechanical properties, and how the
properties of the MLD, such as its length, rigidity, and charge density, control
TIM mediated cellular/viral membrane adhesion and engulfment. The model will be
developed in three phases. 1) At the Intermolecular Scale, the adhesion between
a single TIM-1 and the viral membrane is studied using coarse-grained Brownian
Dynamics Models to predict interaction potentials. 2) At the Intermediate Scale,
the glycocalyx will be added to the cell surface and glycoproteins will be added
on the virus surface to establish the role of the mechanical properties of the
MLD stalk, using a course grained model solved with Brownian Dynamics at 300K.
3) At the Mechanics of Whole Virus and Internalization Scale, findings at the
Intermolecular and Intermediate Scales will be incorporated at the scale of the
viral particles and deformable membranes will be added, with the goal of
describing the virus adhesion process, including effects due to membrane bending
and tension, using a combination of semi-analytic models and coarse-grained
models. The project will thus elucidate quantitatively - for the first time -
the biophysical mechanism of EBOV-host cell interaction, providing potential new
targets for antiviral drug development. While the focus of the focus of this
project is on the EBOV, the approach taken will be applicable to other related
virus-host cell interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.