* 1804540
* Collaborative Proposal: Understanding Motor Cortical Organization through Engineering Innovation to TMS-Based Brain Mapping
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Wasim Malik, Massachusetts General Hospital
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

This project addresses a question that has vexed scientists for more than a
century: how does the motor cortex, i.e. the part of the brain where nerve
impulses initiate voluntary muscular activity, represent and coordinate multiple
muscles in order to produce a vast range of movements? To answer this question,
this project will harness the unique strengths of non-invasive, navigated,
transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) mapping to establish causal links
between brain physiology and behavior. TMS is achieved by placing a coil of
wires near the scalp, which when activated with an electrical current will
create a magnetic field across the scalp and skull. TMS is the only non-invasive
method available to stimulate the brain as effectively as invasive stimulation
for mapping the motor cortex. However, innovations in three areas are critically
needed to use TMS-based motor mapping to understand multi-muscle physiology and
control: 1) drastically improving the efficiency, efficacy and reliability of
the TMS-based motor cortex mapping processes, 2) characterizing and validating
TMS-based mapping as a probe for understanding the relationship between multi-
muscle activation and voluntary movement, and 3) applying a neural network
computational method to improve understanding of motor control and organization.
Enhanced understanding of motor cortex physiology through TMS mapping of motor
representations has the potential to better map the brain in applications such
as surgical removal of tumors, assessing brain injury due to concussions or
stroke, and identifying cortical networks needed for successful brain-machine
interactions for controlling prostheses. Students involved with this project
will be trained to address multidisciplinary challenges at the intersection of
neuroscience, non-invasive brain stimulation, software design, control theory,
machine-learning, statistical signal processing, data dimensionality reduction
and visualization. Partnership with Boston-based leaders in the technology
industry will provide state-of-the-art training to undergraduate, graduate, and
post-graduate trainees. Through cooperative educational programming at
Northeastern University and internships with Mass General Hospital, STEM-based
learning opportunities will be provided for middle- and high-school students,
inspiring a diverse body of students to pursue STEM careers. To promote STEM
careers and demonstrate impact, the team will reach out to local venues that
promote public awareness and appreciation of science, such as science fairs and
the Boston Museum of Science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
collaborative project is to develop a deeper mechanistic understanding of the
role of the motor cortex (M1) in controlling single muscles and synergies in
producing complex movements. This will be accomplished by developing several
innovations in the use of non-invasive transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS)
to map the spatial distribution of synergies and single muscles. Transformative
computational advances will be used to extract more accurate information about
brain interaction with other physiological systems outside the motor domain and
increase the rigor of analysis and data visualization to enhance
interpretability, and repeatability. An enhanced understanding of corticomotor
organization of complex movement will pave the way to studying motor system
development across the lifespan, the basis of human performance enhancement, and
the basis and characterization of neuromotor diseases. The research plan is
organized under 3 aims. AIM 1 is to accelerate acquisition of TMS-based maps by
developing an active learning process based on a Gaussian Process Model (GPM) of
Muscle Evoked Potentials (MEPs) as a function of 2D spatial coordinates on the
scalp. The developed Active-GMP learning algorithm is expected to speed up the
mapping process by diverting time spent on loci with null data to loci where the
model needs more samples to improve certainty. The efficacy and the accuracy of
the new algorithm will be compared to three existing alternatives. AIM 2 is to
test the behavioral relevance of synergies derived from human multi-muscle TMS
mapping, i.e., to biologically validate the technical methods developed in Aim
1. Specifically, TMS and Voluntary (VOL) EMG data will be collected from 16
hand-arm muscles in healthy participants while subjects mimic hand postures for
static letters and numbers of the American Sign Language alphabet. Non-negative
matrix factorization-extracted synergies from VOL data and TMS data will be
compared to determine if the TMS-elicited synergies match those utilized during
movement production and if the adaptive Active-GMP and user-guided approaches
more closely match synergies derived from VOL data compared to other approaches.
AIM 3 is to develop generative and inverse topographic imaging models that allow
forward modeling of M1 control and reverse mapping of M1 organization,
respectively, of muscles and synergies. Hybrid models combining subject-specific
FE modeling of TMS-induced cortical electric fields with neural network models
trained to predict evoked muscle responses will be used to answer key questions:
Q1) Are synergies dominant features of motor control? Q2) Do direct M1
motorneuron projections augment a synergy model of control? and Q3) Are muscles
and synergies discretely organized in M1?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.