* 1804241
* Collaborative Research: Dynamic Manipulation of Micro-scale Liquid-Liquid Interfaces within Complex Droplets for Tunable Optics
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2021
* Mathias Kolle, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Optical materials that can be tuned and adjusted in real time have become
important in many applications. These include display technology, compact
imaging devices, biomedical sensors, and point-of-care diagnostic tools. Liquids
have many properties that would be beneficial for tunable optics. Liquids are
deformable, have a broad range of adjustable properties, and have ultra-smooth
surfaces with variable curvature. These characteristics could be particularly
beneficial in tunable micro-lenses. In this project, the investigators will
examine how complex droplets behave as tunable optical materials. Here, the
complex droplets will be composed of two or three immiscible oils within an
aqueous outer phase. A combination of experiments and analytical and
computational modeling will be used. The aim is to provide a comprehensive
understanding of the opportunities for realizing novel fluid-based optical
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Micron-scale optical elements have
contributed significantly to the miniaturization of devices and instrumentation.
They have been used in integral imaging and 3D displays, spatial light
modulators, endoscopes, plenoptic cameras, and solar concentrators. Dynamically
switchable reflective micro-optics, based on digital micro-mirror displays and
continuously reconfigurable absorptive pixel technology enabled by liquid
crystal displays, have enabled transformative advances in optical technology.
Similarly, dynamic refractive micro-optics are poised to complement and extend
the capabilities of present micro-optical devices. Although not yet a staple in
the optical engineer's toolbox, liquids offer tremendous flexibility, design
advantages, miniaturization promise, and manufacturing benefits in applications
that require tunability. Despite the promise of using liquids within optical
devices, the same malleability and sensitivity to many stimuli that make liquids
so valuable for tunable optics can also make them difficult to control with the
precision required for optical applications. A deeper fundamental understanding
of strategies for liquid interface manipulation to fine-tune a fluid optical
element and new approaches for controlling fluid-fluid interfaces within complex
multiphase systems are critical for the advancement of optofluidic devices. In
this collaborative effort, researchers aim to demonstrate that careful design of
the composition and morphology of multiphase emulsion droplets provides a
powerful strategy to form tunable lenses and micro-scale total internal
reflection modules. This research pushes the boundaries of current liquid optics
by exploring how droplets containing multiple reconfigurable fluid interfaces
can be used to control lensing, correct for optical aberrations, and enable
efficient spectral dispersion through total internal reflection. Understanding
how liquid interfaces can be addressed independently or in tandem to dynamically
tune the optical behavior of complex droplets will enable applications of fluids
as optical components. Through this collaboration, the team aims to bring
together optical theory with an enhanced understanding of how to manipulate
multiphase liquids with the goal of broadening the role that complex fluids play
in the realm of dynamic optical materials. Given the ease by which the complex
droplets used in this proposal can be fabricated and reconfigured, the
researchers will use fluid optical materials as a teaching tool to introduce
K-12 students and educators to concepts in surface science. Broader societal
impact of the research program is expected through applications in point-of-care
diagnostics. Development of more sensitive, quantitative, and low cost platforms
for health monitoring will have far-reaching global impact on
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.