* 1804321
* Non-Intrusive Interpretation and Improvement of Multi-Occupancy Human Thermal Comfort through Analysis of Facial Infrared Thermography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Eunshin Byon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 365,000.00

In the U.S. and worldwide, HVAC systems represent one of the largest energy end
uses, accounting for approximately 50 percent of the total energy required to
operate residential and commercial buildings. Despite the significant energy
footprint of HVAC systems, occupants in the built environment are often
dissatisfied with their thermal comfort. Current "human-in-the-loop" approaches
provide opportunities for occupants to vote on thermal comfort and preferences
(for example, by adjusting the thermostat), thus allowing for HVAC system
adjustment based on human feedback. However, relying on intermittent human
feedback prevents robust evaluation of the comfort level and determination of a
comfortable setpoint. This project will explore the feasibility of using
infrared thermography as a non-intrusive method for predicting human thermal
comfort preferences in single and multi-occupancy building spaces. It will also
design and validate a robust HVAC control framework for buildings that will
synchronously use the analyzed thermography data to adjust its setpoint to
improve thermal comfort in indoor spaces and reduce overall dissatisfaction
among occupants in multi-occupancy spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to explore the premise that thermal comfort can be measured non-intrusively and
reliably in real, operational built environments. The resulting new knowledge
has the potential to transition building HVAC control from a passive and user-
empirical process to an automated, user-centric and data-driven mechanism that
can simultaneously improve occupant satisfaction in indoor environments while
reducing energy consumption. The research extends theory from human thermal
comfort evaluation, computer vision and optimization under uncertainties with
the objective of creating a robust and scalable non-intrusive HVAC control
framework for thermal comfort optimization in various indoor contexts. Although
the focus is on thermal comfort in this project, the developed framework and
methodology can be extended to evaluate other indoor environmental quality
factors such as lighting and airflow. This project will also build a publicly
available thermal comfort dataset consisting of facial thermal images,
subjective thermal sensations and preferences of occupants, and ambient room
conditions, that will enable consistent evaluation and benchmarking of new
methods in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.