* 1804922
* Collaborative Research: Engineering Human 3D Cardiac Tissue Model of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Costas Grigoropoulos, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

Currently, human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSC) technology (a Nobel Prize
winning technology that can turn abundant human cells, such as skin cells and
fat cells, into stem cells that can give rise to every other cell type in the
body) has made it possible to model human heart diseases in cell culture as a
"disease-in-a-dish." However, the grand challenge in current hiPSC disease
modeling is that these models have tended to simplify the diseases as being a
result of a single defective gene without taking into account the many other
influences of genetic-environmental interactions. Specifically, hypertrophic
cardiomyopathy (HCM), a condition in which the heart cells enlarge causing the
heart wall to thicken, is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death among young
adults and athletes, which indicates that physical stress increases the risk of
developing heart failure in the patients already at risk due to genetic factors.
Therefore, to develop useful "HCM-in-a dish" model systems, it is necessary to
precisely control the environmental stress exerted on hiPS-derived cardiac
tissues. This project focuses on the MYBPC3 gene, which is one of the most
frequently mutated HCM genes. Though the relationship has been established, the
mechanisms by which MYBPC3 mutations lead to HCM are not known. Thus, the
primary goal of this project is to investigate the correlation between HCM
characteristics and reduced MYBPC3 expression, and how this could be influenced
by the increase of environmental stress to the cardiac tissues. Key to the
success of this effort is creating a functional/beating 3D cardiac tissue model
of HCM, which offers better understanding of how the genetic defects combine
with the cellular and tissue environment to initiate and advance the disease.
More broadly, the strategies developed in this project could be applied to
studying other cardiac diseases and potentially lead to new therapies for
disease management and treatment. This new approach (which requires hiPSC
technology, cardiac tissue engineering, advanced 3D bioprinting, and materials
processing and characterization) will provide significant and presently
unavailable opportunities for high school, undergraduate and graduate students
to have exciting research experiences and state-of-the-art training in
biomedical engineering and nanotechnology. This will be accomplished with
coordinated, structured instruction and assessments in the form of coursework,
seminars, and workshops, as well as with participation in the research
laboratory environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is
to establish an isogenic, human induced pluripotent stem cell (hiPSs) based
tissue model of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), for studying how genetic
defects interplay with the cellular and tissue environment to initiate and
progress the disease. HCM is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death among
young adults and athletes, which indicates that physical stress increases the
risk of developing heart failure in patients with HCM-related genetic
predispositions. This project focuses on the MYBPC3 gene, one of the most
frequent mutated HCM genes, though molecular mechanisms by which MYBPC3
mutations lead to HCM remain elusive. The central hypothesis of this project is
that the severity of HCM phenotype would be dose-dependent on the reduction of
MYBPC3 gene expression and protein content (haploinsufficiency), which could be
exacerbated by the increase of environmental stress to cardiac microtissues
derived from hiPSCs (hiPS-microCTs). The microtissue model will be established
by integrating: 1) hiPSC technology for understanding human-specific HCM disease
mechanisms associated with MYBPC3 mutations, 2) laser-based bioprinting method
for the creation of three-dimensional (3D) hiPS-microCTs on the filamentous
matrices with controllable biomechanical stress, and 3) gene-editing approach
for the generation of MYBPC3 loss-of-function mutations with identical genetic
background (isogenic) as wild type (WT) and dose-dependent reduction of MYBPC3
gene expression. The research plan is organized under three objectives: 1) To
correlate the biomechanical stress presented to the MYBPC3 deficient isogenic
hiPS-microCTs with the HCM disease severity based on the primary phenotypic
metrics; 2) To correlate the haploinsufficiency level in the MYBPC3 deficient
isogenic hiPS-microCTs with the HCM disease severity under different
biomechanical stress; and 3) To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in
the stress-induced disease progression of MYBPC3-associated HCM. The combination
of hiPSC technology, 3D bioprinting, gene editing method and tissue engineering
approaches provides great potential in the development of next generation hiPSC-
based disease-specific in vitro preclinical tissue models. This model will be a
significant advancement for investigating genotype-phenotype correlation
associated with the clinical heterogeneity, elucidating the disease progression
in human cardiomyopathies, and developing new therapeutic strategies for disease
management and treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.