* 1804629
* Collaborative Research: Sodiation Driven Multiscale Chemical-Structural Interactions in Alloy Electrodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* George Nelson, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2023
* USD 254,756.00

There is a critical need to dramatically increase the integration of renewable
energy in the electric grid. The inherently intermittent and diffuse nature of
these renewable resources predicates the development of cost-effective, large-
scale energy storage. Such storage capabilities offer the added benefit of
contributing resilience to the electric grid, which is needed to mitigate the
effects of natural disasters and other catastrophic events. Electrochemical
energy storage technologies based on earth abundant and cost-effective materials
are increasingly needed. The sodium ion battery and tin (Sn) based alloy anode
materials are promising technologies for this application that needs high-
capacity energy storage. Through this fundamental research project, stronger
connection is made between the chemical and structural changes due to sodium
storage in Sn-based alloys and the resulting performance of the sodium ion
battery. The research project contributes to the education and training of both
graduate and undergraduate students within a multidisciplinary research
environment. The integrated education and outreach plan will create
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, and high school students to be
involved in this research and places a strong emphasis on increasing the
participation of students from underrepresented groups. Research findings will
be integrated into the curriculum at the undergraduate and graduate level
through lectures and laboratory classes. A library of open-source data generated
from the comprehensive experiment, characterization, and simulation efforts will
lead to the advancement of energy storage science. By facilitating the future
development of sodium ion batteries, the project will help contribute to the
societal need for cost-effective grid energy storage. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal objective of this research is to develop a comprehensive knowledge
base and understanding of the chemical and structural transformations in high-
capacity tin (Sn) based alloy electrodes for sodium ion batteries. This work is
predicated on the hypothesis that changes in mesoscale morphology and chemical
composition caused by sodiation contribute significantly to the irreversible
capacity of such alloy electrodes. An experimental program including
electrochemical testing, X-ray diffraction characterization of electrode crystal
structure, and in operando X-ray tomography will be coupled with mesoscale
computational studies of sodium ion battery electrode microstructures. This
comprehensive research approach will test the above hypothesis by achieving
these research objectives: (1) correlate changes in Sn-based alloy electrode
crystal structure with electrochemical performance; (2) correlate multiscale
alloy electrode morphology with structural and chemical changes; and (3) clarify
the influence of electrode microstructure on the transport-electrochemistry
interaction and performance. The research will provide insight into the
interactions between microstructure, chemistry, and performance in sodium ion
batteries. The combined experimental and computational approach will provide
unprecedented details on the chemical and structural evolution of alloy
electrodes due to sodiation. The insights gained will facilitate engineering of
future sodium ion battery electrodes and will yield methods applicable to an
array of electrode materials relevant to other battery chemistries. The proposed
X-ray imaging and mesoscale modeling efforts will yield a documented set of 3D
microstructural data, which will be disseminated through an open-source platform
and will support future research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.