* 1804672
* Collaborative Research: NSF-NSFC: Improving FEW system sustainability over the SEUS and NCP: A cross-regional synthesis considering uncertainties in climate and regional developmen
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,04/30/2024
* Liangzhi You, International Food Policy Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 04/30/2024
* USD 100,000.00

The Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus, from a global perspective, can be described
as the interconnected resource systems of food, energy, and water. As the
world's population expands to the expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be a
need to balance difference resources across these three systems to obtain
different user goals without putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide
these resources. The research groups from North Carolina State University, the
University of Central Florida, and the International Food Policy Research
Institute, in collaboration with research partners in China from Peking
University and the China Institute of Water Resources and Hydropower Research,
plan to develop a Regional FEW system (ReFEWS) modeling framework for the
Southeast US (SEUS) and North China Plain (NCP) Regions and identify and
quantify FEW sustainability indicators and metrics for these two regions. The
researchers intend to use the ReFEWS modeling framework to help various FEW
Nexus stakeholders and decision-makers plan regional development with projected
policy and development scenarios considering climate uncertainties over the next
10 - 30 years. Such a modeling framework would benefit US agricultural and
energy sectors in the southeastern region of the country by providing a tool to
help predict the best development plans to counter both current and future FEW
Nexus issues. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary research groups from
the US and China will consider two study regions, SEUS and NCP, which have
similar portfolios of crop production, water usage, and energy consumption, but
experience contrasting water and energy availability, regulations, and
management practices. Using ReFEWS, a simulation-optimization modeling framework
that links water, power, and crop production models, the principal investigators
plan to identify adaptation pathways to maximize synergies and minimize impacts
across FEW systems over the two regions. An allied goal is to perform a cross-
regional synthesis that describes how changes to ReFEWS systems could impact
both the agriculture sector and the prices of specific food commodities. The
researchers will also engage with several FEW systems institutions and agencies
for outreach and policy adaptations. The cross-disciplinary synthesis on two
regions of national importance will provide information for the development of a
white paper that will identify coping strategies and adaptation pathways for
improving FEW system resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.