* 1804286
* Effects of electrostatics on granular dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Troy Shinbrot, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 299,667.00

Powders and grains are used by the thousands of tons to process polymers,
catalysts, pharmaceuticals, and building materials. However, when powders and
grains are electrically charged, they stick to surfaces and collect into
aggregates. This leads to severe industrial problems, for example, producing
large variations in the active ingredient concentration in pharmaceuticals.
Likewise, sticking of thick, tenacious layers of polymers within processing
equipment can force manufacturers to shut down operations and jack-hammer the
stuck layers from the equipment walls. On the positive side, some technologies
such as electrospraying and photocopying rely on the sticking of charged
particles. Despite the profound problems and significant opportunities
associated with granular charging and sticking, the topic is remarkably poorly
understood. In previous work, the principal investigator has shown that particle
aggregates are affected by patterns of charge, rather than total charge, on
granular surfaces. The research in this award will develop new methods to
measure charge patterns that correlate to sticking behaviors. The research team
will perform both computer simulations and laboratory tests to confirm the
connection between these new measurements and the formation of electrostatic
sticking behaviors. New methods to control sticking in industrial operations
will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will
consist of three specific aims. First, investigators will develop and validate a
method of measuring dipole moments of free particles in microgravity experiments
designed to evaluate electrostatic aggregation of free particles in vacuum and
under microgravity -- i.e. under nearly ideal conditions. These experiments are
being performed by collaborators through separate funding. Second, the
experiments produce aggregates of 50 micron particles whose individual charges
can be individually evaluated: the principal investigator and his team will use
this information as input to simulations of forces acting on the aggregates to
establish the magnitudes of net charge and dipole moments on each particle
required to hold the aggregates together. The outcome at this point will be
direct, computer-guided experimental evaluations of relative strengths of dipole
and net charge influences on aggregate cohesion. Third, the researchers will
perform independent experiments to evaluate the net charge and dipole moment on
individual particles involved in controlled collisions. This will permit them to
both establish how large dipole components are likely to become as a result of
collisional dynamics, and to determine whether these magnitudes agree with the
microgravity experiments. Having completed these aims, the investigators will
for the first time have access to experimentally validated methods for obtaining
dipole moments of free particles. The researchers will have applied the methods
to the description of purely electrostatic forces acting both on aggregates
("aggregation"), and between aggregates and surfaces ("sticking"). This analysis
will permit the reliable evaluation of the influence of electrostatics on
sticking in a unique set of experiments and
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.