* 1804840
* Collaborative Research: Thermal Investigation of Strain-Tuned Thermal Conductivities of Thin Films
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Xiaojia Wang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 158,303.00

Strained nanofilms are widely used in electronic and optoelectronic devices,
microelectromechanical systems, photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, and for
solid-state energy conversion. However, the thermal properties of a strained
film have not yet been systematically investigated. This collaborative project
aims to study the impact of a high tensile strain (up to 1-10% depending on the
film thickness) on the thermal properties of representative thin films that are
of technologically important materials in current electronic industry. Outcomes
of this work can particularly benefit their broad industrial applications with
the preference of thin-film geometry for device fabrication. More broadly, the
obtained knowledge can be potentially generalized to other nanostructured
materials for strain-engineered properties. This project can benefit a general
public through materials discoveries at museum exhibitions, development of
interdisciplinary education and research programs at two universities, and
creation of new outreach activities to K-12 and high-school students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposed work will establish a comprehensive
understanding on the thermal properties of ?elastic strain engineered?
nanofilms, with an emphasis on the thermal anisotropy along both the tensile-
strain and the transverse directions. A series of systematic temperature-
dependent thermal transport studies will be carried out on representative thin
films under uniaxial and equi-biaxial tensile strains, via the integration of
the state-of-the-art ultrafast pump-probe experimental technique and molecular
dynamics (MD) simulations. New physical insights will be gained, particularly,
into the usually overlooked transverse-direction phonon transport. In addition,
by tuning the spot sizes and frequencies of laser heating in the pump-probe
experiments, the in-plane phonon mean-free-path (MFP) spectrum will also be
reconstructed. Such a phonon MFP spectrum will be further used for the phonon
transport analysis of strained films, in comparison with numerous studies on
unstrained bulk materials. The knowledge gained from thin-film studies can be
potentially extended to other nanostructures (e.g., nanowires and 2D materials)
and nanostructured bulk materials (e.g., nanocomposites hot pressed under an
ultrahigh pressure).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.