* 1804900
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--What is the Driver of Orbital-Scale Central American Monsoon Variations? Tests of the Insolation and Sea Surface Temperature Hypotheses
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Amos Winter, Indiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 218,727.00

This project aims to generate orbital-timescale speleothem isotopic records
spanning the last glacial period, 140,000 years or longer, from a cave on the
Caribbean coast of Guatemala. Rey Marcos cave has yielded proof-of-concept data
that allows for high-precision Uranium-series ages resulting from ideal
geochemical characteristics and equilibrium isotopic values. Preliminary data
from a stalagmite spanning the last 15,000 years shows that the Central American
monsoon strengthened at approximately 9,200 years ago coincident with increased
Caribbean Ocean sea surface temperatures (SSTs) and land surface temperatures in
Guatemala. A strong and stable monsoon characterizes the rest of the Holocene in
contrast to the monsoon weakening over the Holocene arising from decreasing
insolation inferred from the Cariaco Basin. The researchers hypothesize that the
dominant forcing on the Central American monsoon is SST change and that orbital
insolation is a secondary and less important forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will enable a new test of the SST versus orbital forcing hypotheses on
orbital timescales. Further, the work will document the timing and duration of
past climate events like the current and last interglacials, the influence of
millennial-scale variability arising from Heinrich stadials, changes in the
meridional overturning circulation of the Atlantic Ocean, and high-to-low
latitude manifestations of Dansgaard/Oeschger events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proof of concept data differ from other regional records which have documented
links to orbital and North Atlantic sourced millennial variability, such as
speleothem records of the Mesoamerican monsoon from Mexico and marine sediments
from the Cariaco Basin. The regional heterogeneity in reconstructed monsoon
behavior highlights the need for additional high-resolution and precisely dated
records from the Caribbean slope on orbital timescales. The interpretations will
be compared with model output from the CMIP 5/6 and PMIP 3/4 model runs to gain
deeper insights about the dominant mechanisms governing the Central American
monsoon and about the relative role of externally-forced and internally-
generated variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts
include furthering the understanding of natural climate variability; development
of educational materials related to caves; training of two graduate students
from underrepresented minorities with bi-lingual (English/Spanish) skills to
facilitate work in Central America; and stakeholder participation with the local
Guatemalan communities hosting the cave sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.