* 1804251
* EAGER: Thermal Radiation from Quantum Convection and Deterministic Quantum Mechanics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Peter Vadasz, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2021
* USD 77,574.00

This project is an early concept exploratory research. Predicting motion at the
sub-atomic level, for example electrons moving around the nucleus of an atom has
been attempted since early last century and led to a probabilistic approach.
This approach can provide the odds of finding the electron in specific
locations, but cannot specify a definitive explicit location. The applications
of this field, called quantum mechanics, are extremely wide. One of the most
important applications is radiation heat transfer, such as solar radiation. This
type of random processes cannot in general be controlled. However, if quantum
mechanics can be shown to be deterministic, then it is likely that it can be
controlled, i.e. instead of random and uncontrollable, it might just be
deterministically chaotic, and then controllable. Such an outcome may
revolutionize a wide range of applications and lead to new engineering
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a fundamental transformative project
aimed at quantum convection and radiation heat transfer. The premise of the
research is that the electron is not a particle but rather a compressible fluid.
Consequently, one can formulate the continuum set of governing equations for the
electron compressible fluid surrounding the atom?s nucleus. The results will
provide the quantum convective flow of the charges (the electron compressible
fluid) around the nucleus. It is anticipated that the Planck?s constant , which
is a universal constant obtained only experimentally, will be derived
theoretically as part of this project. The quantum nature of the sub-atomic
phenomena will be retained, however it will not be imposed upfront but rather
emerge as a result. The impact of the results on radiation heat transfer and the
independent evaluation of radiation properties, such as the emissivity will be
one of the engineering outcomes of the theory?s
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.