* 1804374
* Effects of electrode microstructure and Li2O2 growth on Li-air battery performance
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,01/31/2023
* David Miller, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2023
* USD 457,344.00

The lithium (Li)-air battery, with its high usable energy density, is a
promising battery solution for electric vehicles and renewable energy storage.
However, current Li-air technology suffers from low round-trip efficiency and
energy capacity. The cathode microstructure and the formation of the discharge
product (lithium peroxide, Li2O2) can have a significant influence on the
performance of the battery. The project seeks to examine the impact of the
electrode's material structure and the understanding of the evolution of Li2O2
formation on Li-air cell performance via an integrated project that combines
theoretical modeling and experiments. The development of cost-effective, long
lasting, and high energy-density batteries is a crucial step towards the
electrification of the nation's light-duty vehicle transportation fleet. While
the development of battery materials is an active research area, the design of
electrode material's structure has been mainly based on empirical knowledge
within industry. The structure-property-performance pathway developed here will
provide a baseline understanding of how and why the electrode architecture leads
to premature battery failure and will enable virtual design of novel electrode
structures for improved performance. This project involves two engineering
disciplines and departments and builds an exciting collaboration to enable an
integrated research program on Li-air electrode design that provides diverse
training and mentoring opportunities for students. The project will enable new
course materials and laboratory demonstrations for the Nanomanufacturing for
Energy and Transport Phenomena courses that the PIs teach. In addition, the PIs
will continue to actively mentor undergraduate researchers and recruit women and
under-represented minority students in STEM into their research groups. The
community outreach will be extended to Philadelphia inner-city K-12 teachers and
students through the Philly Science Festival and the Drexel GK-12/REU
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a closely
integrated program that includes novel electrode fabrication, high fidelity
multi-scale modeling, post-mortem and in-situ characterization, electrochemical
testing, and high-performance computing to probe the effects of electrode
microstructure and Li2O2 growth morphology on cell performance. The project
combines the expertise of PI Sun on multi-scale modeling of transport phenomena
and Co-PI Kalra on fabrication of novel nanomaterials for electrochemical energy
storage. Combining the pore-scale transport resolved model with the phase-field
model for Li2O2 growth, the multi-scale modeling approach accounts for rate-
dependent Li2O2 morphology and morphology-dependent properties and is capable of
simulating the coupled growth, transport, and electrochemistry based on 3D real
electrode microstructures. The integrated experimental program provides
geometry/property inputs to the model and directly validates the model
predictions for both the Li2O2 morphology at the nanoscale and the battery
performance at the cell level. The validated model combined with graphics
processing unit (GPU)-enabled computing will be used to perform large-scale,
dynamic simulations over many cycles to discover knowledge pathways from
structural design of porous electrode to cell performance
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.