* 1804432
* Active Mechanical Properties of the Uterosacral Ligament: A New Micro-to-Macro Characterization for Prolapse Treatment
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2024
* Yizheng Zhu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2024
* USD 395,999.00

Pelvic organ prolapse (POP), which occurs when a pelvic organ--such as the
bladder or uterus--drops from its normal place in the lower belly and pushes
against the walls of the vagina, is a very common disorder, affecting half of
all women over the age of 50. The quality of life of women with POP is severely
compromised: depression, anxiety, social isolation, and sexual dysfunction are
serious consequences. Treatment options vary from physical therapy to surgical
interventions, but the overall success rates are low. Given the high incidence
and low success rates of current procedures for POP, new interventional methods
are required. By far, the most important supportive tissues of the uterus,
cervix, and vagina complex are the uterosacral ligaments (USLs). These are not
true ligaments as their name suggests, but they are membrane-like structures
that are primarily composed of collagen and smooth muscle. Despite the crucial
supportive role of the USLs and their extensive use in surgical procedures for
prolapses, the contractile properties of the USLs remain unknown. This project
focuses on filling this gap by providing the first mechanical characterization
of the contractile properties of the USL. Toward this end, state-of-the-art
mechanical testing and advanced light-based imaging methods will be integrated.
The new data will guide the development of high fidelity mathematical models
that capture the active mechanics of the USLs at the cell and tissue levels.
Progress towards understanding the function of the USLs for the prevention and
treatment of POP inevitably depends on the development and use of advanced
engineering methods for mechanical characterization. Using computer simulations
based on the new mathematical models for the USLs, this project can radically
change current conservative methods and surgical procedures for POP, ultimately
improving the quality of life of many women. The learning experiences of
undergraduate and graduate students working on this project will be enhanced by
exchange visits with La Sapienza University, Rome, Italy. The students will
acquire unique skills, build professional networks, and gain cross-cultural
experiences, thus becoming more competitive in the global workplace. Summer
camps, called STEMABILITY, will be organized to serve, train, empower, and
mentor high school students with disabilities while also exposing them to
science, technology, mathematics, and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal
of this project is to characterize the active and passive properties of the
uterosacral ligaments (USLs) in a rat model and then use that information to
develop a new constitutive model incorporating tissue and cell-level properties
that can be used for accurate finite element modeling of the pelvic floor. The
Research Plan is organized under 3 objectives. The first objective is to
determine the active and passive mechanical properties of smooth muscle cells
isolated from the rat USL by conducting uniaxial tests and measuring three-
dimensional deformations using high sensitivity spectral modulation
interferometry (SMI) and spectral-domain phase gradient (SDPG) optical methods.
The optical imaging techniques are uniquely capable of quantifying minute
(subnanometer) cellular morphological changes during contraction. The second
objective is to quantify the active and passive mechanical properties of the rat
USL tissue by performing biaxial tests and measuring three-dimensional
deformations using state-of-the-art digital image correlation (DIC) and optical
tomographic imaging (OPT) methods. The third objective is to describe and
predict empirical results by formulating and validating a new constitutive
framework that accounts for the active mechanical response of the USL. The first
step is deriving new constitutive laws and equations that consider the smooth
muscle contribution to the overall mechanical behavior. Mechanisms to be
considered include: nonlinearity, anisotropy, elasticity, viscoelasticity and
active and passive behavior. The format features three configurations: 1) a
reference stress-free state, 2) an active(due to electrical or chemical
stimulation) without stress state and 3) an active and passive response with
stress state. The evolution law will be derived starting from the description of
microscopic mechanisms, e.g., actin-myosin filament sliding, that lead to muscle
activation. The parameters of the constitutive equations will be obtained via
curve-fitting to experimental data. The resulting set of nonlinear equations
will be solved within a finite element computational framework. The new modeling
framework will be used to provide scientific-based recommendations for both
conservative management and surgical intervention for vaginal vault prolapse and
uterine prolapse; for example, findings have implications for planning pelvic
floor exercises, for improving mesh grafts for POP repair and for designing
surgical interventions that preserve the active and passive mechanical
properties of the USL.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.