* 1804708
* Predictive Modeling of Multi-Solute Adsorption Equilibrium based on Adsorbed Solution Theories
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Huichun Zhang, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 370,459.00

The occurrence of organic contaminants (OCs) in the environment is one of the
greatest environmental challenges facing the Nation. Different remedial
techniques are used to cost-effectively remove OCs from contaminated water.
However, little is known about the adsorption properties and methods of these
techniques over a broad range of solution conditions. These knowledge gaps limit
our ability to design adsorption systems to remove these pollutants, as it is
time-consuming and difficult to experimentally obtain data for the vast number
of OCs in drinking water and wastewater. The objective of this research is to
develop accurate predictive models that can predict adsorption of a wide range
of OC mixtures. Removal of OCs from drinking water will directly protect human
health, and removal of OCs from wastewater will protect the environment and
enable water reuse. The research efforts will be coupled with an educational and
outreach plan designed to: 1) broaden participation from underrepresented groups
in research; 2) integrate the latest research findings with fundamental
environmental concepts for broader dissemination to college students; and 3)
train future engineers and increase awareness within communities about
OCs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to develop predictive
models for multisolute adsorption equilibria of a suite of OCs by two common
adsorbents in either the absence or the presence of natural organic matter
(NOM). The adsorption isotherms of multisolute mixtures of 2-6 aromatic solutes
will be obtained for two representative adsorbents in the presence or absence of
six representative NOM mixtures. The isotherm data will be used to model
adsorbed phase activity coefficients of bisolute mixtures to establish poly-
parameter linear free energy relationships (pp-LFERs) for the activity
coefficients at infinite dilution. Next, predictive models for multisolute
adsorption will be developed based on a combination of pp-LFERs and Real
Adsorbed Solution Theory. Finally, NOM will be treated as one or two equivalent
background compounds, and predictive models for multisolute adsorption in the
presence of the six NOMs mixtures will be established. This new predictive
modeling approach will give environmental engineers a tool to study multisolute
adsorption more easily and overcome the limits of studying single-solute
adsorption or ideal mixtures without consideration of solute interactions.
Developing predictive models for multisolute adsorption contributes to a major
advance in the application of adsorption to OC removal. In addition, multiple
approaches will be employed in the educational and outreach plan, including
involving underrepresented graduate, undergraduate, and high school students in
research, integrating project findings into the environmental curriculum at Case
Western Reserve University, and broadly disseminating findings to communities
with diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.