* 1804560
* INFEWS: US-China-Quantifying complex adaptive FEW systems with a coupled agent-based modeling framework
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Richard Ready, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2023
* USD 499,891.00

With growing populations and economic development, the challenges of water,
energy, and food security, as well as their inter-relations, have risen to the
forefront as global concerns. When the scale of the problem is reduced to a
regional level like a large river basin, nuances across these challenges emerge.
This is because the basin-scale food, energy, and water (FEW) systems are
essentially a coupled natural-human complex system of systems and should be
collectively denoted as FEW nexus. Within the nexus both natural processes
(e.g., rainfall-runoff for water supply) and human behavior (e.g., energy and
food commodity markets and policies) are interdependent at hierarchical
spatiotemporal scales. There are significant knowledge and capability gaps
associated with this FEW nexus, particularly in the context of data and
modeling. This project addresses these gaps by developing a new mathematical
modeling framework to decipher the complex, adaptive food-energy-water system of
systems (FEWSoS). This modeling tool can ensure policy coherence and
coordination among stakeholders to build synergies and generate co-benefits
(e.g., improving security in water, energy and food sectors simultaneously) that
enable us to address the future challenges across multiple sectors. The project
will leverage Mountaintop Initiative at Lehigh University for educational
outreach by allowing engagement of small groups of interdisciplinary projects.
They will also engage undergraduate students in the ADVANCE program and the
BALANCE program in the STEM disciplines. They will also engage an international
student from Ethiopia as a part of this project. Finally, the project will have
a kickoff and wrap-up meeting between the US and China investigators.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed modeling framework will be centering on an agent-based
representation of the linkages among food, energy and water sub-systems and
between human and physical systems across multiple temporal and spatial scales.
The three main research objectives are: (1) Constructing a comprehensive
knowledge platform with a set of quantitative metrics for sustainability,
vulnerability, and resilience of a FEWSoS via inventory and evaluation of both
public and local data and information from the food, energy and water sectors;
(2) Developing a spatially and temporally distributed modeling framework that
analyzes the food-energy-water interactions in a given FEWSoS from local to
river-basin scales. The interactions among food, energy, and water will be
quantified with the aid of a hydro-agro-economic model (food module), an energy
production cost model (energy module) and a process-based hydrologic model
(water module); (3) Testing the utility of the developed FEWSoS modeling
framework over two international river basins in the U.S. and China: the
Columbia River and the Mekong River to elucidate similarities and differences in
these FEWSoS, hence generating new understanding that is transferable to other
river basins. PIs diverse backgrounds and experiences in water resources
management, hydrologic modeling, energy market modeling, and hydro-agro-economic
modeling from both the U.S. and China teams provide an excellent opportunity for
graduate students and postdocs to work together across disciplines. The kick-off
meeting in the US and the wrap-up meeting in China will allow all PIs to engage
stakeholders from the beginning till the end of the project and make sure the
model development echoes real world needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.