* 1804320
* High entropy effects from variable chemical order in multi-principal element solution alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* En (Evan) Ma, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2022
* USD 401,998.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances the field by
answering a fundamental materials science question, the structure (in this case,
the local chemical order, LCO)-property relationship in the emerging high
entropy alloys (HEAs, where multiple elements are mixed in equal amounts and the
resulting alloy retains a single atomic structure). The focus is on the
signature 'high entropy effect' that sets these HEAs apart from traditional
solid solutions. The research highlights the wide variety of local chemical
order on the atomic-to-nanometer level and therefore 'plenty of room at the
bottom' for rich property possibilities. It will also deliver a powerful toolset
(realistic interaction potentials) for the atomistic modeling community working
on HEAs to gain atomistic insight into the underlying deformation mechanisms.
This work also offers niche benefits for society and education. First, from the
application standpoint, the LCOs in HEAs open a vast playground to tailored
properties in solution alloys. For example, a random solution is amenable to
extensive shaping at room temperature. After shaping, the part can be heated to
an intermediate temperature to develop LCO over an extended period of time,
gaining strength for load-bearing applications. Second, this research will
improve the understanding of closely-related concentrated alloys, such as the
very popular stainless steels. Third, the new alloys with partial chemical order
will enrich the basic courses in materials science, such as Thermodynamics and
Phase Transformations, so that future students can practice a real-world example
of 'solution' in their hands, one that can be manipulated to go all the way from
chemically random to highly ordered, and see for themselves what various
enthalpy and entropy terms do to the starting random solution. The findings of
new alloys and new properties will be broadly disseminated at international
conferences and in first-class
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Configurational entropy has been perceived as the
key factor in stabilizing multi-principal element single-phase solid solutions
(SS), the so-called "high entropy alloys" (HEAs). However, the role of entropy
in phase selection was overrated, as these concentrated alloys have complex
chemical interactions, such that the random SS is only metastable except at very
high temperatures. The goal of this project is to highlight a hitherto less-
noticed, and arguably more important, trait of 'high entropy', and illustrate
its impact on the defect behavior and mechanical properties. It will be
illustrated that HEAs are not really chemically disordered, but rather have
large variability of local chemical order (LCO) of the various species on the
lattice sites. This, while precluding the hypothetical extreme of ideal random
solution, represents a vast range of possible structural arrangements that can
be tailored to change HEA properties, beyond traditional solutions and
intermetallics. Molecular dynamics simulations will be conducted with realistic
empirical interatomic potentials developed specifically for HEAs, to
systematically i) map out the LCOs possible in HEA at a given composition and
its strong dependence on the processing temperature; ii) demonstrate that the
partial chemical order sensitively and drastically changes generalized planar
fault energy, not only in terms of its sample-average, but also its spatial
variation; and iii) unveil how the different LCOs influence the behavior of
dislocation, in particular its energy landscape and the activation parameters
that govern the mechanical strength.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.