* 1804429
* NSFGEO-NERC: Collaborative Research: P2C2: MexiDrill: Developing a 350,000 year record of climate and environmental change in tropical North America
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Josef Werne, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 365,330.00

Understanding the mechanisms that caused past climate change is a key problem in
paleoclimate research, and is critical for evaluating impacts of ongoing and
future climate change. Sediments from Lake Chalco, just outside Mexico City,
hold geologic, paleoenvironmental, and paleobiological information of value to
the global scientific community, and directly relevant to the &gt;20 million
people living in the Basin of Mexico. Much of Mexico is projected to become
drier in the coming decades and centuries in response to ongoing climate change;
these anthropogenic changes will be superimposed on natural variability in
climate systems. In central Mexico projections generally point to drying as a
result of decreased rainfall during the summer rainy season and enhanced
evaporation rates. Analysis of records of temperature and precipitation will
provide a means to evaluate the history of climate preserved in Lake Chalco
sediments. Results of this project will contribute to an improved understanding
of climate and hydrological balance in one of the most densely populated urban
centers on Earth. Hydrological balance is critical, impacting agriculture and
drinking water as well as affecting vulnerability to disease. This study will
enable more detailed assessment of volcanic history in the Mexico City region,
which will also allow development of volcanic hazard assessment for the region
that is based on a comprehensive understanding of past activity. The Basin of
Mexico is one of the world's most heavily populated areas, and fallout deposits
from large explosive eruptions have the potential to significantly disrupt the
entire city. The team will incorporate field guides from Mexico into the
"Flyover Country" mobile app, which will be available in English and Spanish.
The project supports the development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce by including early-to-mid career women in significant roles and
through the inclusion of graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To evaluate the role of low latitudes in initiating and
propagating global changes, we need information regarding the geographical
distribution and timing of abrupt changes in the tropics. A long and detailed
climate record from central Mexico, the geographic center of North American
tropical palaeoclimate sites, will enhance our understanding of the mid-latitude
to tropical linkages in North American climate. The primary scientific objective
of this joint NSF-GEO/NERC proposal is to obtain a continuous, high-resolution
record of past changes in climate and biota in the North American tropics since
the mid-Pleistocene. We will analyze a recently recovered ~350m lacustrine
sedimentary sequence from the Lake Chalco basin on the southern outskirts of
Mexico City. The Chalco sediment sequence is likely to provide a &gt;350,000
year record of climate and environmental change, as well as a remarkable
reconstruction of regional volcanic activity. Topics of particular interest
include 1) glacial/interglacial variability in the influence of major climate
modes such as migration of the InterTropical Convergence Zone (ITCZ) and
Westerlies, 2) orbital scale variability, particularly the influence of
precession on the location of the ITCZ and its influence on the Mesoamerican
Monsoon, and 3) millennial scale variability during glacial periods and
terminations. Interplay between air masses controlled by temperature changes in
the Pacific and Atlantic basins is stronger in Chalco than at other sites, and
hydroclimate changes are amplified due to its high altitude location. This will
be among the longest archives of climate, environment, and biota from North
America, from a region presently lacking such records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.