* 1804943
* Including Ecosystems in Process Design and Life Cycle Assessment for Environmental Sustainability and Innovation
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Bhavik Bakshi, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 09/30/2024
* USD 411,194.00

Even though all human activities require goods and services from nature for
their sustenance, conventional engineering has kept ecosystems outside its
decision boundary. Ignoring or undervaluing these critical ecosystem goods and
services (ES) has resulted in their over use and degradation, and can also mean
lost opportunities for innovation and environmental sustainability. Recent
efforts are accounting for the role of ecosystems in supporting human activities
and are demonstrating the many economic, environmental and societal benefits of
including nature in human decisions. Such advances related to engineering design
and life cycle assessment have been demonstrated through case studies, but
rigorous methods are needed for systematic inclusion of ecosystems in
engineering decisions. This work will advance the framework of Techno-Ecological
Synergy (TES), with specific focus on developing methods for, 1) integrated
design of chemical processes and ecosystems on and around manufacturing sites
while accounting for their temporal and spatial variation, 2) including
ecosystem services in life cycle assessment (LCA) by means of a rigorous
mathematical framework, 3) education and outreach activities to improve
knowledge about ecosystem services among students and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Local TES design at a manufacturing site
will be formulated as a multi-objective optimization problem that accounts for
spatial and temporal variation of these systems such as the intermittent
availability of many ecosystem services versus the continuous demand for these
services from human activities. The mathematical framework for ES in LCA will
explicitly include ecosystems in LCA along with their synergies and trade-offs
in providing ES, and their interaction with technological systems. It will
enable calculation of&lt;br/&gt;sustainability metrics by comparing the demand
and supply of ES at multiple spatial scales. This work will be in collaboration
with an expert in ecosystem services, and will be applied to problems of
interest to industry sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.