* 1804523
* COLLABORATIVE: Biomimetic Entropic Patterning (BEP) of Nanobiosensors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2021
* Cherie Kagan, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2021
* USD 100,000.00

This collaborative research project involves developing sensors for point-of-
need testing in food and agricultural applications that can detect regulated
pesticides and/or pathogenic bacteria in food or water. Sensors are being
developed using computer algorithms to generate patterns of materials on
surfaces. The process is reproducible and does not require the use of expensive
equipment or significant training, ensuring the widespread availability of the
technique. The research project also encourages students from underrepresented
groups to pursue research and graduate school via a series of hands-on teaching
activities, undergraduate summer research projects, and informal learning
activities in the community. In addition, non-expert audiences are exposed to
the underlying science and technology of mobile phone-based biosensors as well
as the concepts of biomimicry and fractal mathematics. Finally, the sensor
platform developed during this research project has many potential applications,
including energy storage, biomedical devices, and solar cells.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a new process for
patterning micro/nanostructures in biosensing. A new biomimetic entropic
patterning technique is proposed to improve signal transduction and durability,
particularly under challenging field conditions. The hypothesis is that two-
dimensional patterning of nanomaterials leads to optimization of entropy
associated with signal transduction. This optimization improves durability,
sensitivity, limit of detection, and accuracy of impedimetric and surface
plasmon resonance biosensors. The hypothesis has been developed based on the
researchers? preliminary exploratory analysis of over 30 patterns for
electrochemical sensing, including scale free and non scale-free patterns. For
the first time, a correlation between the entropy of patterned nanomaterials and
signal transduction is established by testing electrochemical and plasmonic
sensors that contain various patterned nanomaterials. The entropy of the pattern
is tuned by an in silico two-dimensional model, and techniques such as laser
scribing or nanolithography are used to pattern nanomaterials on the sensor
surface. This research project will create a multipurpose sensor platform for
point of need sensing using mobile phone-based acquisition systems with
applications in the areas of ecosystem health and food safety biosensing. To
demonstrate the broad applicability of the patterning principle, multiple
fabrication techniques are used (laser inscribed graphene, inkjet printing,
nanoimprint lithography), and the protocol will be tested by multiple sensor
labs with varying skills and equipment through a formal secondary validation
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.