* 1804166
* RAPID: Microbial Risk Assessment of Disease Burdens in St. Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands Post Hurricanes Irma and Maria
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2017,10/31/2019
* Sunny Jiang, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Karl Rockne
* 10/31/2019
* USD 130,258.00

Part 1.&lt;br/&gt;The island of St. Thomas in the U.S. Virgin Islands was
devastated by back-to-back category 5 hurricanes, Irma and Maria, during the
past month. There is limited electricity on St. Thomas, the most populated
island, since hurricane Irma. Major flooding combined with a lack of electricity
for water treatment has resulted in the potential to produce widespread
contamination of waterways and subsequent exposure to microbial pathogens in
untreated wastewater. A major issue with understanding the potential impact of
such events is that they occur relatively infrequently and are of too short
duration to allow for the data collection and scientific evaluation using the
traditional proposal evaluation and funding processes. This proposal seeks to
quantitatively characterize this microbial exposure risk and provide critical
data on water contamination post-hurricane in an island community to better
understand and prepare for future disaster responses. The project proposed here
will fill this critical void by carrying out the field campaign in the disaster
area before the restoration of electricity and water infrastructure, as well as
to provide a base of comparison for subsequent studies of the recovery of the
environment over time. This field campaign is only possible because of project
collaborator Dr. Kellogg's intimate familiarity of St. Thomas, Virgin Islands
and her network of family and friends on the island.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
2.&lt;br/&gt;The specific project objectives are to i) conduct sanitary and
water supply infrastructure survey; ii) survey residential water use behavior
and water related activities; iii) quantification of microbial pathogens in
water samples across the island; and iv) perform a Quantitative Microbial Risk
Assessment (QMRA) of disease burdens through exposure assessment and dose-
response models. To overcome the challenge of field sampling logistics, a
research vessel will be used to carry research equipment, supplies, researchers,
fuel, food and water from mainland to reach St. Thomas by sea. Water samples
(i.e. from sewage outfalls or septic drain fields) will be collected for
detection of important water-related microbial pathogens using state-of-the-art
nucleic acid amplification for target Legionella, E. coli, Salmonella, Giardia,
adenovirus and norovirus. The disease risk estimations will integrate the daily
volume of water exposure with pathogen concentration distributions in various
waters and existing dose-response relationship from clinical trials. The
outcomes of this project will help this underprivileged island community
accelerate the process of recovery, while also facilitate the training of a
graduate student to deal with ?real world? research challenges in the field.