* 1804949
* Mechanistic study of N8- polynitrogen synthesis and its oxygen reduction reaction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Xianqin Wang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2023
* USD 379,001.00

Fuel cells are devices for direct conversion of the chemical energy of a fuel
into electricity through electrochemical reactions. However, widespread
implementation of fuel cells has been hampered by the high cost of the platinum
catalyst. Despite many decades of research, few non-precious metal fuel cell
catalysts have been found that can rival the performance and stability of
platinum. The project will investigate low-cost alternatives to platinum as fuel
cell catalysts, thus helping to achieve higher penetration of fuel cell
technology into the energy sector and increasing our Nation's energy security.
The project will also include educational and outreach programs that will
enhance energy awareness at all educational levels and build a future workforce
highly trained in energy technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project under Dr.
Xianqin Wang from New Jersey Institute of Technology, Newark, NJ, involves
exploring polymeric nitrogen (PN) supported on multi-walled carbon nanotubes as
the cathode catalyst for potential use in proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel
cells. The project seeks to advance fundamental understanding of PN synthesis
and the role of the carbon-supported polymeric nitrogen species to promote the
oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The active sites associated with the anionic
polynitrogen species will be linked to enhanced O=O bond reduction and more
detailed understanding of the electrochemical reduction mechanism as obtained
from both advanced characterization tools and density functional theory (DFT).
In particular, the O2 chemisorption mode will be probed under reaction
conditions by in situ shell-isolated nanoparticle-enhanced Raman spectroscopy
(SHINERS), which when combined with kinetic experiments and theoretical
calculations, can shed deeper insight regarding the ORR mechanism and its
relationship to catalyst structure. The results will provide the basis for
metal-free, green catalytic materials as oxygen reduction catalysts for
hydrogen, methanol, and glucose or biomass powered fuel cells. Successful
results from this effort will lead to use of non-metallic polymeric nitrogen in
other applications, such as mild and selective oxidation reactions,
hydrogenation reactions and multipurpose applications in biomass conversion and
sustainable chemistry. Dr. Wang is actively involved in inspiring young
students, especially female and underrepresented minorities, to develop their
interests in science through research. She will provide opportunities for a
diverse group of graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students to collaborate in
this interdisciplinary research project and work with scientists from different
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.