* 1804941
* RUI:WRF: Zooplankton Mediated Removal of Microbial Pollutants in Natural Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Niveen Ismail, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 322,976.00

Microbial pollutants like bacteria and viruses reduce the full beneficial use of
water resources and negatively affecting human health, the environment, and the
economy. Natural treatment systems like treatment wetlands or retention ponds
can be a low-cost and sustainable option to improve water quality while
providing natural habitat and aesthetic benefits. However, the reliability and
efficiency of these systems to remove microbial pollutants can vary widely,
which limits their widespread deployment. The ultimate goal of this research is
to improve water quality through the novel use of zooplankton in natural
treatment systems, providing increased water security and enhanced environmental
aesthetics. In addition to broader societal impacts, this research will be
conducted at a women's liberal arts college that has a long-standing commitment
to recruiting and retaining minority and first-generation students. This project
will involve undergraduate students in scientific research and provide
opportunities for these students to present their results at conferences,
contribute to journal publications, and participate in educational outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial pollutants are a significant contributor
to poor water quality, and gaining a mechanistic understanding of different
inactivation or removal mechanisms of these pollutants is important to predict
the performance of natural treatment systems. The reduction of bacteria and
viruses through variations in water chemistry, sedimentation, and sunlight
inactivation is well documented, but the mechanisms and contributions of removal
via predation by organisms of higher trophic level is not understood. Current
models predicting performance of natural systems to remove microbial pollutants
focus on sunlight inactivation and neglect to quantify biotic processes such as
zooplankton filter feeding. Hence, developing methods to enhance the performance
of these systems, as well as improving current inactivation models to predict
performance due to predation, is necessary. This research will explore the
efficacy of zooplankton to remove microbial pollutants in natural systems.
Zooplankton can remove suspended organic particulate matter, including bacteria,
from the water column, but little is known about the effectiveness of utilizing
zooplankton to improve water quality in natural systems. The main objectives
this research are: 1) to quantify the ability of zooplankton to remove microbial
pollutants at various environmentally relevant conditions in natural waters; 2)
to understand the factors that impact uptake rates; and 3) to use this
information to develop a quantitative model that relates zooplankton uptake
rates to relevant environmental variables. These objectives will be accomplished
through a series of laboratory and field-based feeding experiments using
different zooplankton assemblages and varying microbial pollutants, including
environmentally isolated Escherichia coli and F+ RNA coliphages. The outcomes
from this research will be used to address important knowledge gaps of how
conditions in natural systems impact zooplankton feeding. Zooplankton filtration
rates have not been measured in complex environments with varying types of
particulate matter, and the viability of microbial pollutants after ingestion is
uncertain. In addition to addressing these knowledge gaps, the research will
result in a model that can be used to predict the variation of zooplankton
clearance rates of target pollutants based on seasonal changes in seston
characteristics. This model will be widely applicable and could help inform
decision makers about the optimal conditions to promote zooplankton filter
feeding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.