* 1804204
* Nano-Scale Physics of Icephobicity and Path Toward Durable Icephobic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Hadi Ghasemi, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2021
* USD 290,259.00

Anti-icing surfaces play a critical role in human daily lives in cold climates
by impacting a broad range of systems including infrastructure, transportation
networks, and power generation systems. Icing in electricity transmission
systems can lead to collapse of poles and towers and rupture of conductors.
Icing in aircrafts results in increased drag and may lead to loss of lift force
and potential catastrophic events. Icing in energy systems significantly drops
the heat transfer rate leading to inefficient operation of these systems.
According to the Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, ice storms account for
10% of power transmission outages in the United States. The financial loss for
industries is estimated at $3-5 billion annually. In addition to financial
losses, around 3 million people in the US suffer from power losses caused by ice
storms every winter. Despite the vital role in society, the development of high-
performance anti-icing surfaces for such demanding applications remains elusive.
This research will involve experiments and theory to reveal the role of length
scale, geometry, and interfacial curvature on ice formation, and will develop
new tools to address icing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-wetting, liquid-infused and
hydrated surfaces have inspired routes for development of anti-icing surfaces.
However, high freezing temperature, high ice adhesion strength (~50-100 kPa) and
subsequent ice accretion, low mechanical durability, and high production cost
have restricted their practical applications. The goal of this research program
is to elucidate the underlying nano-scale physics of ice formation and adhesion
on surfaces which involves studies of thermodynamics, heat transfer and
mechanics of solid-ice interfaces. These physics provide fundamental routes for
suppression of ice formation and minimization of ice adhesion on surfaces. We
propose to break the limit of icephobicity at the nano-scale. Through studies of
ice nucleation and growth at the nano-scale using Environmental Scanning
Electron Microscopy and confined nano-channels, we will explore the icephobicity
limits. A new predictive mathematical model on ice adhesion is proposed that
provides fundamental routes to achieve extremely low ice adhesion along with
high durability. Investigators will examine this predictive model and
subsequently develop and characterize a new class of icephobic materials called
3D nano-viscoelastic materials. These anti-icing materials will be examined
through various icephobicity and durability metrics. The educational tasks in
this research program will provide a platform to discover the talents of
students from underrepresented groups and to equip them with micro/nano
engineering skills required for future multidisciplinary work
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.