* 1804304
* Methods for improved size resolution for particle impactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* John Saylor, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2022
* USD 303,457.00

The presence of particles in the atmosphere has a significant impact on human
health. Continued exposure to pollutant particles contributes to ailments such
as asthma, lung cancer, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disorder (COPD). In
addition, studies have shown that emergency room visits and mortality rates are
correlated to the level of particulate pollution in the air on that day. The
size of a particle has a significant effect on where it deposits in the lung and
therefore on its health impact. For example, micron scale particles are very
effective at depositing in the deepest recesses of the lung, while larger
particles tend to deposit in the upper bronchial tubes and in the pharynx.
Recently, animal studies have shown that nanometer sized particles can
translocate from the lungs to other organs, including the brain. Many studies
have been conducted which measure the number and size distribution of particles
in the atmosphere and in industrial work environments, with the goal of
understanding the formation and removal of particles from the air. Particle
counters, instruments which size and count particles for diameters ranging from
a few nanometers to hundreds of microns, are an indispensable tool in these
studies. Particle counters exist which have good size resolution over this range
of particle diameters. However, this type of counter is expensive, fragile, and
barely portable, as they use lasers, vacuum chambers, and high voltage. A
cheaper, more robust, and highly portable alternative is a device called a
cascade impactor. Unfortunately, these devices have poor particle diameter
resolution, a significant problem given the effect of particle diameter on human
health. This research takes advantage of newly discovered physics of particles
in impactors to dramatically extend their sizing capabilities. Successful
completion of this research will enable studies that would not otherwise be
possible. This research therefore serves as a force multiplier, enabling
particle scientists and epidemiologists to dramatically extend their
capabilities. Additionally, this work will result in the training of at least
one graduate student and several undergraduates in the field of particle
science, an important discipline that is typically not part of graduate or
undergraduate engineering curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Impactor cascades are
used to size and count particles in air for a large range of applications,
including epidemiological studies, monitoring of worker exposure in industries
such as mining and construction, and studies of atmospheric pollution. While
these devices can sense particles down to diameters as small as 10 nm, their
diameter resolution is poor. Commercially available impactor cascades yield
particle size distributions (PSDs) having at most 13 bins. This research
consists of a set of computational simulations and experiments that will
demonstrate how particles can be size-segregated within a single impactor stage,
thereby dramatically increasing the diameter resolution of the PSDs that can be
obtained from impactor cascades. Preliminary research by the principal
investigator has shown that relatively minor modifications of the impactor
geometry can cause particles captured by an impactor plate to be distributed in
the radial direction of the plate according to their diameter. That is, larger
diameter particles are located near the center of the plate and smaller ones
near the periphery. This size segregation of particles allows for a virtually
unlimited number of bins in PSDs obtained from impactor cascades. These
preliminary results were obtained for micron scale particles. The research will
explore further variations of the impactor geometry which can maximize this
effect and then demonstrate its efficacy down to diameters as small as 10 nm.
The principal investigator will recruit female and underrepresented minority
graduate students to participate in this research, and outreach to high school
students will be part of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.