* 1804262
* Collaborative Research:  P2C2--Multi-Time-Scale Climate Dynamics in California (CA): An Integrated Multi-Proxy Stalagmite, Monitoring, and Modeling Approach
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kari Cooper, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 581,559.00

Southwest North America (SWNA) is one of the world's most climatically sensitive
regions with inherently variable hydroclimate. Much evidence exists for
repeated, large regime shifts in this region's hydroclimate at the sub-decadal
to millennial-scale during the last glacial cycle and Holocene, but the
mechanisms driving this change remain uncertain. In the context of this past
variability and the potential magnitude of future climate change, a refined
understanding of the hydroclimate response to perturbation and of the underlying
driving mechanisms is needed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team aims to
generate a set of multiproxy calcite and fluid inclusion records, resolved at
the sub-decadal to centennial-scale, for four stalagmites from the central and
southern Sierra Nevada, CA that span the last deglaciation through Holocene. By
integrating high-precision Uranium-Thorium dating, cave monitoring, multi-
stalagmite records, and Earth system modeling (single-forcing water-isotope
tracking simulations), the research team will (1) evaluate how North Pacific
storm track behavior and the resulting precipitation signal is archived in the
stalagmite proxy records, and (2) apply this knowledge to investigating the
mechanisms underlying this precipitation response in the context of the changing
environmental forcings of the past 21,000 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of the new Sierra Nevada records with
complementary stalagmite records being developed for coastal and northern CA
will permit a regionally expansive investigation of the mechanisms influencing
storm track behavior and precipitation patterns in SWNA. Data-model comparisons
with the new isotope-enabled Transient Climate Evolution since 21-ka simulations
(iTraCE-21ka model) will provide further insight into the global drivers and
response time of climate in the western U.S. to different forcings. An
integrated cave monitoring-stalagmite proxy-water isotope modeling approach
could provide (1) insight into how climate and karst processes imprint
stalagmite proxy records, and (2) much needed quantitative constraints on how
paleo-precipitation in the western U.S. responded to evolving climate
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) include
three outreach activities to integrate under-represented high school and
undergraduate students into the Sierran stalagmite project and distribute the
findings to the public. (1) A team (n=8) of undergraduate students will be
formally integrated into the research through the development of a Vertically
Integrated Project (VIP) at UC Davis (C3Climate Change in California). This
program, supported by a grant from the Helmsley Charitable Trust to the VIP
Consortium (UCD is one of 16 universities that participate), will involve weekly
seminars, peer-mentoring, and team-based research in the cave-monitoring
component. (2) A climate science-based curriculum will be developed for
Vacaville (CA) High School, a Hispanic serving institution. The curriculum will
integrate aspects of the stalagmite study and target development of critical-
thinking skills. (3) An interactive cave exhibit involving a virtual reality
research tour and 3-D stalagmite reconstructions will be built for the Sierra
Nevada Recreation Corporation (owner of two of the Sierran caves targeted for
study). The project would also include support for graduate
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.