* 1804104
* GOALI: Promotion Mechanisms of Supported Ag/Al2O3 Catalysts for Selective Ethylene Epoxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Israel Wachs, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 450,000.00

Ethylene oxide (EO) is a major industrial chemical intermediate used for the
production of many consumer products (e.g., sterilization of heat sensitive
tools in hospitals and medical equipment, pharmaceuticals, detergents,
antifreeze, plastics, etc.) as well as numerous non-consumer chemicals. The
great demand for EO makes it one of the highest production volume chemicals with
US production leading the rest of the world. The catalyst market for EO is
highly competitive with small increases in catalyst efficiency accounting for
significant profits due to its large production volume. This NSF Grant
Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project establishes
collaboration between Scientific Design Company, Inc. (SDCI, a small domestic EO
catalyst manufacturer and engineering process designer) and Lehigh University
(LU, a research institution with leading edge catalyst research capabilities).
The SDCI-LU partnership will advance science and engineering of EO technology
and infuse fundamental research activities into a small US manufacturing
company. Successful outcome will reduce ethylene oxide manufacturing cost,
increase US manufacturing jobs, and reduce undesirable CO2
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although silver catalysts for ethylene oxidation
have received much attention over the years, there have been only a handful of
studies on the role of promoters on the performance of industrial-type alumina-
supported silver catalysts (promoters increase the EO selectivity from ~50 to
~90%). The SDCI-LU partnership will focus on the molecular level understanding
of the promotion mechanisms for alumina-supported silver catalysts to establish
fundamental structure-activity/selectivity relationships and microkinetic models
to guide catalyst and process improvements. SDCI will prepare and test the
catalysts under industrial reaction conditions, with LU students involved in
these activities, and SDCI researchers and engineers will jointly supervise the
LU graduate students. LU has state-of-the-art instrumentation and expertise for
catalyst characterization under reaction conditions (in situ and operando
spectroscopy). The experimental studies will be complemented with cutting edge
theoretical modeling studies that will allow understanding the fundamentals of
how catalyst structure and composition affect activity and EO selectivity. Such
new and unprecedented fundamental insights are poised to reveal the role of
promoters on alumina-supported silver catalysts for EO and establish a
molecular-based kinetic model for ethylene oxidation by promoted alumina-
supported silver catalysts. The SDCI-LU partnership will train and educate
students that will recruited from underrepresented groups, expose students and
faculty to industrial catalyst development and engineering, and expose
industrial researchers and engineers to modern catalysis and engineering
research. The information to be generated will be widely disseminated throughout
the scientific community by presentations, publications, websites, and
integration into LU curricula and several outreach activities to
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.