* 1804232
* CBET-EPSRC: Characterizing the effects of supply hours and pressure of intermittent piped water supplies on water quality
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Emily Kumpel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 321,405.00

Water flowing through drinking water distribution systems can become
contaminated due to interruptions in supply or periods of low water pressure. In
the US, these interruptions are currently more common due to aging
infrastructure systems and natural disasters. Outside the US, more than one
billion people receive water through piped distribution systems for less than 24
hours per day. This project will study the effect of regular pressure loss in
water distribution systems on water quality. In collaboration with the
University of Sheffield in England, this research will provide a better
understanding of the effect of intermittently operated piped water systems on
water quality which can lead to strategies for the reduction of the spread of
waterborne diseases. Additionally, this project will help train engineering
students for engagement in international collaborations and global workforces.
The research team will broaden participation in engineering by recruiting
undergraduate and graduate students from underrepresented populations and by
developing education modules on drinking water distribution systems for K-12
audiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;While the influence of momentary loss of
pressure in otherwise continuous supplies in water distribution systems has been
studied, the effect of chronic water interruptions on the microbiology of pipes
was not previously examined under controlled conditions. The contribution of
this proposed research is to elucidate the fundamental mechanisms by which
chronic interruptions influence the microbial ecology and behavior of pathogens
in biofilms and in the bulk phase of the water supply. The central hypothesis is
that frequent interruptions to pressurized water supply affect the structure and
composition of biofilms, the growth of bacteria, and the persistence and release
of enteric pathogens within the pipes. The sum effect of these frequent
interruptions is negatively influencing the quality of the water received at the
tap. To test this hypothesis, the research group of Emily Kumpel, in
collaboration with researchers at the University of Sheffield in England, will:
1) describe the microbiology of bulk water and biofilms in continuously and
intermittently supplied pipes; 2) determine the fate and transport of indicators
of pathogenic organisms in intermittently supplied pipes; and 3) model the
impact of varying hours of supply in intermittent supply on the risk of
waterborne disease. This proposed research will use an internationally-unique
600 m long temperature-controlled, real-scale pipe loop facility at the
University of Sheffield. The three hydraulically-isolated loops in this facility
will be operated with separate supply regimes to establish baseline quality
parameters, determine the presence, composition, and function of microbial
communities, study the biofilm structure and composition, and investigate the
survival and growth of pathogen indicators. Finally, data generated from these
experiments will be used to develop a quantitative microbial risk assessment
model to evaluate the impact of varying hours of supply on the potential risk of
waterborne disease. By gaining a more fundamental understanding of how these
supply interruptions affect the microbiology of pipes, this research can lead to
the development of strategies for improving water quality. Overall, this
research can strengthen US water security by identifying and reducing the risks
to health posed by chronically intermittent networks and by interruptions to
otherwise continuously pressurized distribution
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.