* 1804733
* Collaborative Research: Synthetic Lichen Co-Cultures for Sustainable Generation of Biotechnology Products
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2024
* Michael Betenbaugh, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2024
* USD 315,000.00

Many drugs are produced by microbes and used to treat diseases in humans and
animals. The cost of manufacturing is a serious issue for many of these drugs.
One major cost is for the nutrients required by these microbes to grow and
produce the drug. The goal of this project is to lower nutrient costs and
overall production costs by growing two microbes together. One microbe is
photosynthetic. It will utilize sunlight and carbon dioxide to generate
nutrients that are then consumed by the other microbe. This removes the need to
purchase expensive nutrients, decreasing the cost of drug manufacture. In this
project, the target product will be endolysin, a novel treatment against chicken
infections that can potentially avoid the widespread use of antibiotics in the
poultry industry. The project will also educate students from the high school to
the graduate level about co-cultures, preparing them for employment in the
growing biomanufacturing industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Commercially,
filamentous fungi like Aspergillus produce enzymes, antibiotics, and
metabolites. Economic analysis reveals that the cost of organic carbon
feedstocks is a major cost for these processes. In nature, filamentous fungi are
found as part of lichens, which are a symbiosis between a photosynthetic
autotroph (photobiont) and its partner, typically a fungus similar to
Aspergillus. The photobiont provides organic carbon, generated using carbon
dioxide and sunlight, to partner fungal species. The fungi generate useful
biochemicals. The goal of this project is to implement synthetic lichen co-
cultures as a transformative biomanufacturing platform for the production of a
novel antimicrobial peptide. Cultivation conditions that allow Aspergillus and
cyanobacteria to grow successfully together will be identified. Interactions
between the two partners will be characterized using genome scale co-culture
models that incorporate transcriptomics, proteomics, and metabolic data. This
model will be used to determine the media composition and cultivation regime
that optimizes the growth and production capabilities of our synthetic lichen.
The synthetic lichen will then generate a novel anti-microbial peptide,
endolysin, which could replace antibiotics for the treatment of bacterial
infections in chickens. Overall, the project will develop a low-cost platform
for the production of a wide variety of therapeutic molecules and
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.