* 1804220
* RNA photonics: Light-responsive RNAs for precise manipulation of the transcriptome
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Andrej Luptak, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2021
* USD 400,000.00

Light is the most widely employed tool to interrogate biological specimens.
Starting with the first optical microscopes through present-day super-resolution
tools. Visible light has provided a vast amount of information about the state
of living systems. The wavelength and intensity of incident light can also be
precisely tuned and measured, enabling applications in quantitative regulation
and single molecule detection. The goal of this proposal is to develop new, more
sensitive molecular tools for manipulating central molecules in live tissues
with superb spatial and temporal resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ribonucleic
acid, or RNA is one of the three major biological macromolecules that are
essential for all known forms of life (along with DNA and proteins). The flow of
genetic information in a cell is from DNA through RNA to proteins. There are
many chemical tools to study RNA structure and function in the laboratory.
However, the tools to study RNAs in live tissue is limited and RNA activity with
light has not been achieved yet. This project will isolate photo-riboswitches
that will regulate gene expression in response to a single photo-isomer of a
photoactive ligand, creating an RNA-based optogenetic tool. These molecular
tools will be clonable modules that can be fused to other transcripts, act
through secondary and tertiary interactions with target RNAs for optogenetic
applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.