* 1804198
* Thermodynamics of nanomagnetic devices driven by spin currents
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sergei Urazhdin, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2022
* USD 364,999.00

Electron spin is a promising medium for the transmission, processing, and
storage of information in future electronic devices. In some of the pursued
implementations, information is carried by coherent spin dynamics in magnetic
materials through the spin waves, which can be generated by injecting spin
current into nanomagnets. It is now well known that many different spin wave
modes are simultaneously produced by spin current injection, but their spectral
distribution, or the mechanisms controlling it, are not well known, hindering
the progress in achieving coherent spin-based device operation. The proposed
Project will develop new experimental approaches enabling the characterization
of spectral distribution of spin waves generated by spin current, and establish
the methods to control it. The possibility that the spin waves form a quasi-
equilibrium distribution, described by the effective thermodynamic parameters -
temperature and chemical potential will be tested. This will allow the proposed
research to identify the fundamental mechanisms underlying the formation of
dynamical states in nanomagnetic systems driven by spin currents. The resulting
ability to achieve highly coherent magnetization dynamics will contribute to the
progress in the implementation of efficient spin-based devices. The project will
contribute to the burgeoning Engineering Sciences degree at Emory University, by
developing training modules for the new hands-on experimental Materials Science
course, and to the highly successful Atlanta Science Festival, by developing
educational demos for the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
the Project is to establish the relation between the dynamical and the
thermodynamic characteristics of nanomagnetic systems driven by spin current,
which will enable efficient engineering and optimization of these
characteristics for nanodevice applications. Magneto-optical micro-focus
Brillouin Light spectroscopy technique will be utilized to determine the
spectral distribution of spin wave quanta known as the magnons. To achieve a
broad spectral sensitivity of the technique, momentum-space squeezing and
plasmonic effects will be utilized to concentrate the probing light into deep
sub-wavelength regions. The obtained results will be used to quantitatively test
the hypothesis that nanomagnetic systems driven by spin current can form a
quasi-equilibrium state characterized by the effective thermodynamic parameters
such as chemical potential and temperature. This will allow the project to
establish the relationship between the previously achieved coherent spin
current-induced dynamics and Bose-Einstein condensation, a coherent dynamical
state spontaneously formed when the chemical potential becomes equal to the
lowest magnon energy. By establishing this relation, number of fundamentally and
practically important questions will be addressed, such as the role of different
dynamical spectral modes play in a magnetic systems in the formation of coherent
states, what nonlinear magnon-magnon interactions prevent or facilitate the
formation of these states, can they be controlled by engineering the dynamical
spectrum, is there a possibility to achieve Bose-Einstein condensation driven by
spin current and can the condensate be formed in a large volume of the magnetic
system, or is it always localized in nanoscale regions. By addressing these
questions, an unprecedented level of understanding of dynamical magnetization
states, and the ability to control them for spin-based device applications, will
be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.