* 1804534
* Collaborative Research: Designing Nitrogen Coordinated Single Atomic Metal Electrocatalysts for Selective CO2 Reduction to CO
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Guofeng Wang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2021
* USD 180,000.00

Fossil fuels (i.e., coal, petroleum, and natural gas) are still today's primary
energy sources, but their utilization increases carbon emissions. Technologies
that can convert waste carbon dioxide (CO2) into value-added chemicals have
great economic and societal importance for realizing a sustainable energy
future. Electricity, generated from sunlight, offers a potential sustainable
route for CO2 conversion to chemicals, but present electrochemical approaches
require expensive precious metals as catalysts. The project will focus on
discovery of cost-effective alternatives to the precious metal catalysts while
contributing to U.S. research leadership in energy utilization. The project will
impact a broad range of technology related to renewable energy, water usage,
transportation, and defense. Moreover, the research results will be incorporated
into curriculum development, student mentoring, and educational outreach to
high-school teachers and students. This award will also broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in conducting research and will
positively impact higher education in science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nitrogen coordinated single atomic metal (e.g.
iron, cobalt, or nickel) is a new type of electrocatalyst that has demonstrated
impressive activity and relatively high selectivity for electrochemical
reduction of CO2 to carbon monoxide (CO) in recent research. However, the
chemical nature of the active sites as well as the catalytic mechanisms for CO2
reduction in such complex catalyst systems are not fully understood. In
addition, the factors controlling selectivity to CO2 reduction versus the
competitive water reduction reaction are not well known. This research aims to
provide fundamental understanding of rationally designed nitrogen coordinated
single atomic metal sites embedded in a carbon framework and to elucidate the
relationship between the synthesis, properties and performance of the catalysts
in selective CO2 reduction into CO. The research team will 1) predict the active
sites using first-principles calculation methods, 2) synthesize the catalysts
containing the predicted active sites and local carbon structures, 3) conduct
comprehensive characterization of the chemical properties, structure, and
morphology of the synthesized catalysts, and 4) measure the performance of the
synthesized catalysts for electrochemical CO2 reduction. This research will
provide insights on how to achieve the highest possible activity and selectivity
of the catalysts for CO2 reduction to CO through tuning the coordination
environment of the central metal-nitrogen atom and the local carbon
structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.