* 1804169
* Norovirus persistence in surface water
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2023
* Alexandria Boehm, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 321,821.00

Human norovirus causes severe gastrointestinal illness. Even though it is
commonly found in water, there has been little work to examine the survivability
of the virus in surface waters like lakes, rivers, and oceans. In this project,
researchers will investigate how long human norovirus survives in surface
waters. The generated knowledge will inform the management of surface waters and
the design of wastewater and water treatment processes. The project addresses a
high priority research need to protect human health. The educational activities
will benefit learners from preschoolers to tenured researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human norovirus (hNoV) is the leading global cause of
gastroenteritis and is the most important etiology of recreational waterborne
illness. The objective of this project is to fill the critical knowledge gap in
hNoV persistence in surface water. This research consists of coordinated
laboratory, mesocosm, and modeling studies. The goal is to develop a
generalizable predictive model for hNoV inactivation under a wide range of
conditions relevant to surface waters. hNoV cannot be readily cultured, so hNoV
inactivation will be approximated using molecular methods that aim to
differentiate infectious from non-infectious hNoV and investigate the mechanism
of hNoV inactivation (capsid damage and genome lesions). The work will yield
novel advances in the understanding of hNoV persistence in water, and it will
have immediate implications for the management of surface waters for the
protection of human health. This research will also advance the field of applied
microbiology and virology by providing new insights into mechanisms of hNoV
inactivation that may be applied to other viruses. Outreach to the beach manager
community in California and nationally at EPA?s Office of Science &amp;
Technology will take place through presentations at working group meetings.
Information provided to these two groups by the research team can inform
national water quality standards for viruses. The project team will develop new
curricula on microorganisms for preschool children and will also integrate the
results into classroom instruction. A graduate student will pursue PhD research
and undergraduate students will gain research experience during the course of
this project. The project team will work with the diversity program Stanford
University to identify underrepresented students to participate in the proposed
work. In order to promote this research, the team will participate in a local
science festival.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.