* 1804229
* Collaborative Research: An Integrated Approach to Understanding and Spatially Modeling Haloacetonitrile Disinfection By-Products Associated with De Facto Wastewater Reuse
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Paul Westerhoff, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2021
* USD 130,000.00

Haloacetonitriles (HANs) are a group of disinfection byproducts (DBPs) formed
during drinking water disinfection that are important contributors to drinking
water toxicity. Recent studies show that HAN formation is increased when the
treated wastewater discharged from upstream treatment plants are present in the
water supply that is treated for potable use. Therefore, it is desirable to
develop a watershed scale model to predict the risks of HAN formation based on
the presence of upstream treated wastewater discharges and the drinking water
disinfection processes. This collaborative study between SUNY at Buffalo and
Arizona State aims to fill the knowledge gaps that have prevented the
development of such a model. Specifically, this study will be the first to
determine the rates at which treated wastewater discharges alter the potential
formation of HANs due to environmental degradation processes. The experimentally
determined parameters will then be applied in regional or national scale water
quality models. Additionally, a data science course will be introduced in the
environmental engineering curriculum at Arizona State University. A two-
semester, cross-course student project spanning modeling and water treatment
will be developed at the University at Buffalo. If successful, the development
of these models will help aid in the protection of the Nation's water security
while monitoring the effects of various water treatment
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;De facto reuse, or indirect potable water reuse,
the incidental presence of treated wastewater effluent in downstream drinking
water supply, is increasing with urbanization worldwide. The proposed project
aims to develop a comprehensive understanding of the risks associated with HANs
under de facto wastewater reuse scenarios on the watershed and national scale.
It has four research objectives: (1) Determine the HAN risks associated with
wastewater effluents as a function of wastewater treatment process and isolate
the contribution from wastewater organic matter and inorganic constituent
bromide; (2) Determine the influence of biological and photochemical
transformation of organic matter on the wastewater-derived HAN risks; (3)
Integrate experimental findings into the geospatial DRINCS model to assess
wastewater-derived HAN risks for all water treatment plants supplied by surface
water in the U.S. (4) Compare model predictions from DRINCS with regional
hydrodynamic models to validate the simplifications made in DRINCS or estimate
the associated error. This project is the first effort to quantitatively assess
wastewater-derived HAN risks on the national scale. Although it focuses on HANs,
the framework of integrating experimental research with modeling is
transferrable to other high priority emerging DBPs and contaminants derived from
wastewater. The outcome of this project will inform the nationwide HAN risks due
to de facto reuse, and potentially provide strategies for wastewater and water
utilities to collaboratively address DBP problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.