* 1804528
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--Bridging the Gap from Northern Iberia to Northwest Africa to Reconstruct Atmospheric Dynamics and Hydroclimate for the Last 2,500 Years
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Alan Wanamaker, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 300,251.00

The Mediterranean region is identified as a climate change hot spot. Recent
observations, including increased fire activity in 2017, suggest that aridity in
the Iberian Peninsula is already increasing. This multi-institutional team of
researchers seeks to provide a spatial and temporal context for on-going and
future climatic changes in this region by constructing a 2,500-year-long history
of hydroclimate variability from precipitation-sensitive stalagmites formed in
caves in central and southern Portugal. Rainfall in Iberia is strongly
correlated to the strength of the Azores sub-tropical high-pressure system, and
these cave sites lie at its climatological epicenter.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project aims to bridge the hydroclimate
knowledge gap for the last 2,500 years using sub-decadally resolved, multi-proxy
stalagmite records (carbon and oxygen stable isotope ratios, trace element
abundances, growth laminae, and high precision Uranium/Thorium dating) from cave
sites in central and southern Portugal. Based on measuring, counting and
comparing the uppermost Uranium/Thorium age from one stalagmite, these laminae
appear to be annual in nature. Resulting data will be combined and evaluated
with similarly-resolved hydroclimate-sensitive records from northern Iberia
(Spain) and northwest Africa (Morocco), creating a latitudinal transect that
will allow spatial and temporal constraints to be placed on the Azores
High&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research could also provide a significant spatial
bridge between the only existing high-resolution paleo-hydroclimatic
reconstructions (northern Morocco and northern Spain) from this zone. Together,
these time series will allow for a more comprehensive evaluation of dynamical
changes in the regional climate system through time, particularly in the spatial
extent and intensity of the Azores High.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The state of the
atmospheric circulation in the North Atlantic region during recent millennia,
and particularly medieval times, remains the subject of considerable debate in
both proxy- and model-based studies. Of particular interest is the North
Atlantic Oscillation (NAO), an atmospheric dipole between the Iceland low and
the Azores high, which is strongly linked to regional inter-annual precipitation
variability in Western Europe and northwest Africa through the routing of storms
tracks. Dynamics of the NAO and the Azores High are poorly understood prior to
the late 19th century, and as a result, the drivers of NAO/Azores High dynamics
have not been adequately explored. An ideal place to address these deficiencies
is central and southern Portugal, where few, if any, high-resolution records
exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) includes the
potential to transform the understanding of the nature and drivers of past
Iberian hydroclimate variability, and through comparison with model simulations,
how it may respond to future anthropogenic forcing. As such, the development and
synthesis of these high resolution and precisely dated records will be of value
to the broad climate/paleoclimate communities. All data produced as part of this
project will be made publicly available and archived on community websites. The
project unites a diverse, internationally recognized team of researchers from
major research institutions (Iowa State University, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution, University of New Mexico) and liberal arts colleges (Cornell
College, Union College) to apply multi-disciplinary approaches to addressing
long-term hydroclimate dynamics. This work will involve the training of a PhD
student already in residence at Iowa State and at least eight undergraduate
researchers in state-of-the-art climate reconstruction and modeling techniques.
A component of data collection in Portugal will involve citizen-based science at
a local tourist cave and with regional caving groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.