* 1804407
* Enhancing Hydraulic Fracturing Productivity via Model-based Feedback Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joseph Kwon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 388,032.00

This project will establish a systematic computational modeling and control
framework for real-time model-based feedback control of the hydraulic fracturing
process. The goal of this framework is to enhance productivity in low
permeability oil reservoirs, while minimizing energy consumption and water
usage. Despite advances in real-time measurement techniques, such as downhole
pressure analysis and micro-seismic monitoring, there remains a lack of a
systematic framework to enhance productivity in low permeability oil reservoirs.
This gap is due to modeling and controller design challenges associated with
moving boundaries arising from the hydraulic fracturing operations. The proposed
research has the potential to lead to transformative advances in hydraulic
fracturing and could be extended to other problems with similar challenges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A fundamental study is proposed to enable closed-loop
operation of hydraulic fracturing for enhanced productivity in low permeability
oil reservoirs by integrating the moving boundary aspects of hydraulic
fracturing processes with computationally efficient model reduction, spatially
varying parameter estimation, and model-based feedback control strategies.
Specifically, the proposed research will devise methods to construct local in
time reduced-order models of hydraulic fracturing, which are suitable for
controller and state estimator designs, and real-time implementations. The
models will predict the effect of controllable variables on key parameters that
affect well performance. Based on these models, nonlinear model predictive
control designs will be developed to produce practically implementable feedback
control systems for enhanced productivity in low permeability oil reservoirs. A
parameter estimation technique for solving the inverse problem of the spatially
varying geological properties in the rock formation will also be developed. In
addition to training graduate students, the principal investigator plans to
pursue outreach activities to high-school students and teachers in high schools
with large Hispanic student populations and develop workshops on the
fundamentals of hydraulic fracturing. The research findings will be integrated
into a new course based on applications of process systems engineering
principles in hydraulic fracturing operations. A workshop on safety issues in
hydraulic fracturing will be organized in collaboration with the Mary Kay
O'Connor Process Safety Center at Texas A&amp;M University with a mentoring
component aimed at establishing interactions between Hispanic students and Texas
A&amp;M alumni from the oil and gas industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.