* 1804412
* Hybrid catalyst system combining hot electron-generating quantum dots and molecular catalyst for efficient photocatalytic CO2 reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,12/31/2021
* Dong Son, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2021
* USD 399,999.00

Photocatalysis utilizes energy from the sun to achieve a sustainable route to
producing high-value fuels and chemicals from low-value or environmentally
harmful molecules. In this project, new combinations of photocatalysts will be
investigated to upgrade carbon dioxide (CO2) to molecules that can be used to
make fuels or chemicals. The new catalytic materials will help pave a path to
the Nation's future energy security while decreasing the environmental impact of
carbon emissions. The project also includes plans for education and outreach at
all levels, ranging from training graduate and undergraduate students in energy-
related technologies to promoting interest in STEM-related areas amongst K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novelty of the proposed hybrid systems lies
in the combination of specifically doped quantum dot (QD) photosensitizers with
molecular, transition metal-based catalysts. The ability of doped QDs to
generate hot electrons upon irradiation will allow for long-range hot electron
photosensitization and efficient electron transfer to molecular CO2 reduction
catalysts without the need for direct linkage between the sensitizer and
catalyst. In the new hybrid systems, manganese and copper dual-doped quantum
dots will produce energetic hot electrons under weak visible light, which will
perform efficient long-range (e.g., 10 nm) sensitization to molecular catalysts
in solution. The large increase of the sensitization volume and energetically
more favorable and unidirectional hot electron transfer to the molecular
catalyst are expected to enhance the overall catalytic CO2 reduction efficiency
of the hybrid catalyst system, while keeping the convenience and flexibility of
uncoupled hybrid catalyst system in construction and regeneration. To quantify
the rates of key processes at each stage of the entire photocatalytic reduction
process and to optimize their efficiency through structural variations of the
sensitizer and hybrid system, several objectives will be pursued: (1) structural
control of the doped quantum dot sensitizer for maximum hot electron generation
efficiency, (2) quantitative measurements of hot electron sensitization
efficiency to molecular rhenium- and nickel-based molecular catalysts, and (3)
assessment of the overall catalytic efficiency in the reactor at varying
reaction conditions. Comparative evaluation of the overall efficiency of the
hybrid catalysts designed here with that of the existing hybrid architectures
will lead to the identification of the optimum structure of the hot electron-
sensitized hybrid catalyst system. With respect to education, new multimedia
materials will be used to complement instrumental training in undergraduate
laboratories and graduate classes and in workshops on instrumentation/data
acquisition/processing. Outreach will involve new hands-on experiments that are
related to the synthesis of plasmonic nanocrystals and simple optical
experiments that can be safely performed by middle or high school classes as a
part of their science curriculum. Additionally, the Texas-wide Texas Sized
Crystal Contest is being organized which will allow large numbers of high school
students and teachers to experience the fascinating world of crystalline
solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.