* 1804053
* Semi-Passive Robots for Stroke Rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* C. David Remy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

Individuals with stroke often experience substantial muscle weakness that
greatly reduces their quality of life and leads to additional long-term health
problems. Rehabilitation using robotic devices is a promising approach to
intensify therapy and to expedite the recovery process after stroke. However,
there still exist many barriers that limit the usability of robotic devices in
the clinic or the patient's home. Key barriers include the high cost of these
devices, their size, and their weight. Furthermore, safety can be a concern,
especially when the devices are operated without the supervision of a therapist.
Consequently, most clinics and patients still rely primarily on simple devices,
such as weights, pulleys, and elastic bands, for performing functional exercises
to regain muscle strength and movement control during rehabilitation. This
project seeks to investigate a new class of robotic devices that has the
potential to be inexpensive, small, and inherently safe such that robotic
therapy can be translated into small clinics and even patients' homes. The key
innovation is the use of computer controllable brakes, instead of motors, to
generate programmed forces to resist or gently guide the user's motion during
training. Compared with motors, brakes are lighter, smaller, cheaper, and most
importantly, inherently safer because they can only remove energy. Thus, brakes
will never hurt a patient, even in the case of a malfunction. At the same time,
the devices will maintain many of the advantages of motorized robotic systems,
such as the ability to guide the patient's movements along desired paths, to
track progress and scale training intensity for adequate progression during
rehabilitation, and to enable interactive "game"-like activities. These features
could substantially increase the amount of therapy that patients can receive
while making training fun and engaging. This project will establish the basic
design and control principles for such robots, develop two prototype robots, and
then validate the clinical potential of these novel devices in healthy subjects
and stroke survivors. The project will advance the field of rehabilitation
robotics by creating the scientific foundation for a new type of rehabilitation
robot that will bridge the gap between fully assistive motorized robots and
traditional exercise equipment. Project outcomes may not only impact the lives
of millions of stroke survivors, but also others with a wide range of
neurological or orthopaedic conditions, such as spinal cord injury, cerebral
palsy, and joint surgeries. Additionally, the research will train students and
scholars and foster outreach activities through educational opportunities for
underrepresented individuals in Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Math.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on investigating the potential
of a new class of semi-passive rehabilitation robots that will bridge the gap
between current effective robotic devices that are too expensive and bulky for
in-home rehabilitation and less effective, inexpensive, and totally-passive
devices such as weights and elastic bands. The system will use controllable
brakes instead of motors to generate forces to resist or gently guide the user's
motion during training, which makes the device cost-effective, portable, and
inherently safe for in-home use. The Research Plan is organized under three
tasks. The first task is to systematically investigate how to design and control
semi-passive rehabilitation robots. The primary challenges to overcome are that
such robots cannot produce arbitrary forces, but can only create forces that
remove energy from the device, and that energy dissipation is in the joints of
the robot, not in the robot's end-effector. Thus task activities include: 1)
systematically investigating different robot structures and other design choices
that influence how the motion of the end-effector handle is translated to the
joints and brakes and 2) developing controllers that allow the generation of
force-fields, virtual walls, other haptic elements and closed-loop steering in
trajectory tracking tasks. The second task is to conduct a thorough evaluation
of the proposed device's capabilities. Task activities include: 1) developing
hardware and software for prototype robots and 2) conducting tests that range
from physical assessments to experiments with healthy human subjects, e.g.,
measuring how different types of resistance affect muscle activation of healthy
subjects and implementing resistive and assistive capabilities of the robot in a
version of a computer game--Pac-Man--to demonstrate how interactive elements can
be used in a rehabilitation setting. The third task is to evaluate the clinical
potential of the proposed device in stroke survivors. Task activities include:
1) testing how different types of resistance affect muscle activation in stroke
survivors, 2) evaluating the extent to which closed-loop controllers improve
performance of line-drawing tasks and 3) assessing the device's ability to break
dysfunctional synergies and how training with the device affects movement
kinematics, muscle coordination, and motor cortical plasticity during a simple
reaching task.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.