* 1804742
* Collaborative Research: An Enzyme-free Amplification Technique for Ultrasensitive ELISA of Disease Biomarkers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,11/30/2018
* Zhihong Nie, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 11/30/2018
* USD 11,559.00

Technologies for diagnosis of diseases are essential to the improvement of our
standard of living. Increasing detection sensitivity of a diagnostic technology
can enable earlier diagnosis of diseases especially cancers and infectious
diseases, thus improving treatment outcomes. The goal of this project is to
establish a highly sensitive diagnostic platform through the development of a
nanoparticle-based signal amplification technique. The broader impacts of the
proposed research program include multidisciplinary training for graduate and
undergraduate students particularly from underrepresented groups, as well as
outreach activities such as mentoring local high-school students and student
exchange between two institutes in
summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay (ELISA) technology has been extensively used in research labs and clinical
diagnostics for decades. However, its limit of detection has not been
substantially improved in recent years. The proposed work seeks to develop a
novel enzyme-free signal amplification technique that can substantially enhance
the detection sensitivity of ELISA. This technique relies on the release of
millions of tiny nanoparticles preloaded in gold vesicles. Each released
nanoparticle can catalyze colorimetric reaction more effectively than a
commonly-used enzyme in an ELISA. By substituting enzymes in a conventional
ELISA with such nanoparticles-encapsulated gold vesicles, an enzyme-free ELISA
with substantially enhanced sensitivity is established. To optimize the signal
amplification system and thus enhance the detection sensitivity of associated
enzyme-free ELISA, physicochemical properties of both nanoparticles and gold
vesicles will be carefully controlled. To achieve the goal of this project,
following research aims will be pursued: 1) Building the nanoparticles based
signal amplification system; 2) Establishing the enzyme-free ELISA; and 3)
Applying the enzyme-free ELISA to detecting human blood samples spiked with
biomarker standards. The signal amplification technique is expected to impact
the general field of in-vitro diagnostics and find a broad range of applications
in biomedicine. This project will benefit the engagement of graduate and
undergraduate students, especially women and minorities, into research. The
research will also be integrated into outreach activities for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.