* 1804752
* GOALI: Local thermoreflectance measurement of evaporative heat transfer in the thin film region of a dynamic meniscus
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,01/31/2022
* Jonathan Malen, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 01/31/2022
* USD 333,017.00

Cooling by evaporation is used in a wide range of important industrial and
power-generation processes. Improved understanding of evaporative heat transfer
will lead to more energy-efficient equipment designs for the thermal management
industry. The objective of this project is to measure local evaporative heat
transfer in the thin film region of menisci with unprecedented spatial
resolution. Theory suggests that heat flux will spike in the thin evaporating
region of the meniscus, yet prior experiments cannot adequately resolve this key
feature. Thermal management technologies exploit this region using
micro/nanostructured surfaces that expand the meniscus. New experiments that
measure local evaporation are critical to improve such nanostructure designs for
the thermal management industry but are also of fundamental value to meniscus
driven processes like boiling and desalination. The educational activities will
expose students to industry-driven academic research through curriculum
development, guest seminars, and internships. Through collaboration with a local
non-profit, regular outreach opportunities will be formalized with
underrepresented middle school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaporative heat
fluxes will be measured using frequency domain thermoreflectance (FDTR) and
simultaneous measurements of meniscus thickness will be made using
interferometry. The microscale extent of the thin film region (100-102 ?gm in-
plane, 100-103 nm thick) and sub-Kelvin liquid-vapor temperature differences
(superheats) challenge conventional thermometry, while parasitic conduction into
the underlying substrate obfuscates actual evaporative heat fluxes. As a result,
prior measurements effectively integrate evaporation rates over large swaths of
liquid-vapor interface, permitting a range of satisfactory theoretical
interpretations. Thermoreflectance approaches, which have revolutionized heat
conduction research, will help to overcome these barriers in thin film
evaporation metrology. These accurate measurements of the evaporative heat flux
(?b10%) will uniquely discern the role of surface attractive forces and
accommodation coefficients on thin film evaporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.