* 1804445
* Collaborative Research: Aerodynamic-aeroacoustic performance of poroelastic wings inspired by the silent plumage of owls
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Michael Krane, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 301,488.00

Owls are extraordinary predators that are able to suppress their aerodynamic
noise generation and achieve effectively silent flight over a broad frequency
range, which includes the sensitive hearing ranges of owls, their prey, and
humans. The poroelastic fringe adaptation of owls is believed to contribute to
this broadband noise suppression by modifying the trailing-edge noise mechanism
that sets the minimum noise level of many engineering designs, such as computer
fans, propulsors, commercial airframes, and wind turbines. Many applications for
which weaker edge noise is sought are also constrained by, for example,
aerodynamic performance or stability metrics related to the integrated pressure
across these fluid-loaded structures (e.g., lift or moment). Furthermore, it is
clear that changes to the trailing-edge geometry and compliance to improve
acoustic performance should entail an aerodynamic performance penalty. In this
scenario, the unsteady acoustic and hydrodynamic fields must be considered
together. At present, guidance towards a more complete understanding of their
interaction for finite-chord and finite-span structures with variable porous and
elastic properties is lacking. Furthermore, there is little empirical support
for the predicted aerodynamic and aeroacoustic effects of poroelastic edges. The
principal aim of this project is to address these shortcomings through a series
of analytical and numerical model problems coordinated with experimental
measurement to elucidate the unsteady loading and noise generation of thin
fluid-loaded structures with graded poroelastic properties.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the above technical shortcomings
through an interactive theoretical-experimental program that distinguishes
itself in no fewer than three ways: (i) construction of analytical and numerical
frameworks to predict turbulence noise generation by graded poroelastic
structures, from first principles; (ii) experimental validation of acoustic
scaling laws for poroelastic edges, without background flow noise; and (iii)
development of a glider to measure wing noise on the fly in a manner consistent
with how owls hear their self-noise. The modeling and validation efforts aim to
transform a biologically-inspired noise solution into a rational paradigm for
passive aerodynamic noise control in low-speed flows and to create an
experimental platform for future bionic owl noise-reduction studies. This
project will also include K-12 educational outreach with the DaVinci Science
Center (Allentown, PA), as well as integrate undergraduate research involvement
through the Lehigh Biosystems Dynamics Summer Institute (in partnership with
Northampton Community College) and through a design-build-fly competition
between Lehigh and Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.