* 1804548
* Synergizing Surfactants and Electric Fields to Engineer the Mechanics of Fluid-Fluid Interface.
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Lynn Walker, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 07/31/2022
* USD 379,986.00

Many materials are made up of blends of fluids, such as oil and water, that do
not mix. The processing and control of these materials affects industries from
food and pharmaceutical processing to oil recovery that are vital to our
economy. This research will provide tools to guide the use of electric fields to
manipulate these fluid systems including emulsions, blends, droplets, foams, and
many soft materials. The use of electric fields has the potential to be more
energy efficient and to allow for more intricate control of the properties of
these materials than mechanical stirring. A critical step is understanding how
electric fields interact with certain additives called surfactants. Surfactants
are compounds that adsorb at the interface between two fluids and are ubiquitous
in industrially relevant systems. The researchers will combine experimental
studies, computational work, and molecular design of additives to improve
existing processes and potentially develop new approaches to material
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electric fields are integral to a variety of
processes that control multiphase complex fluid systems. Electrocoalescence,
jetting, printing, dielectrophoretic manipulation on microfluidic chips,
capillary electrophoresis and other processes use electric fields to break,
deform, and coalesce fluid interfaces. Electric fields have the advantage of
high spatial and temporal control and a quadratic, rather than linear,
dependence of power on field strength. These advantages have been exploited in a
limited number of processes involving fluid-fluid interfaces; however, broader
development has been limited. A lack of understanding of the coupling between
applied electric fields and surface active species is at the core of this,
hindering the optimization of existing processes and the development of novel
low-power electric-field driven replacements of existing mechanical processes.
The principal investigators have established synergistic computational and
experimental platforms to quantify the influence of electric fields on the
electro-hydrodynamic deformation of fluid interfaces, drops, and bubbles. In
particular, they have shown that additional time scales associated with
electrical transport (e.g. due to charge relaxation) lead to deformation
dynamics that are significantly richer than the more familiar scenario of a drop
deformed by an imposed fluid flow. In many instances, surface active molecules,
or surfactants, accumulate at fluid-fluid interfaces, and their transport
dynamics brings further timescales that impact interfacial mechanics. However,
fundamental understanding of the interplay of surfactant dynamics and imposed
electric fields on the dynamics of fluid interfaces is lacking. Such an
understanding is needed to avoid undesirable behavior such as drop breakup in
coalescence devices, whose operation at present is guided by empirical
observations. The hypothesis that drives this work is that the combined effects
of electrohydrodynamics and surfactant transport can be tuned to enable control
of drop deformation and break up, which will result in unique techniques to
manipulate fluid interfaces in multiphase processes. This hypothesis will be
tested using a synergistic experimental and computational
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.