* 1804911
* Development of a thermodynamically consistent rheological constitutive equation for thixotropic suspensions connecting particle properties to thermodynamics and rheology
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,01/31/2023
* Antony Beris, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2023
* USD 388,381.00

Many materials must have both solid-like and fluid-like properties during their
processing and/or use. Examples include construction materials such as cement
and asphalt, biological fluids such as blood, consumer products including
toothpaste and hand-creams, naturally occurring muds, clays, and sediments, and
polymers and pastes used in 3-D printing. To achieve the desired flow behavior,
product formulators vary particle properties, such as size, shape, and surface
coatings, add flow modifiers and gelling agents, and vary the processing
conditions. However, there is no accurate method of predicting the flow
behavior. This limits the development of many products and points to a gap in
our scientific understanding of these important materials. This research will
develop a new theoretical framework, to be validated by innovative experiments,
to aid in this endeavor. The work should both improve our scientific
understanding of these complex materials and provide engineering guidance for
industry on improving processing. In addition, high school students,
undergraduates and graduate students will be trained in this multidisciplinary
research effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this research addresses
thixotropy, which is a ubiquitous, and often vexing, property of particle-
containing complex fluids, pastes, and soft matter characterized by a complex,
time-dependent rheology due to flow-microstructure coupling. Micromechanical
approaches are inherently restricted to small scales of length and time, while
at the larger scales of importance to engineering applications and processing,
only phenomenological models exist. These are often restricted to shear flows,
and contain internal parameters with ill-defined physical meaning. The principal
investigators plan to remedy this by developing a fundamental and rigorous,
multiscale theoretical framework and use this to develop truly predictive
constitutive equations, which will be validated against advanced experiments on
well-defined, model thixotropic systems. They will develop a new tensorial,
multiscale microstructure-based framework that is thermodynamically consistent
and generally applicable for all flows (i.e., cast in materially objective
fashion). The theory is based on the most modern nonequilibrium thermodynamic
(NET) formalism (GENERIC); the investigators at the University of Delaware are
among the pioneers of this approach. Coarse graining of a newly derived
population balance model based on particle properties for suspensions with yield
stress and matching with the continuum model will fix the mesoscale parameters
in the NET theory and result in a predictive constitutive model that can be
rigorously tested and validated against exact analytical results as well as
internationally recognized data on model concentrated suspensions in transient
and oscillatory shear flows and non-viscometric flows, and directly against
microstructure data obtained using RHEO-optical &amp; RHEO-SANS, leveraging
research supported by NIST. The proposed NET multiscale modeling with a
simultaneous emphasis on both the rheology and the material's microstructure,
combined with tight coordination with the leveraged experimental program sets
this work apart from previous efforts. The research will lead to a new
capability in the modeling and understanding of complex thixotropic systems that
can significantly advance the rational formulation and processing of many
materials of industrial and national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.