* 1804247
* Chemical and structural design of inorganic-organic layers for stabilized Li anodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Betar Gallant, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2021
* USD 330,205.00

This project will generate fundamental knowledge and identify design principles
for developing improved battery anodes based on lithium metal. This knowledge is
critical for enabling rechargeable high energy density lithium electrode
batteries for electric vehicle-based transportation and for compact storage of
renewably generated electricity. This work will advance understanding of how
this active material forms beneficial, ionically-conductive material films that
have the potential to impart improved stability, cycling efficiency and
lifetime. The insights developed in this work can be used to design new
fabrication procedures and improved interfaces for lithium anodes with higher
degrees of stability, which is currently a key issue with this technology. This
work could lead to lighter, longer-lasting and more compact transportation
batteries, which supports improved national energy sustainability, reduced air
pollution, and a potential path to more widespread electric vehicle adoption.
The educational and outreach plans will leverage and add to existing programs at
the Massachusetts Institute of Technology to benefit K-12 students and improve
public literacy related to energy storage, batteries and electrochemistry within
the Cambridge and Greater Boston areas. This project specifically entails
development of new educational materials and teaching modules to support public
school science teachers in teaching energy conversion and storage concepts, and
workshops to be hosted on MIT campus in collaboration with the MIT Edgerton
Center and MIT Museum. The PI also plans inclusion of Greater Boston community
college students in summer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rechargeable Li
electrode is an essential element of the most promising, "beyond Li-ion"
advanced battery chemistries. However, Li electrodes do not currently cycle with
acceptable Coulombic efficiency, safety, or lifetime. This project investigates
how oxide and fluoride gases interact with Li metal, and impart chemical,
morphological, and electrochemical properties favorable to formation of an
artificial solid electrolyte interphase (SEI). This research includes systematic
studies of Li reactions with gases that yield ionic compounds on the Li surface,
allowing for independent tuning and study of the formed inorganic interface. By
exploring three gases that are projected to yield a comprehensive set of
distinct inorganic-layer compositions, this work will contribute new fundamental
understanding of how the SEI chemical, structural and electronic properties
govern performance, and identify optimized inorganic-layer chemistries that can
drive future additive development and optimization. The major tasks that
comprise the research plan are: (1) Determine the chemical and structural
properties of films formed when fresh Li reacts in gas environments, using X-ray
Photoelectron Spectroscopy, Fourier-Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, electron
microscopy and thermal/microstructural modeling; (2) Perform cycling
measurements and quantify key electrochemical metrics of Coulombic efficiency,
cycle life, and short-circuit time; (3) Measure the physical and electrochemical
properties of the reactant gas, including reaction kinetics, transport
parameters, and electrochemical activity within battery environments, which are
relevant to SEI-healing processes; (4) Probe the feasibility and mechanisms of
healing reactions using these gases. This effort will contribute new knowledge
of how gas molecules decompose in far-from-equilibrium reactions at the surface
of a Li electrode, and how this reactivity can be exploited to develop optimized
interphases for improved efficiency and cycle life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.