* 1804702
* Collaborative Research: Ethanol Plants to Produce Animal Feeds --- Whole Conversion of Corn and Residue to Support Biofuel and Feed Production
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Pedro Urriola, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 08/31/2022
* USD 537,044.00

The Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus, from a global perspective, can be described
as the interconnected resource systems of food, energy, and water. As the
world's population expands to the expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be a
need to balance difference resources across these three systems to obtain
different user goals without putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide
these resources. The goal of this project is to develop FEW Nexus solutions for
regions where bioenergy crop production competes with animal feed production for
land, water, and energy sources. Due to the increased demand for ethanol from
corn production, there is less land for animal feed production. Farmers will
often use distiller's dried grains with other grain waste products to supplement
animal diets. However, this feed is not digested efficiently by swine and
poultry, leading to wasted nutrients and nutrient run-off to surface waters. The
Hu research group at the University of Minnesota - Twin Cities, in collaboration
with Chinese partners at the Dalian University of Technology, Guangxi
University, Beijing Technology and Business University, and Beijing Normal
University, propose to develop a fungal fermentation step during corn-ethanol
processing to convert corn stillage, along with other agricultural residues, to
animal feed that can be better utilized by swine and poultry. This step will
ultimately reduce energy costs for the corn-ethanol production process and
mitigate impacts to the interconnected FEW systems of bioenergy production and
animal feed production. By testing various agricultural residues, the
researchers will identify different opportunities for nutrient enhancement for
swine and poultry feed which will lead to more efficient digestion by these
animals and reduce nutrient run-off from incompletely digested
feed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the whole conversion of corn and selected
agricultural residues, the principal investigator's research group, in
collaboration with 4 Chinese universities, will support both the biofuel and
feed production industries in interconnected food-energy-water (FEW) systems.
Livestock with monogastric diets are typically fed with corn stillage, a by-
product of the corn-ethanol fermentation process to reduce the cost of ethanol
production. While suitable as feed for monogastric livestock, this stillage is
not easy to digest. The inefficiency of stillage digestion leads lower nutrient
uptake by livestock and, subsequently, the increase of nutrient run-off from
animal waste. The researchers plan to study methods to improve the digestibility
of this feed through fungal fermentation of this stillage, along with other
residues such as rapeseed meal, during integration with corn ethanol production.
First, they will evaluate the digestion efficiency of these co-products in
comparison to traditional diets of corn-soybean meal and untreated corn-stillage
diets to determine the best combinations of stillage and residues. Once the
optimized feed mixture(s) is/are identified, life cycle analyses and techno-
economic analyses will be used to identify the potential economic and
environmental impacts of the new diets from synthesis to digestion and waste
treatment. The research could benefit bioenergy production in both the US and
China by lowering the cost and the environmental impact of corn ethanol
production through the development of a higher-value byproduct of corn ethanol
fermentation. The researchers plan to engage the Hmong community, an
underrepresented Asian community, through community outreach, high school
programs, and summer camps designed to inform these stakeholders of ways to
increase their corn ethanol production income while benefiting the environment
and reducing strain on the local FEW Nexus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.