* 1804482
* 2018 Midwest Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics Conference (MTSM)
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2019
* Christopher Wilmer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Triantafillos Mountziaris
* 04/30/2019
* USD 15,000.00

This grant is to provide partial support for the 2018 Midwest Thermodynamics and
Statistical Mechanics (MTSM) Conference to be held on the campus of the
University of Pittsburgh on June 10-12, 2018. The MTSM Conference has
historically provided a forum for researchers working on theoretical and
experimental aspects of Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics to come
together, present their work and exchange ideas. Most participants will be from
chemical engineering and chemistry departments, although students and faculty
from physics, materials science, mechanical engineering, and computer science
departments have also participated in this conference in the past.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics are an important
area of research that has a wide spectrum of applications in chemical,
biological and natural systems. The MTSM Conference series has a 30-year history
and attracts participants from academic institutions, industry and national
laboratories. Most attendees are from institutions located in the Midwest region
of the US, which has a large concentration of researchers working in the field
of Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics. The Conference participants will
have the opportunity to attend state-of-the-art invited presentations by leading
experts in the field and debate controversial points with their peers. The
conference participants supported by this grant will be about 90 undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates and include members of
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields. The participants will have the
opportunity to network with peers from other institutions and exchange ideas
about the current status and future directions in research and education in an
important area of research: Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics. A
distinctive feature of The MTSM Conference is its focus on researchers in the
early stages of their academic careers, such as undergraduate and graduate
students, postdocs, and junior faculty. Because the meetings are regional and
organization costs are kept to a minimum, faculty members are often able to
travel with their entire group to the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.