* 1804453
* INFEWS: U.S.-China: An Integrated Technology-Environment-Economic Modeling Platform for FEW Systems in Arid Regions
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Yuanhui Zhang, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Brandi Schottel
* 07/31/2023
* USD 500,000.00

The Food-Energy-Water (FEW) Nexus, from a global perspective, contains closely
interconnected resource systems of food, energy, and water. As the world's
population expands to an expected 9 billion by 2050, there will be an urgent
demand to balance different resources across these three systems to achieve
different user goals without putting undue strain on the ecosystems that provide
these resources. This research project will utilize both wet waste conversion
and renewable energy sources, such as wind and solar, to produce electricity for
harvesting and filtering saline water for crop irrigation and algae production
in soils not normally used for such purposes. The goal of the project is to
create a new modeling platform that ingrates technology, environment, and
economics using research inputs from two different teams in this collaboration -
one from the University of Illinois at Urban-Champaign (UIUC) and one from the
China Agricultural University (CAU). This new platform could potentially be used
to identify options for harnessing underutilized resources and renewable energy
to produce food, particularly in arid region FEW systems (AR-FEWS). The PIs plan
to test the hypothesis that harvesting non-conventional sources of water for
high-value crop irrigation will be cost effective and environmentally feasible
in arid regions with access to renewable energy sources. If successful, this
research could strengthen FEW systems in the US and other countries in under-
used arid regions by identifying economically and environmentally viable
technologies to produce food and energy while conserving water
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using research inputs from the U.S. and China
teams, this project will develop a seamless system modeling tool that integrates
technological, environmental, and economic components to conduct holistic
quantitative analysis of AR-FEWS. A particular focus will be put on arid regions
with marginal land and water and plentiful renewable energy sources where the
synergies in resources production and use can be enhanced. The PIs will define
key parameters of the integrated system to develop process-based models,
including optimization for hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) conversion of wet
biowaste and algae, wastewater treatment methods needed for algal biomass and
hydroponic food production, and characteristics of food produced hydroponically
with wastewater. The process models will be integrated with environmental and
economic analyses at the regional scale to identify technological solutions and
policy options for harnessing the potential of marginal resources and renewable
energy to produce food in arid regions. The integrated modeling tool will be
tested in arid areas in Northwestern China. This project will be aligned with an
ongoing NSF-funded INFEWS project (INFEWS #1739788, Advancing FEW System
Resilience in the Corn Belt by Integrated Technology-Environment-Economics
Modeling of Nutrient Cycling) to develop a generic modeling tool that will be
used to identify robust optimal solutions for sustainable and resilient FEW
systems and assess the feasibility of technology adoption at regional
scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.