* 1804462
* Decoupling dynamics from the rheology of surface-anisotropic colloids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Lilian Hsiao, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Colloids consist of micron-sized particles dispersed in a fluid. Due to the
small size of the particles, their motion is affected by collisions with the
fluid molecules. Colloids are found in a broad range of engineered products,
such as pharmaceuticals, dairy foods, and oil slurries. Despite their ubiquity,
traditional engineering approaches have not accounted for the fact that these
particles possess rough surfaces. This difference in shape from a perfect,
idealized, smooth sphere does not cause problems when the particle loading is
low. However, when such particles are packed more closely, large disagreements
between experimental data and theories are found. These deviations have hampered
the engineering of processing flow conditions for suspensions containing rough
particles that generate frictional interactions due to solid-solid contact. The
goal of this project is to investigate the effect of colloidal surface roughness
on a variety of flow phenomena. Connections between dynamics, microstructure,
and properties of the suspensions will be made using a specially constructed
apparatus mounted on a confocal microscope. The results from this work will lead
to design rules for industry for the use of colloid particles with rough or
irregular surfaces in their products. In addition, knowledge gained from this
project will be used in outreach activities that utilize social media for STEM
education. A series of Reddit interactive outreach activities that present
complex scientific concepts about the flow and texture of materials in an
interesting and digestible way will be made available to the general public. The
goal is to capture the imagination of the nation's younger generation and to
guide them towards the wonders and discoveries present in today's science and
engineering careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to understand the
microscopic dynamics of model polymeric colloids with well-controlled surface
anisotropy. The central hypothesis is that the translational and rotational
diffusion of colloids with various surface features becomes independently
decoupled at high particle loadings. The decoupling of dynamics leads to
significant departures in the linear and nonlinear rheology from current
theoretical predictions. This work will generate new physical understanding of
how particle diffusivity affects the linear and nonlinear rheology of
concentrated suspensions. In this regime, fluid suspensions become increasingly
glassy in their mechanical properties. The fundamental rationale behind these
phenomena is still not well understood, particularly when particles make solid-
solid contacts with one another. This work will investigate the microscopic
mechanisms by imaging smooth and rough colloids flowing within a fast confocal
rheometer setup designed to concurrently capture rotational dynamics during
shear flow. Brownian Dynamics simulations with short-range hydrodynamic
interactions will be incorporated to support experimental observations of
dynamics and connections to glassy rheology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.