* 1804024
* Inter-comparison of Direct Quantification and Areal Micrometeorological Methods to Investigate the Transport and Fate of Methane from Heterogeneous Sources in Natural Gas Fields
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Omar Abdul-Aziz, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 321,788.00

The use of natural gas is increasing worldwide. Methane, the primary component
of natural gas, is a highly potent greenhouse gas (GHG) that contributes to
climatic changes. Recent research suggests that methane can be released from
natural gas fields, but large uncertainties in these data do not allow accurate
quantification of the amount. The proposed research will reduce this uncertainty
and advance knowledge in measurement methods and modeling tools for the
quantification of methane emissions in natural gas fields. The project will
support graduate and undergraduate researcher from underrepresented engineering
students in rural Appalachia, addressing societal needs for broadening
participation in science and engineering. If successful, the results of this
research will help protect the Nation's energy security by potentially
influencing regulatory activities and improving the efficiency of natural gas
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to maturation of technologies such as
directional drilling and enhanced recovery, natural gas production continues to
grow in the U.S. However, the magnitude and fate of leaking methane emissions
from natural gas fields remain highly uncertain and unresolved. Recent studies
show significant variations in methane losses, from less than 1% to 17% of the
total natural gas produced. These large variations are generally attributed to
uncertainty in top-down (indirect aerial fluxes or downwind measurements) and
bottom-up (direct component level measurements and emissions factors) estimates,
which include measurement uncertainty and a general lack of high fidelity data
sets. The goal of this research is to reduce these uncertainties by collecting
and analyzing temporal top-down measurements of methane fluxes and environmental
variables based on eddy-covariance flux techniques and Gaussian plume
measurements in concert with direct bottom-up measurements. This research will
employ advanced data analytics using empirical models and artificial
intelligence to improve the mechanistic understanding of methane emissions in
natural gas fields across West Virginia and the greater Appalachian region.
Accurate quantification with indirect measurement techniques would decrease the
need for the labor-intensive leak detection schemes currently employed. The
research findings will be broadly disseminated through peer-reviewed
publications and conference presentations. The researchers will leverage
industrial collaborations at the Marcellus Shale Energy and Environmental
Laboratory (MSEEL) in Morgantown, WV, to communicate the research outcomes. The
research group will also work with the West Virginia University Energy Institute
to develop outreach materials and conduct seminars in the Marcellus
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.