* 1804004
* Lateral migration of droplets and vesicles in inertial microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Tamer Zaki, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2022
* USD 337,052.00

Manipulating and positioning small objects like cells or drops in flow is
important in industry, biology, and medicine. The properties of these objects,
including size, shape, and softness, often distinguish particles of interest
from complex mixtures of many particles. However, current tools for measuring
the deformability or softness of such objects are very limited. Often, these
tools can analyze objects only slowly and in small numbers, so that large
heterogeneous samples cannot be processed efficiently. Alternately, some tools
do not allow only objects with certain properties to be selected and collected
for further analysis. This study aims to understand how the mechanical
properties of cell-like objects affects their behavior in flow in small channels
and relate that behavior to the object's properties. Experiments and computer
simulations will be used to examine cell-like objects undergoing flow. The
results will be used to engineer a rapid, cellular deformability measurement
tool that will also allow cell sorting. Such a device would benefit various
biological and clinical applications, such as cancer diagnostics, stem cell
research, and drug development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
identify critical factors that enhance lateral migration of deformable
microscale objects and will establish the fundamental understanding required to
predict locations of deformable objects with known properties in channel flow.
When microscale objects are injected into inertial microfluidics operating at
finite particle-Reynolds-number, a balance of opposing, inertial lift forces
acting on flowing microscale objects leads to unique lateral and vertical
positions in a rectangular microchannel. An additional force also exists away
from the channel walls in Poiseuille flow, which locates deformable objects
closer to the channel center than rigid ones. By taking particle size into
account, the location of objects in the channel can be used to infer their
deformability. Also, the inherently high flow speeds at which inertial effects
are relevant make inertial microfluidic systems ideal candidates for high-
throughput deformability measurements. This study examines behaviors of droplets
and vesicles in inertial flow, experimentally and computationally, to explain
fundamental aspects of nonlinear particle migration. The experiments span a wide
range of parameters and will identify dynamically significant regions of the
parameter space, and the simulations will provide non-intrusive access to the
flow fields, the balance of forces, and the stability of the flow
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.