* 1804970
* Bimetallic Janus Nanocrystals and Their Derivatives
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Younan Xia, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 502,720.00

Assemblies of metal atoms with well-ordered structures in the size range of ~10
nanometers are known as nanocrystals. Controlling the spatial distributions of
different metal atoms in nanocrystals offers a simple and versatile way to
tailor their structures and properties. Such tailoring has the potential to
vastly expand their utility as catalysts in the production of important
chemicals and pharmaceuticals as well as processes used for conversion of energy
and protection of the environment. In this project, Dr. Younan Xia of the
Georgia Institute of Technology and Dr. Manos Mavrikakis of the University of
Wisconsin-Madison are developing a bimetallic system, in which the two metals
are spatially separated from each other by an interface to form nanocrystals
with a Janus structure. The bimetallic Janus nanocrystals offer a broad range of
unique properties and applications, including the tuning of optical response and
the enhancement of catalytic activity and/or selectivity for specific chemical
products. By switching to bimetallic Janus nanocrystals and their derivatives,
one can substantially reduce the amount of precious metal in a nanocrystal while
potentially improving the performance, enabling Society to achieve cost-
effective and sustainable use of precious metals, some of the scarcest elements
in the Earth's crust. However, there are only a very limited number of reports
on bimetallic Janus nanocrystals, primarily due to the lack of mechanistic
understanding and experimental control for their chemical synthesis. As a major
requirement for the formation of bimetallic Janus nanocrystals, the atoms of one
metal can only be deposited at a single site on the surface of a nanocrystal
made of another metal and this particular pattern of deposition must be
maintained throughout the growth process. The PIs integrate experimental studies
and computational modeling in their development of predictable, deterministic,
and robust synthesis of bimetallic Janus nanocrystals. They are also
contributing to the preparation of a skilled workforce for science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) disciplines through active engagement of
graduate and undergraduate students in this collaborative, multidisciplinary
research, as well as curriculum enrichment and development. The investigators
are fully committed to promoting diversity in higher education by engaging
underrepresented groups into this research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
funding from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular &amp; Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Drs. Xia and Mavrikakis are developing a new
knowledge base for the design and deterministic synthesis of bimetallic Janus
nanocrystals. They are deriving the exact range of initial reduction rate needed
for achieving nucleation and growth from a single site on each individual
nanocrystal and thus generating a Janus structure. They are also investigating
the thermal stability of the Janus nanocrystals with respect to atomic inter-
diffusion and surface diffusion. As for applications, the Janus nanocrystals are
explored as building blocks for colloidal self-assembly and as sacrificial
templates for the fabrication of metal nanoboxes with a single, well-defined
hole on the surface, preferably located at one of the vertices. Such nanoboxes,
when made of platinum, can serve as a highly active and durable catalyst towards
oxygen reduction, a reaction key to the operation of hydrogen-based fuel cells.
Along with the experimental studies, computational modeling is used to explain
the trends and mechanisms involved in the syntheses, as well as the catalysis
taking place on some of the bimetallic nanocrystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.