* 1804300
* Mechanistic Elucidation of Thermal Runaway in Potassium-Ion Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Arvind Varma, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2022
* USD 345,968.00

Increased use of renewable energy sources such as solar and wind results in a
growing need for research addressing efficient and inexpensive energy storage
technologies. Due to the intermittent nature of wind and solar, stationary
energy storage is a requirement for grid buffering to provide electricity during
low production times, such as during the night for solar or when the winds are
calm. While lithium-ion batteries remain the predominant rechargeable battery
technology in terms of energy density and market share, the scarcity of lithium
makes it too expensive to be used for stationary scale grid storage. Potassium-
ion batteries have recently seen increased interest as a sustainable,
domestically available alternative, in terms of its higher operating voltage and
its promise with a graphite anode. While many promising electrode materials have
been researched for this system, practical engineering considerations such as
battery safety and temperature dependent performance remain unexplored. This
project will provide fundamental knowledge of the chemical reaction mechanisms
and transport occurring in the graphite anode and the electrolyte interface that
relates to the understanding of the safety considerations of the performance of
the battery to avoid thermal runaways. Electrochemistry education is the other
primary goal for this project. The PI has developed creative experimental kits
for outreach that are appropriate for pre-college students for experiments and
tests that convey key concepts in batteries and electrochemical reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of this project is to improve the
fundamental understanding of potassium-ion (K-ion, K+) battery chemistry to
evaluate temperature effects on battery safety and performance. While the
mechanism of K+ intercalation into graphite has been investigated through
experimental and computational studies, this chemistry has only been studied so
far at room temperature. The PIs will study these K-ion batteries at higher
temperatures to understand the energetics and kinetics of reactions at the
electrode-electrolyte interface that may lead to thermal runaway. Four research
tasks are planned: (1) accelerating rate calorimetry (ARC) analysis of K-ion
batteries to probe thermal runaway behavior; (2) investigation and
characterization of K-ion battery carbon anode solid electrolyte interface (SEI)
layer; (3) study the effect of operating temperature on electrochemical
performance (e.g. cell ageing) and safety (e.g. K dendrite formation); and (4)
test electrode binders and electrolytes, to enhance K-ion battery system safety
and performance by manipulation of the SEI layer. Mechanistic studies of thermal
runaway will be investigated by ARC analysis of the cycled electrodes, exploring
the influence of SEI, state of charge, and electrolyte composition. This project
will also involve detailed systematic characterization of the SEI layer for
carbon anodes via x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy with depth profiling.
Determination of model parameters for SEI growth and K+ diffusion coefficients,
will be carried out by the temperature study, via electrochemical
characterization methods such as electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)
and galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT). These results will
generate deeper understanding of the relationship between SEI composition and
battery safety, and the influence of temperature on cell performance, providing
further insight into alkali metal-ion battery systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.