* 1804504
* Timing and Paleoceanographic Impacts of the Onset of Arctic-Baffin Bay Throughflow
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* John Andrews, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2024
* USD 676,325.00

Changes in the amount of sea ice and low salinity surface water (together called
freshwater) that flow from the Arctic Ocean to the North Atlantic have global
ocean circulation and climate impacts. The research involves analysis of the
timing and consequences of the opening of the western route for Arctic
freshwater flux after the retreat of glacier ice at the end of the last
glaciation. The Arctic freshwater flows through the western route to the
Labrador Sea, which is a critical area of deep ocean convection. Diverse
analyses of sediment cores from northern Baffin Bay and computer modeling will
be used to document and explore the large changes in sea-ice cover, Arctic
freshwater flux, ocean circulation, marine productivity, and ocean acidification
over the last 11,000 years that are associated with opening of the western
freshwater route. An important component of the research is to study the history
of the North Water Polynya (NOW), an oasis of high productivity and low sea-ice
cover that forms where the Arctic freshwater enters northern Baffin Bay. The
productivity of the NOW owes to the high nutrient content of the Arctic
freshwater and to the blockage of Arctic sea-ice floes by the constricted
channels forming the gateway. The NOW is a hotspot of biological productivity
that has attracted humans to the area for millennia and sustains Arctic
communities today. Both the history of freshwater flux via the western
freshwater route and the history of the NOW are very poorly known, yet the
behavior of this system is poised to change in response to continuing reductions
in Arctic sea-ice cover. The understanding of how the opening of the western
route of Arctic freshwater and the initiation of the NOW have changed through
time will provide context to understand how these systems will affect the Arctic
systems and global climate in future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses
existing sediment cores from the NOW polynya, and areas upstream of and
downstream from it using both novel (nutrient tracers from Inductively Coupled
Plasma Mass Spectrometry and algal biomarkers) and traditional (quantitative
X-ray mineralogy, foraminiferal assemblages, stable C and O isotopes) proxies,
climate modeling with the Community Earth System Model (CESM) and Glacial
Isostatic Adjustment modeling and chronology development (radiocarbon and
paleomagnetic secular variation) to test three hypotheses: Hypothesis 1: The
opening of the western freshwater route of the Arctic-Atlantic throughflow
changed the freshwater outflow to the North Atlantic with consequences for the
Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). Hypothesis 2: Significant
shallowing of the CAA channels by glacial isostatic uplift has changed the
composition of the Arctic outflow with consequences for carbonate preservation
and the AMOC. Hypothesis 3: The NOW formed in the middle to late Holocene as a
consequence of increased Arctic sea-ice. The project is an international effort
involving Canadian and EU cooperation and foreign graduate student interaction
with CU faculty and scientists. It will provide support and mentoring for a
female post-doc who will receive training in novel biogeochemical laboratory
techniques. A PhD student will work on the CESM modeling. Several undergraduate
students will receive training and participate in the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.