* 1804287
* Changes in Energy Use and Water Stress Caused by the Emergence of the Cold Chain
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Ming Xu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 317,786.00

A critical yet unexplored dimension of the food-energy-water nexus is the
expansion of the "cold chain" into developing countries. The cold chain is
defined as access to climate-controlled environments (i.e. refrigeration)
throughout the entire food supply chain. There is not a good understanding of
how adoption of the cold chain in emerging economies will affect food
consumption patterns, energy use, or water stress. This research will examine
the influence of the cold chain on the life cycle impacts of meat, dairy, and
produce in the context of the Chinese food system. The hypothesis driving this
work is that the introduction of a fully-integrated cold chain will lead to
significant increases in global energy use and water stress without achieving
substantial decreases in food waste. In addition to testing this hypothesis, the
research will seek to identify potential technical or policy interventions that
are likely to reduce the anticipated energy and water impacts of an expanded
cold chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First, the project team will construct a system
dynamics model that quantifies baseline greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, energy
use, and water stress of the interlinked food, energy, and water systems when
refrigeration is not present. Second, elements of the cold chain related to
physical system properties will be integrated into the model, including extended
shelf life of food, direct energy required for refrigeration, GHG emissions from
coolants, changes in transportation modes and distances, and changes to
infrastructure such as refrigerated warehouses and modern grocery stores. Third,
elements of the cold chain related to behavior and consumption will be
integrated into the model, including shifts in consumption to more water and
energy intensive foods, increased bulk purchasing (and subsequent waste
generation) due to household refrigeration, and a shift in demand for
convenience foods such as prepared and frozen meals. The system dynamics model
will be integrated with an economic input-output model to determine the spatial
extent of water consumption to quantify water stress. Finally, a variety of
scenarios will be tested to determine how interventions or alternative
development scenarios will affect system dynamics. In particular, a case study
will be constructed to quantify the life cycle energy and water use of a direct-
to-consumer meal kit compared with the same meal purchased from a brick-and-
mortar supermarket. Direct-to-consumer food systems have the potential to
leapfrog traditional supermarkets in emerging economies and may significantly
reduce energy use due streamlined logistics and also reduce food waste, lowering
overall energy and water use associated with an expanded cold chain. The work
will advance sustainable systems modeling capabilities by coupling multiple
modeling techniques and integrating socio-economic factors into analysis of
emerging technologies. Due to the emerging nature of the cold chain, the
research will also advance methods in prospective LCA, using scenario analysis
to determine potential interventions that have the greatest potential to
mitigate undesirable consequences. The project will work directly with relevant
cold chain industries to help improve the sustainability of the food supply
chain. Outreach activities will be coordinated through established industry
partnerships to share the results of the work. The PI is part of a larger effort
to redesign sustainability-related curriculum through integration of case-based
learning in sustainability education, where each case tells a story that
presents a real-world problem with a challenging decision. The cold chain will
be the basis of a new&lt;br/&gt;Michigan Sustainability Case and integrated into
course modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.