* 1804041
* NSF-BSF: Steering Selectivity in Aldol Reactions by Control of Relative Effective Reaction Rates in Porous Catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,05/31/2023
* Friederike Jentoft, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2023
* USD 385,416.00

This project, funded under the National Science Foundation (NSF) and US-Israel
Binational Science Foundation (BSF) collaborative opportunity NSF 17-520,
focuses on the study of catalysis to make chemical processes more
environmentally friendly by reducing chemical waste. The chemical transformation
of interest is the aldol condensation, which results in a new bond between two
carbon atoms. Aldol condensation is an essential reaction in many syntheses of
bulk, fine, and specialty chemicals. This reaction shows promise for upgrading
biomass-derived feedstocks to fuels or chemicals. The objective is to steer this
chemical reaction to give the desired product without generating a multitude of
side products. The approach is to develop new solid catalysts and, by varying
their surface chemical composition and pore morphology, tune their chemical and
physical properties for optimal performance. The new knowledge and fundamental
understanding emerging from this collaborative work between the University of
Massachusetts Amherst and the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology will serve
to better direct aldol condensations and other similarly complex and pivotal
chemical reactions. In addition, the project will contribute to U.S.
competitiveness in chemical manufacturing of biorenewable products and will
promote training of a diverse workforce skilled in biomass
processing.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Aldol reactions consist of two sequential
steps, addition and subsequent dehydration. Cross aldol condensations,
particularly those involving unsymmetrical ketones, can lead to a multitude of
primary and secondary products. The central hypothesis of this project is that
selectivity in aldol reactions, which is governed by relative effective reaction
rates, can be tuned by tailoring the active surface sites and effectiveness
factors. While theory on the influence of transport limitations on the
selectivity in parallel and sequential reactions has been outlined long ago,
there are few realizations of these concepts in complex liquid phase reactions.
This research project rigorously tests the practical viability of these concepts
by manipulating surface chemistry and pore structure of the catalysts. The main
catalyst platform is layered double hydroxides, because they allow for a wide
and independent variation of chemical and physical properties; that is, acid-
base and pore characteristics can be tailored. Porous model materials serve to
independently investigate transport limitations. Reactant complexity and
reaction conditions are varied to ensure broad validity of the findings. The
project benefits from complementary expertise and instrumental capability at the
U.S. institution and at Technion in Israel. Student training will include visits
of the partner laboratory and a subject-relevant graduate course. The
participation of women in science is sought to be broadened through appropriate
recruiting efforts and outreach activities targeting female high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.