* 1804218
* GOALI: Climate-Responsive Design and Control Strategies for Affordable Multi-Family Residences
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Sandipan Mishra, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2022
* USD 381,954.00

Nationally, mechanical air conditioning accounts for ~40% of energy use in all
buildings, and over 50% in residential buildings. This project focuses on
creating industrially-relevant, immediately applicable solutions for
transforming non-mechanical,&lt;br/&gt;passive heating and cooling system design
and delivery throughout the U.S. Effective passive heating and cooling
strategies are virtually absent from U.S. buildings for several reasons,
including existing passive design tools are unwieldy and time-consuming to use,
and effective, responsive control strategies are unavailable. These problems are
particularly acute in affordable housing, where extra designer time and typical
green design measures (e.g. superinsulation, triple-pane windows, PV arrays) are
too costly. To alleviate these problems, this project targets the following
advances: (Task 1) A set of new, visual metrics to express a location's unique
combination of useful climatic resources for passive heating and cooling, as
well as their respective values, enabling rapid prioritization in early design
stages; (Task 2) A set of customizable residential dwelling prototypes for
simulation to allow designers to estimate energy benefits of passive system
adoption in a climate of interest before investing in project-specific
simulation, accompanied by cost implications, along with a rigorous estimate of
the extent to which optimally-controlled passive heating and cooling systems can
reduce mechanical conditioning needs and diminish GHG emissions in multi-family
dwellings in the major climate zones of the U.S.; and (Task 3) A field-tested
intelligent control system for operating combined passive systems optimally and
responding continuously to weather, forecasts, and user
input.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a GOALI project, a primary broader impact will be
the exchange of expertise between industry (Mithun, Inc., a leading national
sustainable design firm) and academia (the University of Oregon and Rensselaer
Polytechnic Institute), connecting with industrial research, providing
industrially-relevant results, and educating students through research
fellowships and in-office internships. The work will advance national carbon-
neutral building design by (a) the dissemination of climate metrics,
customizable passive system prototype models, and control approaches through
national channels, and (b) the construction of built products, to be realized as
experimental elements within Mithun projects, that will then serve as precedents
for others to study and further improve upon. An additional targeted impact is
the enhancement of social inclusiveness in green design, which typically offers
better air quality and lower utility bills to residents; this work will
facilitate green building strategies for affordable buildings that rarely offer
such advantages. The project will also support and expand the team's outreach
work with the University of Oregon Sustainable City Year Program, in which city
planners and community members work with students to realize effective
environmental designs, increasing public engagement with science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.