* 1804822
* Fundamental Investigation of Interactions of Temperature, Pore Water Pressure, and Pore Fluid Flow in Soil Media
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* Omid Ghasemi-Fare, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 276,427.00

Temperature change induces a variety of changes in soils, including volumetric
change in saturated clays and clay mixtures, changes in permeability, and
special variation in fluid density leading to induced flow. The aim of this
research is to investigate the fundamental interaction of temperature, water
pressure, and pore fluid flow in soil through integrated experimental and
computational models. The knowledge generated through this research will be
utilized to optimize the design and construction of nuclear waste disposal
facilities, geothermal boreholes, and other energy geo-structures. The outcomes
of the research, and the results of advanced numerical model and laboratory
controlled experiments, will be essential for applications of thermal-hydraulic-
mechanical-chemical (THMC) modeling in civil engineering (e.g., underground
structures, deep geothermal power plants, and construction in permafrost areas).
The results of the experimental models can also be useful to predict the
permeability changes of landfills due to chemical reactions and daily
temperature variations to have a better estimation of leakage based on the
temperature dependent permeability. The expected research findings may also help
to improve the current design codes and methodologies for underground structures
surrounding heat sources. The education and outreach activities of this project
will provide both K-12 and college students from underrepresented groups with
opportunities to be exposed to STEM disciplines and careers. The personnel on
this project will provide guidance to graduate students considering careers in
academia and research. This study also help to enhance the research literacy of
the Commonwealth of Kentucky, one of the EPSCoR states.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to comprehensively study
temperature effects on soil behavior. Soil hydraulic conductivity varies with
temperature. This happens not only because of changes in fluid density and
viscosity, temperature might alter the soil fabric and porosity in both sand and
clay as well. Temperature increments in unsaturated media result in drying soil
and moisture content reduction close to the heat sources. However, temperature
changes in saturated sand make the spatial variation in fluid mass density. Such
a variation results in buoyancy-driven flow and, creates thermally driven pore
fluid flow. The thermally induced pore fluid flow in sand facilitates heat
transfer in the ground and results in heat convection even under hydrostatic
condition. Therefore, induced pore fluid flow must be considered to accurately
model the heat transfer in the ground. The interaction of heat and fluid flows
needs to be investigated in high permeable soil. On the other hand, heat flow
results in permeability variation and volumetric changes which will result in
thermal consolidation in low permeable ground (e.g., clay). Four main tasks are
planned to accomplish the research goal: (1) Predicting permeability variation
of different soil types (e.g. sand and clay with different void ratios) under
different confining stresses using a temperature controlled cell; (2) Analyzing
volumetric changes and thermal consolidation for different temperature
increments in clays; (3) Studying the effect of thermally induced pore fluid
flow on soil temperature response in high permeable soil; and (4) Predicting the
interaction of heat and fluid flow in porous media while considering time and
temperature dependent soil and fluid properties. The outcomes of the current
study will be useful for Multiphysics and flow in porous
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.