* 1804085
* Characterizing the Behaviors of Li-O2 Battery in a Stable Electrolyte System
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Dunwei Wang, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2022
* USD 321,887.00

Electrochemical energy storage is of paramount importance to a future energy
infrastructure that is primarily powered by renewable sources. Currently, the
state-of-the-art technology, lithium (Li)-ion batteries, will not sufficiently
meet increasing needs in terms of energy densities. Of the new technologies that
are being pursued, lithium-oxygen (Li-O2) batteries are prominent as theoretical
studies predict that Li-O2 batteries could be 2 to 10 times better than Li-ion
batteries. To date, the poor stability of the battery electrolyte is a key
factor that limits further advancement of this new technology. This fundamental
research project will directly address this critical challenge. This project
will research a water-based electrolyte that has a high level of salt so that it
is not corrosive or reactive in the presence of the battery electrodes. In this
way the project will directly test what key reactions occur at the electrode
that limit its overall performance compared to predictions. The research project
will then explore how to improve Li-O2 batteries. Upon its completion, the
project will advance research on this new promising technology. The research
efforts will be complemented by outreach activities designed to broaden the
impacts of renewable energy research to diverse audiences including
undergraduate researchers, high school student researchers, and pre-college
children and their families. The project will contribute significantly to the
goals of moving toward a renewable energy-powered
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses fundamental research on a
novel strategy to solve the problem of electrolyte degradation of lithium-O2
batteries by using a H2O-based electrolyte, in which all known electrolyte
decomposition pathways are blocked. An electrolyte with high salt concentration
(referred to as water in salt, WiS) will be used to minimize potential negative
influences by H2O decomposition and H2O-induced oxide decomposition. The
project's research goal is to quantitatively study how electrolyte decomposition
contributes to the low performance of existing Li-O2 batteries. This information
is imperative to the evaluation of the theoretical maximum performance attribute
of Li-O2 battery as an electrochemical energy storage technology; however, a
knowledge gap exists for this information. The gap exists because previous
research on Li-O2 batteries all employed electrolytes that exhibit reactivity
toward oxygen species. As a result, parasitic chemical reactions due to
electrolyte decomposition have been ubiquitous, greatly undermining efforts
designed to understand Li-O2 battery operations. The WiS electrolyte represents
a super-concentrated aqueous solution. When the salt concentration is
sufficiently high (e.g., 21 mole/1 kg of H2O, or 21 m), all H2O molecules are
locked down by solvating the salt ions, and the overall solution acts as an
aprotic one within a reasonably wide potential window (e.g., between 1.9 V and
4.9 V vs. Li/Li+). Such a system provides a unique, organic-solvent-free
environment for the studies of Li-O2 battery chemistries. WiS electrolytes have
proven effective in enabling superior performance for Li-ion, Li-sulfur and,
most recently, Li-O2 battery operations. The system provides a unique
opportunity to examine Li-O2 battery chemistry without the confounding factors
connected to parasitic chemical reactions of the electrolytes. The outcome of
the project will be a knowledge base of Li-O2 chemistry without the confounding
factors such as electrolyte decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.