* 1804915
* Molecularly selective sensors based on organic semiconductors and artificial receptors: demonstrations and scaling studies
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2021
* Alberto Salleo, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2021
* USD 300,000.00

A robust sensing technology, suitable for wearable devices, will be developed
for continuous monitoring of molecules secreted by the human body. Electrically
active polymers will be combined with molecularly selective polymers to sense a
range of molecules in a sensitive and selective way. The sensor fabrication
process will take advantage of the same technology developed to fabricate
microprocessors, thus giving access to a wide range of sensor sizes and shapes
in order to determine the optimum sensor geometry. Furthermore, the electrical
response of the sensor will be modeled mathematically in order to predict the
best sensor design. Finally, several sensors will be arrayed to demonstrate the
simultaneous detection of several molecules of interest. The development of a
general sensing technology based on plastics has the potential to produce a
substantial impact in the world of low-cost wearable sensors suitable for non-
hospital based applications. Furthermore, the workforce trained with these funds
will have an interdisciplinary outlook, being equally comfortable with
electronics and with biomedical applications in the realm of analytical
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enzyme-based sensing is not robust for wearables
or measurements in non-controlled environments. A new transduction method is
proposed where an organic electrochemical transistor (OECT) is functionalized
with a robust molecularly imprinted polymer (MIP) incorporated in a membrane.
The MIP acts as an artificial receptor and selectively binds to the molecule
that was imprinted in it during the fabrication phase. This is an entirely new
sensor device concept, which incorporates selectivity (from the membrane) and
sensitivity (thanks to the gain given by the transistor). This approach works in
a cortisol sensor, which is compatible with wearable electronics as it is
sensitive (thanks to the electronic gain of the transistor), operates at low
voltages and can be fabricated on flexible substrates. Device scaling studies
will demonstrate that sensitivity and range can be controlled with device
geometry. The effect of processing on the selectivity and sensitivity of the
membrane will be studied as well. Ultimately these experimental data will be
used to build and validate a complete device model, which will give insights
into the device physics of the sensor and will be used for a priori design of
sensors with arbitrary architectures. Because the concept of OECT and artificial
receptor membranes is general, the model will be a useful design tool for this
entire family of novel sensors.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the MIP-functionalization
approach is quite general as will be demonstrated by building a multiplexed
sensor array that will sense two hormones (cortisol and adrenaline) in addition
to other electrolytes in a single sample. A high-school teacher will be involved
in the project with the goal of using the materials investigated to fabricate a
?visible? transistor, i.e. a device where the switching process can be viewed by
naked eye. The goal is to provide a simple demonstration for high-school
students helping them understand the basic functionality of the device that is
at the heart of the IT revolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.