* 1804871
* Impact of Ion Transport and Dissociation on Polymer Electrolyte Battery Rate Capability
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,12/31/2022
* Justin Kennemur, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2022
* USD 420,746.00

Solid, polymer electrolytes are needed to enable transformative increases in
battery capacity for advanced electric and hybrid-electric transportation
applications. However, the current polymer electrolytes suffer from low ion
transport rates, most commonly characterized by conductivity. This fundamental
engineering science project will evaluate the hypothesis that conductivity alone
is not a good metric for battery rate capability and that an equally critical
component is ion transport in the polymer electrolytes. Such understanding will
allow intelligent design of the next generation of solid electrolytes for
electric vehicle batteries. Novel polymer electrolytes will be studied with
experimental techniques not typically applied to electrolytes. The techniques
provide direct measurement of ion concentration in real time and ion speciation,
both of which are important for accurate and complete characterization of
polymer electrolyte performance in a battery. The investigators of this project
combine complementary expertise in engineering and chemistry, respectively,
which will be used to further the understanding of ion-transport and battery
performance through cutting-edge, time-resolved measurements and new synthetic
polyelectrolytes tailored to probe structure-property relationships in these
systems. For educational and outreach activities, this project includes hands-on
battery activities related to this research that will be presented at
economically disadvantaged middle schools. Students involved in this research
will be trained with skills needed in the synthetic development of new precision
polyelectrolyte systems and commercial development of lithium batteries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop a complete picture
of transport in polymer electrolytes and how it connects to battery performance.
The specific aims are (1) to fully characterize transport in a systematic set of
polymer electrolytes using several complementary techniques, (2) to investigate
the role of ion speciation and electrolyte structure on transport behavior, and
(3) to determine limiting currents for polymer-electrolyte batteries and compare
to rate predictions based on a complete understanding of transport. Physical
insight into the underpinnings of transport will be achieved using surface-
enhanced Raman spectroscopy to evaluate dissociation state and x-ray scattering
to examine the connectivity of ionic structure. This work will be conducted on
the current standard polymer electrolyte, poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) containing
lithium bis-trifluoromethanesulfonimide (LiTFSI) salt. The effect of
nanostructure will be examined using a mechanically strong PEO-containing block
copolymer with LiTFSI. Precision polyelectrolytes blended with PEO will be used
to draw conclusions about the effect of anion connectivity on dissociation state
and its commensurability with the cation structure. Finally, limiting currents
of polymer electrolyte batteries will be measured and predicted with continuum-
level simulations. This project encompasses a thorough evaluation of transport
in polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries which could shift the paradigm in
understanding what limits the discharge rate in these batteries. Knowledge will
be gained of the physical underpinnings of transport using a combination of
frontier techniques and novel materials. A validated polymer electrolyte battery
model will be developed and made publicly available. It will assist the battery
community in determining target transport properties for the next generation of
solid electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.