* 1804836
* Collaborative Research: Active Transport of Lipid Vesicles in Osmotic Gradients
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,10/31/2019
* Manish Kumar, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 10/31/2019
* USD 160,000.00

The membranes of living cells are highly and selectively permeable to water.
Variations in the osmotic pressure due to dissolved molecules drives water
transport across the membrane, thereby inducing fluid flows and membrane
motions. Such flows are critical to biological processes such as the regulation
of cell water content, the transport of intra- and extracellular compartments,
and the migration of cells in tissues. Despite their importance, the fundamental
fluid mechanics underlying these processes remains poorly understood. This
project aims to advance our understanding of fluid flows and membrane motions
driven by osmotic gradients. Such knowledge will further enable biotechnologies
involving the extraction, separation, and delivery of extracellular vesicles,
which are actively pursued as diagnostic and therapeutic tools for treating
human diseases. The project will also provide educational opportunities to
middle and high school students from underrepresented groups through laboratory
tours and summer research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of
the research is to develop experimental platforms and theoretical models that
elucidate the physical mechanisms underlying the motion of lipid vesicles in
osmotic gradients ? a process called osmophoresis. Using microfluidic systems,
the research will quantify vesicle velocity as a function of membrane properties
such as vesicle size, permeability, rigidity, tension / excess area, and surface
charge as well as environmental properties such as solute type, gradient
magnitude, fluid viscosity, and confinement. Notably, the project will use lipid
membranes incorporating aquaporin water channels to create high permeability
vesicles that mimic native exosomes. The experiments will provide definitive
data with which to enhance our understanding of osmophoresis and its impact on
vesicle transport in biology. The proposed theory will integrate previous work
on the osmophoresis of rigid spherical membranes with models of membrane
dynamics that account for deformation and flow within incompressible lipid
bilayers. The theoretical investigations will ultimately reproduce and explain
experimental observations of rapid vesicle motions in osmotic gradients.
Finally, the demonstration of osmophoretic vesicle sorting will provide a
fundamental basis for biotechnologies involving the separation and
characterization of extracellular vesicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.