* 1804126
* Stable Cohomology: Foundations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2018,02/28/2019
* Sarah Witherspoon, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Janet Striuli
* 02/28/2019
* USD 35,000.00

This award supports participation in a 5-day workshop to be held May 28-June 1,
2018 in Snowbird, Utah. The workshop will bring together world experts and early
career researchers to explore some fundamental questions in algebra and
representation theory, subjects that are important in many scientific and
mathematical settings. The workshop will lead to a better understanding of
stable cohomology, its foundations, and its applications. The workshop will thus
have substantial impact on research in the many fields to which stable
cohomology can be applied. At the same time, the workshop is an opportunity for
early career mathematicians to learn from experts in a collaborative
environment. Further details are on the conference website: http://www.math.ttu.
edu/~lchriste/snowbird2018.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stable
cohomology goes back to Tate, who in 1952 announced a new cohomology theory for
finite groups, with a view towards applications in number theory. It deviates
only slightly from classical (co)homology of finite groups, but the difference
is decisive: it essentially combines group homology and group cohomology into
one theory. Tate cohomology has since evolved along several different tracks,
and there are applications in several branches of mathematics, including local
algebra, singularity theory, representation theory, and homological and
categorical algebra. Evolutions include generalizations to other groups and
rings, as well as a Hochschild analogue for some associative algebras. Today one
has several theoretical frameworks, depending on context, for treating stable
cohomology. They expose different facets of the theory, and some properties are
as evident in one framework as they are obscure in another. The purpose of the
workshop is to bring together experts on homological algebra and mathematicians
who apply stable cohomology in their research to address such broad questions
as: Is there a unifying theoretical framework for stable cohomology in which all
its properties emerge naturally? What kind of information, exactly, is encoded
in stable cohomology?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.