* 1804377
* Meta-Surfaces for Far-Field Radiation Control and Near-Field Radiation Enhancement
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2022
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 314,648.00

Radiation is an important energy transfer process that has wide applications in
energy harvesting, production, and utilization. Radiation energy transfer can be
accomplished by far-field radiation, where radiative surfaces are separated by a
distance longer than the radiation wavelength (typically several to tens of
micrometers) and near-field radiation, in which the surfaces are separated by a
distance shorter than the radiation wavelength. In this project, engineered
surfaces with specifically designed very small (microscale) patterns, called
meta-surfaces, are studied to achieve specific far-field radiation properties
and to enhance near-field radiation for applications such as thermal-
photovoltaics in solar energy harvesting. The project aims to generate a wealth
of scientific and engineering knowledge to advance the fundamentals and
engineering of radiation energy transfer. It can also be applied to other fields
of science and engineering, including high resolution imaging, sensing, and
infrared radiation sources. In addition, the project provides education and
training to the next generation scientists and engineers, broadens participation
of underrepresented groups, and increases public awareness of radiation science
and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs novel meta-surfaces
that are advantages for the desired radiation properties and transfer processes.
Specifically, meta-surfaces capable of enhancing the magnetic radiation field in
addition to the electrical radiation field are studied. This approach provides
the design space for manipulating both electric and magnetic properties to
achieve desired far- and near-field performances, while using relatively simple
two-dimensional meta-surface structures. Advanced experimental techniques are
used in this project, including near-field radiation measurements with surface
separation distances of tens of nanometers, FTIR (Fourier Transform Infrared
spectroscopy) coupled with near-field scanning optical microscopy, FTIR near-
field emission microscopy, and far-field FTIR spectroscopy. These studies
provide a complete micro-to-macro spectroscopic picture of the designed meta-
surfaces to validate the design theories, therefore, to advance far- and near-
field radiation research and facilitate their
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.