* 1804360
* Characterization of Near-Field Thermal Radiative Properties of Man-Made Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Carl Tripp, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 350,024.00

Man-made materials that are engineered at the very small (nanometer) scale have
been proposed for thermal radiation applications. The radiative properties of
these materials have been studied theoretically using exact or approximate
methods. However, these theoretical predictions have never been experimentally
verified. The objective of this project is to experimentally demonstrate that
novel thermal radiative properties can be achieved using man-made materials such
as metamaterials, gratings, and photonic crystals. The ability to engineer
thermal radiation will lead to technological breakthroughs in energy conversion
and conservation, and will significantly accelerate the development of thermal
radiation applications such as waste heat recovery using nano-gap
thermophotovoltaic devices and thermal management at the nanoscale. This will
benefit the society by reducing consumption of fossil fuels and thus conserving
our limited energy resources and the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this project is to test the hypothesis that the spectrum of near-
field thermal radiation can be tuned using man-made materials that are
engineered at the sub-wavelength scale. This hypothesis will be tested by
measuring the spectrum of near-field thermal emission from a variety of man-made
structures. The measured spectra will be compared with theoretical predictions,
and they will be used for validating and tuning the theoretical models. This
research will contribute to the advancement of knowledge and technology in the
field of nanoscale radiative heat transfer in several ways. It will be
experimentally demonstrated that tunable near-field thermal radiation can be
achieved using man-made materials. A robust technique will be established for
measuring the spectrum of near-field thermal emission. This project will provide
physical insight into the mechanisms of near-field thermal emission by man-made
materials, and it will help to establish theoretical models that accelerate
design and discovery of materials with novel radiative
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.