* 1804428
* Using Kinetic Entropy to Understand Dissipation in Reconnection and Turbulence
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Paul Cassak, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

This project will contribute to a detailed understanding of a mysterious plasma
process called magnetic reconnection, a process behind explosive events in space
including solar flares and so-called geomagnetic storms that drive space
weather. It occurs where a magnetic field embedded in a superheated (ionized)
gas, a plasma, changes directions and rapidly releases large amounts of energy
into the plasma. The project will also contribute to understanding of plasma
turbulence, where energy injected at large scales cascades down to small
dissipation scales. This project will pursue a systematic approach to
determining where dissipation occurs in plasmas. The approach is to develop the
tools to apply the concept of entropy, known since the late 19th century, to
this modern problem where it has been underutilized. This project has the
capability to be truly transformative to the field of geospace sciences since it
will provide the infrastructure for using entropy as a diagnostic for
dissipation which should be useful in many subareas of this field, and will be
directly comparable to existing satellite measurements. It fosters education
through the support of a graduate student and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to perform the first systematic
study using kinetic entropy as a diagnostic for dissipation in reconnection and
turbulence, and to compare the results with observational data from the
Magnetospheric Multiscale space mission. The kinetic diagnostic was recently
developed for particle-in-cell (PIC) codes by the research team, so the new
diagnostic will be used to assess the numerical dissipation in collisionless PIC
codes and implemented into a collisional PIC code that self-consistently
contains dissipation. The two will be compared to provide strong insights into
where dissipation occurs and what physical mechanism causes it. As needed, the
results will be compared directly with a new Vlasov-Maxwell solver that was
recently developed by a collaborator at the Los Alamos National Laboratory. The
simulation study will be carried out on standard test problems in magnetic
reconnection and turbulence. The expected contribution of this work will be a
systematic approach to study dissipation in nearly collisionless systems which
can broadly be used for plasma science, and a newfound understanding of what
causes irreversible dissipation in reconnection and turbulence. This project is
being supported as a part of the NSF/DOE Partnership in Basic Plasma Science and
Engineering, with a collaborating effort at the Space Science Institute
supported by the Department of Energy, Office of Fusion Energy
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.