* 1804422
* Collaborative Research:  A Point-of-Care Device for Diagnosis and Management of Pulmonary Diseases
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Massoud Motamedi, University of Texas Medical Branch at Galveston
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 04/30/2023
* USD 319,323.00

Lung cancer is the most common cause of cancer-related death. Symptoms, such as
fever or fatigue, are unspecific while other indicators are typical of many
other diseases. Development of a reliable technique that detects lung cancer at
the earliest possible stage, is critical for successful outcomes. Several
competing techniques demonstrated their ability to diagnose intermediate and
late stage lung cancer, but failed to detect early stage cancer which
significantly decreases their utility. This project will synthesize a set of
novel optical biosensors and indicators that have been implicated in early stage
lung cancer. The development of this novel non-invasive, cost effective, and
reliable screening tool would be transformative for the whole field of lung
cancer prevention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will achieve technical proof-
of-principle by focusing on a set of biomarkers (matrix metalloproteinases and
cathepsins) that have been shown to be successful in detecting stage 1 non-
small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), the most common form of lung cancer. An
integrated microfluidic device will be developed to handle a new class of nano-
biosensors designed to detect a large number of enzymes. The panel of biomarkers
that will be detected by the proposed device will be optimized based on samples
collected from animal models first, and human patients later.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.