* 1804799
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: Extreme floods on the lower Mississippi River in the context of late Holocene climatic variability
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Zhixiong Shen, Coastal Carolina University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2022
* USD 49,704.00

The Mississippi River plays a fundamental role in the economy of the United
States, and flooding along its course is costly in both economic and social
terms. Historic flooding of the lower Mississippi in 2011 caused over $3 billion
in agricultural losses and damage to infrastructure, with additional losses to
flooding occurring again in 2016 and 2018. Seasonal and longer-term predictions
of flooding along the Mississippi and its major tributaries remain a major
challenge because the effects of climate variability, greenhouse forcing, and
human modifications of the river are difficult to disentangle using short
records from gauging stations that span less than 150 years. This project will
develop records describing the timing and magnitude of flooding across the
Mississippi River basin over the last millennium, and use these records to
understand the influence of climate variability on flood activity. This work
will improve predictions of flooding along the Mississippi River, a hazard that
affects millions of people. The findings will be useful for planned and ongoing
efforts to slow coastal land loss in the Mississippi River delta. The project
will engage students at three institutions in research, and its findings will be
disseminated to the public through an exhibit at the Mississippi River Museum
and Aquarium. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
reconstruct the frequency and magnitude of overbank floods along the lower
Mississippi River and its major tributaries over the last millennium using the
sedimentary archives preserved in oxbow lakes. Our ability to create this novel
hydrological record is due to recent developments in paleoflood hydrology that
demonstrate the unique ability of floodplain lake sediments to record individual
flood events and their associated magnitude. Once developed, our reconstructions
will be used to characterize decadal- to centennial-scale variability of flood
activity, to compare with simulated discharge extremes in climate model
ensembles, and to identify the regional and hemispheric circulation patterns
associated with increased likelihoods of extreme floods on the lower Mississippi
River and its major tributaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.