* 1804945
* Learning to Automatically Evaluate Pathological Gait: A Data-Driven System for Characterizing Disability and Informing Therapeutic Interventions
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Jenna Wiens, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Grace Hwang
* 08/31/2022
* USD 223,962.00

Being able to balance is something most of us take for granted. However,
approximately 35% of U.S. citizens 40 years and older are affected by
vestibular-related balance issues. The vestibular system, located in the inner
ear, is one of several sensory systems that provides our central nervous system
with balance and spatial orientation information. When a person's vestibular
system is impaired by disease or injury, he/she can experience balance and gait
deficits in addition to dizziness and vertigo. There are physical, emotional,
and monetary costs associated with sensory-based balance disabilities, such as
vestibular disabilities, and the falls that typically follow bouts of balance
instability. Most fall-related injuries occur during walking (gait), but
treating imbalance during gait is challenging. Current clinical tools for
assessing gait pathologies (gait abnormalities due to injury or disease) in
people with vestibular disabilities do not fully capture body motion, neglecting
potentially critical features of sensory-related disabilities during gait-based
activities. The goal of this project is to develop and test data-driven
algorithms (problem solving instructions) for characterizing pathological
motion. This work will lead to new methods for assessing sensory-related gait
disorders and support the development of novel rehabilitation strategies. As
part of this research, large motion sensing networks will be combined with
machine learning algorithms to identify and measure gait abnormalities in people
with vestibular disabilities. Though the focus of this project is on vestibular
disabilities, the methods developed can be generalized to a wide range of
balance impairments stemming from sensory disabilities, injuries, neural
disabilities, motor disabilities, and aging. This research will also contribute
to the training of both undergraduate and graduate students through capstone
design projects, clinical immersion experiences to identify unmet rehabilitation
needs, and the development and implementation of an open access, online
educational module focused on applications of machine learning for societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's primary purpose is to
develop and assess data-driven machine learning (ML) algorithms that identify
and quantify pathological gait in people with vestibular disabilities for the
purposes of informing the creation of new assessment techniques and supporting
the development of novel rehabilitation strategies. The Research Plan is
organized under three objectives. The first objective is to create a shareable
database of gait measurements from subjects with vestibular disabilities.
Activities include: a) recruiting participants with vestibular deficits and age-
matched healthy controls, b) collecting kinematic data during an experimental
session in which subjects are instrumented with a full set of passive markers
and up to 17 IMUs (Inertial Measurement Units), c) collecting clinical
vestibular testing diagnostic data, e.g., electronystagmography test battery,
and d) collecting Physical Therapist (PT) labels based on videotaped gait
rehabilitation exercises that are viewed and rated on a 1-5 visual analog scale
by a small cohort of PTs and d) sharing data by organizing data into tables that
can be downloaded in a local database format. The second objective is to develop
robust data-driven ML algorithms for automatically evaluating and characterizing
pathological gait patterns in people with vestibular disabilities. Activities
are organized under sub-objectives designed to learn data-driven models to a)
automatically differentiate subjects with vestibular disabilities from healthy
controls, b) characterize subpopulations by developing a notion of prototypical
gait pathologies for each clinical subgroup and c) quantify the extent of the
disability and generate hypotheses regarding the root sensorimotor or
biomechanical problem. The third objective is to develop and prospectively
evaluate a portable system for real-time assessment. Activities include: a)
developing a portable smartphone gait assessment tool that will generate real-
time ratings during gait-based rehabilitation exercises using data obtained from
no more than 7 IMUs and b) prospectively testing the system in a proof-of-
concept study involving 10 adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.