* 1804243
* A 1.4 million year record of black carbon and biomass burning in the eastern Arctic from the Lake El'gygytgyn and other sediment cores (P2C2)
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Joseph McConnell, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Frank R. Rack
* 08/31/2022
* USD 468,274.00

This award funds a new method for measuring black carbon in lake-sediment cores,
which builds on a well-established technique for measuring black carbon in
glacial ice cores. Black carbon (BC) is a primary climate forcing agent
resulting from incomplete combustion of biomass. Wildfire emissions are critical
unknowns in climate-model predictions under a warming climate, particularly the
relationship of large-scale biomass burning and BC emissions to climate forcing.
Development of the ice-core BC method has transformed understanding of BC in
polar regions; this project will further develop the sediment-core BC method and
apply it to provide additional records that will expand temporal and spatial
coverage to other regions, including development of detailed lake-sediment
records of Arctic BC during the past ~1.4 million years thereby extending
understanding of climate and biomass-burning linkages. This will enable
worldwide, longer-term understanding of linkages between climate, human
activities, and biomass burning, as well as quantification of BC as a forcing
agent. BC aggregates reflect regional-to-hemispheric biomass burning emissions
rather than local biomass burning. Given the sparsity of ice-coring locations in
the eastern Arctic, application of this new lake sediment method in Arctic
Russia will enable widely distributed records of past biomass burning and BC
forcing in the region, potentially transforming understanding of forcing
scenarios through time. Analysis of samples from Lake El'gygytgyn will extend
biomass burning records much farther back in time than is possible with ice
cores or charcoal records. The development and interdisciplinary interpretation
of such long-term BC records will greatly extend instrumental records of biomass
burning and BC in space and time - through a broad range of climate states and
forcing scenarios - in line with the goals of NSF's Paleo Perspectives on
Climate Change (P2C2) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will exploit
the availability of archived lake sediment samples from the eastern Arctic and
use this new method to (1) develop ~2,000-year-long records of BC, which is
related to biomass burning in the eastern Arctic, to determine linkages between
climate, human activities, BC, and biomass burning in the region; (2) evaluate
the validity of the lake sediment method of measuring BC for different climate
states by comparing BC flux and particle mass in the upper ~150,000 years of the
Lake El'gygytgyn sediment core with a reprocessed ~120,000-year BC record from
the Greenland NEEM ice core; and, (3) quantify and understand linkages between
long-term and large-magnitude climate change, BC, and biomass burning in the
eastern Arctic by developing a detailed sediment BC record from Lake El'gygytgyn
during the past ~1.4 million years (spanning Marine Isotope Stage (MIS) 1 to MIS
45). To meet the goals of this project, BC concentration and particle mass
measurements will be made in lake sediment samples from an array of shorter,
higher-time-resolution cores from the Russian Arctic, as well as from deeper,
lower-time resolution lake cores, including the upper ~60 m of the Lake
El'gygytgyn core. Pilot BC measurements from Lake E sediment cores for the past
160,000 years show close correspondence with large-scale climate (e.g.,
insolation, greenhouse gas concentrations) but suggest different climate-
vegetation-fire relationships during the glacial periods than reported for the
Holocene interglacial. This award is co-funded by the Office of Polar Programs
and the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.