* 1804838
* Isotope Fractionation of Water Adsorption on Clay Minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Juske Horita, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 08/31/2022
* USD 349,999.00

The soil-water system of terrestrial environments is located at a very critical
interface within land-atmosphere-vegetation continuum of the energy-water-carbon
dioxide balance and ecological systems. The outcome from this project can
contribute to our better understanding of the land-atmosphere-vegetation system
on plot to regional to global scales. By extension, the improved understanding
can lead to more accurate prediction of regional to global water cycles and
likely climate changes. Such capability is increasingly required to meet
societal needs such as water resources development, global primary production,
and agriculture/food production and security. The investigator will conduct an
outreach activity designed to enhance middle school girls' interest from rural
West Texas in STEM topics through a one-day, interactive "Water Planet" workshop
on water-related projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The isotopic compositions of
soil waters have been extensively utilized as a very effective tool to study
vadose-zone hydrology, including evapotranspiration, water movement, and
groundwater recharge. Recently, isotope-based studies found that mobile water
(expressed by stream water) and tightly bound water (represented by soil and
plant water) in watersheds were isotopically distinct and the notion of
?ecohydrological separation? has been proposed. Other explanations of the
observed isotopic differences include a mixing of evaporated and unevaporated
soil waters during percolation. The proposed activities and expected outcome
from this project will test the hypothesis that isotope fractionation associated
with the adsorption and condensation of water on the surface and in pores of
soil minerals differ from that for bulk liquid water. This proposal seeks an
integrated approach of detailed, systematic experiments and basic modeling to
quantify, understand and predict the isotope fractionation of adsorbed water on
various non-expansive clay (kaolinite), expansive clays (Na- and Ca-rich
montmorillonite), and soils in general as a function of physicochemical
properties (surface chemistry, pore size/interlayer distance, type of interlayer
cations) and the relative vapor pressure. The potential of the outcome has far-
reaching implications for our understanding of the water cycle at the land-
atmosphere-vegetation interface, because the isotopic compositions of soil water
has been increasingly and widely used. Knowledge that can be directly impacted
and further advanced include: a) analytical methods for the isotopic
compositions of soil water, b) multiple subsurface water pools in soil pores and
fractures with different isotopic compositions, and c) Craig-Gordon evaporation
model for calculating the isotopic compositions of evaporation and transpiration
fluxes from soils and vegetation, respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.