* 1804720
* Fate, Transport and Transformation of Ammonia Emissions from Animal Feeding Operations and Their Impacts on Air-Soil Health
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Ken Anderson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 323,019.00

In the United States, animal feeding operations (AFOs) emit approximately 2.5
million tons of ammonia per year, contributing 85% of the total ammonia
emissions in the nation. The fate, transport, and transformation of ammonia
released from AFOs are an increasing concern due to the adverse effects of
ammonia on air and water quality, soil health, and ecosystem health. This
project will advance the scientific understanding of ammonia fate and transport
to better understand the ecological and environmental impacts of ammonia
emissions from AFOs. This knowledge will be transferred to students, industries,
regulators, and the public through various educational and outreach programs
that will increase the public's understanding of the environmental impacts of
ammonia release from AFOs, as well as to inform policy makers to better protect
human and ecological health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will accomplish
three specific objectives: (1) Quantify ammonia and particulate ammonium ion dry
deposition impacted by ammonia emissions, land usage and meteorological
conditions in AFO environments; (2) Estimate the transformation of emitted
ammonia to secondary inorganic fine particulate matter as impacted by ammonia
emissions, distance from source, atmospheric chemical conditions, and
meteorological conditions; and (3) Quantify the impacts of ammonia and ammonium
ion depositions on soil chemical and biological properties, including the
microbial biomass, thestoichimetry of nitrogen transformations, and pH. Ammonia
emission, deposition and transformation, and air-soil properties will be
simultaneously investigated through a multi-discipline, multi-media approach at
a poultry facility in North Carolina. Micrometeorological and resistance methods
will be used to determine nitrogen deposition rate. Response of the soil quality
metrics and nitrogen cycling rates to nitrogen deposition will be examined.
Based upon simultaneous measurements of acidic gases, ammonia, and secondary
inorganic fine particulate matter ions, ammonia neutralization potential will be
quantified to assess the potential for particulate matter formation. This work,
if successful, will produce new knowledge about: (1) the impact of reduced
nitrogen deposition on soil ecosystems in rural areas; (2) the formation of
secondary inorganic fine particulate matter in response to AFO ammonia emissions
and ambient meteorological and chemical conditions; (3) applicability of
thermodynamic equilibrium model ISORROPIA-II for the simulation of secondary
inorganic fine particulate matter formation in agricultural
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.