* 1804460
* Collaborative Research: P2C2: A High Resolution Paleoclimate Archive of Termination I in Oneida Lake and Glacial Lake Iroquois Sediments
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2024
* Christopher Scholz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 604,283.00

At the end of the last ice age, the vast ice sheet still covering much of
northeastern North America served as a dam for ponded meltwaters along its
southern edge. When the ice sheet collapsed, those fresh lake waters were
released to the Atlantic Ocean, and are thought to have disrupted ocean
circulation, causing abrupt cold spells in the northern hemisphere, and perhaps
globally. Near southern Ontario and northern New York State, enormous Glacial
Lake Iroquois contained massive amounts of cold fresh water, and modern remnants
of that lake include Lake Ontario and Oneida Lake. Oneida Lake is located near
the easternmost part of ancient Glacial Lake Iroquois, and this area and the
Mohawk Valley were a key valve for the release of meltwaters to the Hudson River
and to the Atlantic. The Oneida Lake project will study the ancient sediments
laid down during these meltwater releases, to determine their precise timing,
and will then compare those timings to past climate records derived from
Greenland ice cores and from sediments from the Southern and the Atlantic
Oceans. The researchers will use geophysical (sonar) methods to image the
sediments below the bottom of Oneida Lake, and then collect sediment cores for
detailed analyses. Special Carbon-14 dating techniques will be used to date
sediments in the cores and to correlate the layered sediments to similar records
previously collected in New England. Project outreach efforts include a public
lecture series for lake-side communities, engagements with Oneida Nation high
school science classes, and the installation of science information kiosks at a
State Park on the lake?s eastern edge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
examining the Late Quaternary sediment record from the Oneida Basin in Upstate
New York, through analyses of new geophysical data and new sediment cores. The
unusually rich stratigraphic archive will constrain the paleoclimate evolution
along the SE margin of the Laurentide Ice Sheet in the terminal Pleistocene. The
researchers will also develop an energy balance hydrologic model of ancient
Glacial Lake Iroquois to better constrain fill and discharge events from this
basin. Non-linear episodes that perturb the global climate system (e.g., the
Younger Dryas cooling) include major meltwater pulses and drainage pathway
switches associated with Glacial Lake Iroquois and its precursors. The
researchers will evaluate Termination I (the end of the last glaciation, ~20,000
years ago) at seasonal resolution over several millennia, using the rich varved
sediment record in Oneida Lake and surrounding outcrops. Outcrop observations of
newly discovered lake sediment exposures (varves) in the basin will be
integrated with correlative sedimentary sequences recovered by cores from Oneida
Lake. The glacial varve record will be chronologically constrained via
paleomagnetic methods (cross-dating) with the North American Varve Chronology
and further fixed by selective use of Ramped PyrOx radiocarbon dating of organic
matter and separately of pollen 14C dating. Preliminary high-resolution seismic
data reveal a remarkable, high-fidelity stratigraphy with evidence for outburst
flood events, ice sheet instabilities, and a continuous time series from
deglaciation through the Holocene. The full lake will be surveyed at high
spatial resolution using CHIRP (sweep signal seismic) and multichannel seismic
reflection methods. The calibrated time series of events will be compared to
three well-established global archives: the Greenland ice core record, the
Antarctic Peninsula Palmer Deep and Cariaco Basin marine sections. Beyond the
direct scientific outcomes and graduate student training, the researchers will
mount an outreach effort including: 1) a riparian community lecture series; 2)
construction of two information kiosks describing the geologic evolution of
Glacial Lake Iroquois and subsequent evolution of Oneida Lake at two lakeside
parks; and 3) engage under-represented groups including secondary school
students from the Oneida Nation during both field and laboratory
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.