* 1804177
* Rational Framework for Particle-containing Coacervates
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Maria Santore, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2022
* USD 357,694.00

Coacervates are complexes of oppositely charged polymers that have separated
into two liquid phases from a salt solution due to electrostatic forces. They
are used in coatings, adhesives, pharmaceuticals, and personal care products.
This research will create novel coacervates in which one of the charged
components is a solid nanoparticle. The work will create new coacervates by
building on existing knowledge, explore how particle size and rigidity affect
the formation of the two liquid phases, and examine the role that the
arrangement of charges on the particle surface plays. Experiments to map the
phase diagrams for these new materials will be complemented by analysis,
experiments to identify the adsorption of polymers on the particle surfaces and
the polymer configurations, and experiments to measure the bulk mechanical
behavior. Ultimately, the researchers plan to identify design rules for the
formulation of coacervates using a broad class of particles. Research
opportunities for women and other students who are under-represented in STEM
fields will be provided as part of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
focused on a systematic study of polymer-particle coacervates. Three specific
aims for the work are: 1) create polymer-particle coacervates employing
particles with polymers attached (brushy particles) to build upon the current
understanding of polymer-polymer coacervate systems, 2) examine how particle
rigidity and size impact coacervate formation and properties, and 3) examine the
role of charge clustering on coacervate formation by focusing on
electrostatically patchy particles. The three aims decouple the hypothesized
mechanisms by which particle properties affect coacervate formation, thus
providing design rules for the formulation of coacervates using broad classes of
particles. By comparing coacervate formation with brushy particles to the
analogous system of linear polycation and polyanion chains, Aim 1 preserves the
molecular interactions of a classical coacervate and introduces solid particles
as space filling entities whose length scales may be important through their
range of interactions. Aims 2 and 3 sequentially probe the impact of molecular
scale constraints introduced by particle rigidity, potential mismatch in
registration of positive and negative charge, and charge clustering. The program
exploits the synergy between the principle investigators: Perry (coacervate
expert) and Santore (expert on polyelectrolyte adsorption and colloidal phase
behavior). The experiments at UMass will be supported by computations by
collaborator Sing at UIUC whose calculations address both the polymer-solid
interactions and the phase behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.