* 1804743
* Collaborative Proposal: Engineering Architecture for Tissue Models
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Erin Lavik, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2022
* USD 308,102.00

This project focuses on developing a screen printing process to build models of
both neural networks and the innervated colon (i.e., a colon with imbedded
nerves to mimic the natural structure). The screen printing process has been
around for thousands of years and is used to make art, to mass produce t-shirts,
and to make microelectronics. It is simple, low cost, reproducible, and
scalable, making it ideal for printing highly accessible tissue models. While
there have been many exciting approaches to print tissue models, most involve
expensive equipment and subject the cells to either ultraviolet rays or shearing
through fine needles, both of which can impact cell survival and behavior. The
objective of this project is to determine the resolution and reproducibility of
the screen printing approach and then use the process developed to make the two
new models. The neural network model (based on human derived stem cells) will
lay the groundwork to study diseases and investigate therapies relevant to nerve
tissue in a more physiology-based/meaningful way that is still suitable for high
throughput systems. The colon model (consisting of epithelial cells, goblet
cells producing mucous, immune cells, and neurons) will provide one of the first
innervated gut models that is suitable for high throughput techniques. High
throughput screening opens the possibilities of investigating the interplay
between these cells in the development of food allergies and conditions such as
colitis. The research will provide new tools for researchers interested in
understanding the complex cross-talk between cells in these tissues and
developing new therapies for insults to these systems. The screen printing
technique will also be used to engage young researchers. Screen printing
demonstrations will be built into outreach programs in schools and utilized to
educate researchers in classrooms and labs. Screen printing is exceptionally
familiar and "user-friendly," thus a great platform for engaging and keeping
people engaged in science. For example, Jello will be screen printed on edible
paper to explain methods to make tissues as part of outreach program
demonstrations in the Baltimore and Boston public schools. Educational and
outreach efforts will be complemented by a website that highlights scientists
from diverse backgrounds and the accessible, low tech parts of their work, like
screen printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to
determine the resolution and reproducibility of a screen printing approach to
making highly scalable hydrogel-cell tissue models and to then use the system
developed to make new models of neural networks and the innervated colon. The
investigators hypothesize that screen-printing will provide a cost-effective
approach to making tissue models that surpass those made via bioprinting
approaches in terms of ease, cost and cell survival and thus enable more
relevant models of tissues from cells that are highly sensitive to shear. The
Research Plan is organized under four aims. THE FIRST AIM is to characterize the
screen-printed materials (PLL(poly(L-lysine))/protein and hydroxy appetite-based
gels functionalized with PEG-thiol groups printed on glass slides) with regards
to the resolution, repeatability and lamination of layers. Expected aim outcomes
include: determining the gelation time and mechanics of the different materials,
confirming the concentration and distribution of proteins on the gels,
determining the strength of lamination between similar and different layers, and
knowing the limits on how thin gels can be reproducibly screen printed. THE
SECOND AIM is to characterize the multilamellar, patterned gels with regards to
architecture including resolution and reproducibility of features in the
printing plane. Expected aim outcomes include: determining the finest resolution
that can be reproducibly achieved for a range of gels, confirming the
concentration and distribution of proteins on and in the gels and determining if
there are any types of features that are more or less easily printed at high
resolution. THE THIRD AIM is to determine the relationship between printing
resolution, cell survival, and cellular behavior using human induced pluripotent
stem (iPS) cells and human iPS-derived neurons to build neural circuits
including excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Expected aim outcomes include:
knowing which hydrogel augments iPS cell survival the most, knowing the impact
of the matrix on the genetic and phenotypic cellular behavior of iPS and their
progeny, knowing the impact screen printing has on the genetic and phenotypic
cellular behavior of iPS cells and their progeny and developing a reproducible,
scalable system for high throughput screening of 3D neural interactions that
lead to neural circuits. THE FOURTH AIM is to build a model of the innervated
colon to investigate the application of screen printing in a multicellular,
physiologically relevant, high throughput model. Cell lines include enterocytes
and goblet cells derived from Caco-2 cells, primary human intestinal epithelial
cells, immune cells (dendritic cells) and neural cells (from Aim 3). Matrix
materials include PLL-PEG gel systems printed with laminin and collagen I. The
matrix optimized in Aim 3 will be used for the neural layer. Expected aim
outcomes include: the development of a novel gut/colon model 1) that lays the
foundation for study and enhanced understanding of the role of the enteric
nervous system, 2) that, even without the neural component, will be one of the
first colon models that can be prepared in a high throughput manner and
interface with real time electrical recording and imaging modalities without a
substantial investment in materials or equipment and 3) that lays for foundation
for adding the next critical component--the
microbiome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.