* 1804011
* Understanding Thermal Transport in "Breathing" Porous Crystals
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Christopher Wilmer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2021
* USD 351,480.00

Porous materials are used widely in modern society, from air and water filters,
to battery electrodes and catalysts for manufacturing chemicals. One particular
application of porous materials is to better store gases; highly porous
materials are able to soak up gases just like a bath sponge soaks up water. For
example, porous materials can be used to store large amounts of oxygen in
portable containers or to store natural gas in vehicles. The most effective
materials for storing gases are the ones whose pores are of nanoscopic size,
where each pore is just large enough to store a few molecules of gas. However,
there have been two challenges that researchers have faced in developing better
materials for gas storage: (1) gas getting stuck in the pores (referred to as
'stranded' gas), and (2) the pores getting excessively hot due to the heat that
is generated when gases enter and bind to their surfaces. This project aims to
shed light on both challenges by looking at the thermal properties of a special
class of materials called 'breathing' porous crystals. The pores of these
materials are able to open when gases enter, and close when gases leave, thus
squeezing out any residual gas; not unlike how our lungs work. For this reason,
breathing porous materials are very promising for revolutionizing industrial gas
storage and separations. However, we currently have no understanding of how heat
dissipates in pores that open and close in response to the presence of gases. By
illuminating these thermal properties, this project will help facilitate the
practical implementation of these promising breathing porous crystals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to study heat transfer
phenomena in flexible porous crystals. This project will systematically study a
series of idealized flexible porous crystal structures to help build a
fundamental understanding of the factors that play a role in their thermal
transport properties. The guiding hypothesis is that the ratio of thermal
conductivity for expanded versus contracted pores can be as much as an order of
magnitude. Under vacuum conditions, the high ratio might be considered an
obvious outcome based on the relative difference in crystal densities, but in
the presence of gas, which would be the relevant application condition, there
are corresponding changes in gas density that could counteract thermal
conductivity changes. In addition to answering these questions directly, our
modeling efforts will uncover structure-property relationships that could add
further insight into thermal transport behavior in porous systems. Working with
experimental collaborators, there will be an effort to subsequently validate the
modeling results with empirical measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.