* 1804436
* Tailored Carbon-Supported Catalysts for the Conversion of Biomass in the Condensed Phase
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Jean-Philippe Tessonnier, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 02/28/2022
* USD 340,682.00

Biomass, produced from agricultural waste and non-edible plants, offers an
abundant, cheap, and renewable source of chemical raw materials that can be
upgraded to a wide range of chemical products. The complexity of the biomass-
derived raw materials necessitates finely tuned catalysts that can attack
specific chemical bonds to form desired products. In this study, catalysts
consisting of noble metals dispersed on carbon supports will be tuned to produce
specific chemicals, with emphasis on engineering the carbon materials in ways
that direct the chemistry towards the targeted chemical products. The science
and engineering generated by the study will promote the production of chemicals
from renewable feedstocks, thereby decreasing dependence on fossil resources,
reducing global carbon footprint, stimulating and diversifying rural economies,
and promoting a range of educational opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Metal-support interactions provide a suitable handle to engineer the
catalytic activity of a chosen metal function through both chemical and
electronic effects. Such interactions have been generally overlooked in the case
of carbon as this material is usually considered to be inert in catalysis. Yet,
there is ample evidence in materials science that the electronic properties of
carbons can be tailored by varying the nature and concentration of the oxygen
moieties that cover their surface. As a result, the work function of
conventional carbon scaffolds can be modulated between 4.4 and 5.4 eV, providing
an ideal platform for studying and harnessing electronic metal-support
interactions without the challenges associated with atom mobility that are
common for oxides. The project will decouple the chemical and electronic
interactions introduced by oxygen moieties and reveal their true effects on the
hydrogenation performance of supported palladium (Pd) and platinum (Pt)
nanoparticles. Cinnamaldehyde and furfural will be utilized as probe molecules
as they present both carbon-carbon and carbon-oxygen double bonds - two
functionalities common in bio-based chemicals. The associated fundamental
understanding will yield transformative concepts for manipulating the
performance of carbon-supported catalysts, in particular Pd/C and Pt/C, two
catalysts with broad applications in the chemical industry. Broader aspects of
the project will include several educational and outreach activities highlighted
by a student-led community-based program "Be Iowa Smart" that will attract a
diverse group of students to science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines, and build a competitive and globally engaged workforce in
Iowa and the Midwest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.