* 1804721
* Uncovering the microscopic origins of nonlinear rheology in glassy nanocolloidal suspensions
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Robert Leheny, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 06/30/2022
* USD 336,839.00

Soft solids such as gels, pastes, and emulsions will change their shape and flow
when subjected to sufficient forcing. Understanding and controlling this
behavior is central to the processing of these materials in applications ranging
from ceramics and pharmaceuticals to food and personal care products. At the
microscopic level, this deformation and flow involves rearrangements of the
constituents that are often difficult to identify and characterize. Furthermore,
once flow stops, the force needed to maintain a soft solid's new shape can
display a long, slow evolution with time that depends on details of the
preceding flow. This phenomenon provides a potential mechanism for tailoring the
properties of the soft solids; however, the microscopic motions within the
material that underlie this slow evolution are poorly understood. This award
will support a novel experimental investigation to identify the key microscopic
motions associated with the onset and cessation of flow in soft solids and to
connect these motions with the solids' macroscopic properties. A central feature
is a technique that uses x-rays to provide unprecedented resolution of the
motions within materials at lengths as small as a molecule. The development of
these x-ray methods for investigating soft solids under deformation and flow
will have impact far beyond the planned experiments. This new tool has potential
applications that span physics, chemical engineering, and the biosciences.
Graduate and undergraduate students who will be trained in advanced x-ray
methods will further contribute to the talent pool needed to advance research
and development in the United States. In addition, the award will provide
Baltimore City public school students with opportunities for research
internships in the Investigator's laboratory through partnership with a local
magnet science high school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft disordered solids can
possess characteristic mechanical properties, such as the emergence of a yield
stress, shear thinning upon flow, and thixotropy. This deformation and flow
behavior is central to the utility of these materials in a range of technologies
and provides a point of contact with theoretical concepts such as jamming and
soft glass rheology. At the root of the nonlinear rheology are shear-induced
changes to the internal microstructure and microstructural dynamics of the soft
solids. Understanding the connections between these microscopic structural
dynamics and macroscopic rheological properties remains a central goal for the
fields of mechanics and colloid science. This effort is made challenging by the
strong spatial and temporal fluctuations that can characterize the microscopic
response to stress and by the out-of-equilibrium nature of many soft disordered
solids, which causes their properties to depend not only on thermodynamic
conditions but also on their history. The proposed research will take advantage
of the unique strengths of x-ray photon correlation spectroscopy (XPCS) for
illuminating the salient nanometer-scale structural dynamics in soft materials
to bring insightful perspectives to this problem. Specifically, the research
will leverage and expand newly developed experimental capabilities that combine
XPCS with rheometry in novel ways to reveal the particle-scale and mesoscale
dynamics at the origins of macroscopic deformation and flow. Through three
specific and inter-related projects focused on nanocolloidal suspensions that
form soft-glass and concentrated-gel phases, the experiments will elucidate the
microscopic processes leading to stress relaxation, yielding, and aging in ways
that enable tests of prevailing theoretical ideas regarding the mechanical
properties of soft disordered solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.