* 1804096
* Exploiting dynamics and cell-to-cell variation in metabolic engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Mary Dunlop, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 309,609.00

Cells can be engineered to produce products ranging from fuels to
pharmaceuticals. However, the pathways that produce these products often reduce
cell yields and increase costs. Turning these pathways on and off in some
pattern might simultaneously reduce the burden and increase production.
Conceptually, this approach is similar to a work week and weekend. It is based
on the idea that a combination of work and time off can result in higher overall
productivity than sustained, constant effort. The research is complemented by
educational and training opportunities for high school students and
undergraduates. These students will be prepared to participate in a high-
technology workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene expression is noisy, leading to
variation between cells in the absence of genetic diversity. Cells exploit that
variability to optimize resource use. This calls into question whether
introducing dynamics and noise in expression of genes could be beneficial. This
project focuses on efflux pumps that export the monoterpene pinene. Pumps export
toxic substrates and improve biosynthetic yields, but overexpressing them
burdens the cell. Diversifying pump levels may allow populations to exploit
these benefits and costs. The project is organized around two objectives: (1) to
quantify single-cell differences in efflux and the duration of variability, and
(2) to compare pinene production in strains with dynamic versus static pump
expression. Time lapse microscopy coupled with microfluidics and quantitative
image processing will be used to characterize pump variability. Pinene yields
between strains with different approaches to pump expression will also be
measured. Stochastic mathematical modeling to predict the impact of pump
expression dynamics will complement the experiments. Overall, this project will
test whether it is possible to exploit cell-to-cell variation in metabolic
engineering to enhance production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.