* 1804639
* Engineering Advanced Logical Operations for Gene Control
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Corey Wilson, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 07/31/2022
* USD 333,842.00

Living systems respond to stimuli in the environment. Personalized medicine and
bio-industrial applications are made possible by this trait. An obstacle to
developing these applications is a lack of regulators (i.e., switches that can
turn genes on or off) that can facilitate complex operations. This project will
attempt to create a new class of gene regulators that can perform fundamental
logical operations (i.e., AND, OR, NOT). These regulators can be combined in
sequences that mimic a computer program. These biological programs will direct
the cell to fulfill specific functions. One example might be the following: if
compounds E (AND) F are detected, then turn on gene G; if E (OR) F are present
individually, then NOT G. This project will be complemented by outreach
activities aimed at educating students from underrepresented groups in state-of-
the-art biological engineering. This initiative will contribute to the
development of a diverse engaged science and engineering workforce, building a
firm foundation for a lifetime of contributions to research, education and their
integration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
combinational logic gates (programs) in cells to implement multiple input signal
control over gene transcription. The biological programming envisioned will
require the creation of a new class of DNA-binding transcription factors.
Successful completion of the project will result in a new class of orthogonal
and modular DNA-binding transcription factors that work as logical systems. The
resulting system will allow programmable microbial decision making, where
different combinations of signal inputs result in distinctive combinations of
genetic outputs. These transcription factors can be directly introduced into
existing genetic circuits at any position where transcription is regulated by a
DNA binding protein (or system of transcription factors). Successful completion
of this project will result in a significant enhancement in biological computing
capacity, which will enable the construction of synthetic regulatory networks at
the scale of natural networks in bacteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.