* 1804704
* Collaborative Research: Application of fluorescence spectroscopy for the characterization of dissolved organic matter: Disentangling common misconceptions and underlying chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Fernando Rosario-Ortiz, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 227,538.00

Dissolved organic matter (DOM) is a complex mixture of carbon containing
molecules that are present in all aquatic environments. DOM plays an important
role in aquatic ecosystems. Thus, variations in DOM chemical composition may
inform understanding of different processes in the environment. Fluorescence has
emerged as a common tool to characterize DOM, but many challenges are associated
with its use. In this research collaboration between the University of Colorado
at Boulder and Montana State University, the connection between fluorescence
characterization of DOM and specific chemical constituents within this mixture
will be evaluated. The results from this study will impact the field of
environmental engineering and aquatic science by providing specific guidelines
and education regarding the use of fluorescence as a broad metric for DOM
chemical understanding in aquatic ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
characterization of dissolved organic matter (DOM) by fluorescence spectroscopy
has become ubiquitous in the environmental engineering and science communities.
Specifically, the use of excitation emission matrices (EEMs) has emerged as one
of the most common tools used by researchers examining DOM on numerous natural
and engineered processes. Given the amount of data collected in an EEM, several
qualitative and quantitative approaches have been developed to analyze the
results. In most cases, these approaches attempt to tie a fluorescence response
to a chemical constituent or behavior within DOM. The environmental engineering
and science community has embraced fluorescence as an important tool for the
characterization of DOM. However, little progress has been made in understanding
what specific factors (e.g., chemical structures and molecular composition)
control the observed fluorescence response. The main goal of this project is to
fill the deficiencies in chemical interpretations of fluorescence information by
conducting a detailed evaluation of fluorescence analyses as a broad measure to
interpret the chemical composition and variability of DOM. The results from this
proposal will offer guidelines to engineers and scientists regarding the use of
fluorescence for the characterization of DOM. The use of different commonly used
fluorescent interpretation metrics will be calibrated against distinct chemical
analyses of DOM samples from highly fluorescing environmental fractions. It is
expected that this project will provide the community with detailed guidelines
regarding the limitations of the use of fluorescence for DOM research in natural
and engineered systems. The educational component will focus on the
incorporation of results from this study into collegiate curricula and
departmental seminars at the collaborating institutions. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be educated in analytical chemistry techniques
routinely used for water quality assessments. They will also learn advanced
analytical DOM characterization techniques at the molecular level. The
fluorescent community will be informed of the results from this work via
convened sessions organized at domestic and international scientific conferences
and publications in high impact scientific journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.