* 1804557
* Synthesis of completely biobased lignin-formaldehyde resins with catalytically activated lignin products
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Charles Frazier, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed project aims to develop a chemical process to convert a material
found in plants called lignin to a more valuable material called lignin-
formaldehyde (LF) resin. Completely bio-based LF resins can replace of phenol-
formaldehyde resins, which a common material used in myriad of industrial
products, such as countertops, coatings, adhesives, billiard balls, etc. Lignin
contains phenolic units that make it a potential renewable substitute for phenol
in the synthesis of the resin. However, lignin itself has limited reactivity
towards formaldehyde. To overcome this problem, a new catalytic process is
proposed to enhance the reactivity of lignin products. The proposed research may
lead to the development of technologies that add value to lignin from biomass
waste streams and can have positive impact on the environment and on rural
economies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Catalytic depolymerization and demethoxylation
of lignin into small fragments can generate free phenolic hydroxyls and free
ortho positions for formaldehyde addition and crosslinking. This pathway can
overcome the limited reactivity of lignin towards formaldehyde. Preliminary
results have shown that inexpensive catalysts, such as metal sulfides, could
catalyze depolymerization and demethoxylation of lignin. LF resins can be
subsequently synthesized from phenolic compounds with two ortho positions and be
cured with the addition of multiple-ortho-position compounds. Catalysts will be
screened through model compound studies on dimers featuring various kinds of
interunit linkages. The optimal ratios of monomer/dimers (and/or oligomers) for
LF resin synthesis will by studied by synthesizing LF resins from model
compounds. The research results will be incorporated in courses at Virginia
Polytechnic Institute and State University aimed at educating students about
biomass-derived fuels and value-added products. Outreach activities to high
school students are planned with emphasis on attracting members of
underrepresented groups into pursuing careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.