* 1804690
* Light Trapping in charge transfer states for improved organic photovoltaic performance
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Alexandr Dudnik, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2022
* USD 422,293.00

Photovoltaics (PVs) convert sunlight directly into electricity without any
production of greenhouse gases. Most commercial PVs are made from silicon, which
is expensive to process, heavy to transport, and brittle. This fundamental
research project contributes to the development of PV devices that are made from
organic materials that are low-cost, light-weight, and mechanically flexible.
One issue for all PV devices is that the sunlight must be absorbed and not
reflected from the surface for any angle of incidence on the surface. This
problem has been addressed for silicon PV devices by roughening the front and
back surfaces of the silicon in a specific pattern to cause the light to be
absorbed into the silicon instead of being reflected back to space. This
research project addresses a similar process to roughen the back surface of the
organic PV layer to enhance absorption of light specifically in the near
infrared portion of the solar spectrum, which contains a large proportion of the
solar energy. Through this surface roughening process, the efficiency of organic
PV devices will be increased, making them a better commercial option for clean
energy production. The pattern will also make the organic PV absorb light more
efficiently at high incidence angles, which is similar to sunlight in the
morning and evening. Undergraduate and Ph.D. graduate students will be trained
with research skills that are valued in the solar, polymer, and semiconducting
industries. Student recruiting and outreach activities are designed to enhance
inclusion of underrepresented minorities in research
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need to engineer
light&amp;#8208;trapping structures into organic photovoltaic (OPV) devices that
can greatly increase the charge&amp;#8208;transfer (CT) state absorbance in the
near infrared (NIR). The goal of this project is to enhance CT&amp;#8208;state
absorbance in OPV devices using lateral light&amp;#8208;trapping structures. The
overall objective is to develop a roll&amp;#8208;to&amp;#8208;roll (R2R)
compatible optical patterning process to scribe lateral light&amp;#8208;trapping
structures into OPV layers that can increase the external quantum efficiency
(EQE) of CT&amp;#8208;state absorbance above 20% across a broad wavelength
range. The central hypothesis of this project is that 700&amp;#8208;1000 nm 2D
lateral patterning of the OPV layer combined with a thick active layer will
achieve this goal of 20% EQE in the CT&amp;#8208;states. The rationale that
underlies the research is to mimic light&amp;#8208;trapping structures used in
inorganic thin&amp;#8208;film PV devices using solution processing methods that
make OPV potentially both inexpensive and scalable. The University of
California-Davis team brings expertise in OPV device fabrication, optical
modeling, and conjugated polymer synthesis to the project. The project is
structured into three aims. Aim 1: Create NIR light&amp;#8208;trapping
structures using rapid optical processing. The working hypothesis is that deep
light&amp;#8208;trapping structures will optimize waveguide modes below the
excitonic band gap, leading to enhanced absorbance in the NIR range. Aim 2:
Synthesize OPV materials with controlled solubility for optimized patterning.
The pattern fidelity is maximized by high molecular weight and low dispersity
polymers that are active donors for OPV applications. And Aim 3: Develop, test
and model patterned OPV devices with record power conversion efficiency (PCE).
The team will use large&amp;#8208;area solution patterning to fabricate
patterned OPV devices with the most promising polymeric active materials. This
fundamental research will enable a departure from flat OPV layers to focus on
light capture in sub&amp;#8208;band gap states. The expected significance
extends beyond the individual device efficiency as other researchers will be
able to adopt the patterning method and industry will be able to expand its use
to large area organic device applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.