* 1804314
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Analysis of Shellfish for Environmental and Chronological Interpretation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2018,11/30/2021
* Susan deFrance, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 11/30/2021
* USD 24,888.00

Shellfish were an important resource for past societies and the many shell
matrix sites found along world coastlines, riverbanks, lakes and creeks are a
testament to that. These sites reflect not only a record of subsistence, but
contain valuable information about the past environment and how people
interacted with it and each other. Due to the difficulty in excavating and
transporting large amounts of shell, invertebrates are typically not included in
zooarchaeological analysis which results in a lack of comparative data on the
composition of vertebrates and invertebrates in shell matrix sites. This
interdisciplinary research combines zooarchaeology and stable isotope
geochemistry to understand the role of shellfish in the processes and practices
that led to the formation of shell ring sites on the coastal southeastern US. As
a prominent component of shell rings, the eastern oyster (Crassostrea virginica)
will be the focus of a season of capture study that uses modern environmental
data as a proxy for past environmental conditions. Further, understanding use
patterns of oysters in the past has important implications for the management
and conservation of the species today. Given the decline in oyster populations
world-wide, archaeology is uniquely situated to provide a long-term, historical
perspective on the human impact on the coast and the health and sustainability
of its important resources. Results of this research will be shared globally,
including a web-based guide outlining preparation techniques for geochemical
analysis of oysters, implications of the findings for estuarine health, and
value for archaeological research. Undergraduate student participants in the
project will gain laboratory experience and training in zooarchaeological
methods and stable isotope analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shell rings are a
class of shell-matrix site in which form and function have been variously
theorized as the products of either habitation, ceremonial practice or a
combination of the two. Central to these theories is seasonality, wherein
ceremonial sites would likely demonstrate seasonal use when compared to year-
round habitation sites. Faunal remains are typically used to address the
seasonal nature of these sites, however invertebrate remains are rarely included
in analysis, limiting our understanding of combined vertebrate and invertebrate
faunal use patterns. Under the direction of Dr. Susan deFrance, Co-PI Nicole
Cannarozzi will investigate the differential formation and use of two Late
Archaic Period Shell rings located on St. Catherines Island, Georgia by
comparing the stable isotopic composition of the carbonate in modern and
archaeological oysters from these sites. Over a two-year period, the Co-PI
collected oysters and water samples from St. Catherines Island and measured
water temperature and salinity. These data will be coupled with a comprehensive
zooarchaeological analysis of vertebrates and invertebrates from column samples
taken from various contexts within the two sites to understand faunal use,
settlement patterns and depositional practices. This study highlights the value
of interdisciplinary research in archaeology and will clarify our understanding
of the timing of formation of shell matrix sites, faunal resource use and
seasonal settlement and mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.