* 1804513
* From Wastewater to Gasoline - Aqueous Biorefining of Polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB)-Enriched Biosolids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Timothy Strathmann, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 330,436.00

Increasing population and rising living standards are driving the demand for
more clean water and inexpensive energy, materials, and food. At the same time,
this demand produces growing volumes of solid and liquid wastes that public
utilities must manage. Current approaches to wastewater treatment expend large
amounts of energy to remove organic carbon, nutrients, and pathogens from the
water. However, these same "waste" constituents can potentially be recovered as
energy or other valuable products during the wastewater treatment process.
Recent research demonstrates that wastewater treatment can be accomplished using
microorganisms that funnel waste organic carbon into their cells to form
polyhydroxybutyrate (PHB) granules. The PHBs can then be separated from the
resulting waste and converted to high-value products such as renewable gasoline,
industrial chemicals, and bioplastics. Through integration of biological and
catalytic technologies, the wastewater treatment processe can be reinvented as a
"bio-refinery" that yields clean water as just one product of many. This re-
invention of water infrastructure will also allow the diffusion of sustainable
waste treatment and resource management concepts to a broader audience of
students at all levels. Ultimately, such research and educational efforts are
needed to support the Nation's shift towards more sustainable
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by developments in nascent
biorefinery technologies, this project aims to realize and optimize the
conversion of waste organic carbon streams to valuable industrial chemicals and
gasoline-grade hydrocarbon fuels through the processing of PHB-enriched biomass.
Experiments will be conducted to: (1) develop effective strategies for
separating PHB from microbial biomass and promoting PHB depolymerization in an
aqueous environment; (2) identify reaction conditions and catalysts for optimal
dehydration and decarboxylation of the resultant PHB-derived monomers; and (3)
demonstrate integrated conversion of waste organic carbon to gasoline-grade
fuels and establish a techno-economic analysis (TEA) framework for the system.
PHB separation from biomass and subsequent depolymerization will focus on
aqueous-only strategies to minimize chemical inputs and byproduct wastes.
Catalyst development will focus on low-cost solid acid catalysts (SACs) such as
zeolites. The most promising catalysts will be evaluated in continuous flow
reactors, and both preventative and regenerative strategies for maintaining
catalyst activity will be tested. This research will support a path forward
towards increased valorization of organic carbon-rich waste streams in
municipal, agricultural, and industrial sectors, potentially flipping the energy
balance and cost model for wastewater utilities. In addition, this project
supports the career development of graduate and undergraduate student
participants, and educational and outreach activities designed for K-12 students
and teachers will support the diffusion of sustainable waste treatment and
renewable energy production methods to a larger
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.