* 1804091
* Energy Harvesting Approaches to Low-Temperature Plasma Generation for Field Applications
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* David Go, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 274,093.00

Low-temperature plasmas in atmospheric-pressure air produce extremely reactive
chemistry that can be used in applications ranging from water purification and
sterilization of medical equipment to wound healing and medical therapeutics or
even for mitigating pollution from engines and similar equipment. While plasma
technology has historically been restricted to the laboratory, field-portable
plasma devices could play an important role in a number of settings;
missionaries and disaster responders could clean drinking water in low-resource
areas, medical personnel could treat wounds far from a hospital or clinic, or
field scientists could use them for rapid soil or water analysis. Beyond the
hand-held applications, it is also easy to envision miniaturized plasma devices
incorporated into the exhaust of vehicles to help destroy exhaust pollutants.
One of the primary challenges for making portable plasma devices is that they
inherently consume electrical power, and for atmospheric-pressure air, require
thousands of volts to operate. While battery-powered devices are possible,
devices that require no source of on-board electrical power and operate by
harvesting the mechanical or thermal energy from their surroundings would be
very impactful. This project will investigate how the polarization properties of
non-centrosymmetric crystals can be utilized to develop atmospheric-pressure air
plasma devices that can be operated by direct energy conversion from either
motion or from waste/solar heat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
fundamental research is to establish the engineering of low-temperature plasmas
that operate by harvesting thermal or mechanical energy to directly produce an
air plasma. The strategy is to take advantage of the high polarizability of non-
centrosymmetric crystals to produce extremely high surface fields leading to
plasma formation directly from the crystal surface. Piezoelectric crystals will
be used for mechanical-to-plasma energy conversion and pyroelectric crystals for
thermal-to-plasma energy conversion. Relationships between
piezoelectric/pyroelectric crystal properties and plasma generation and plasma
properties will be established using electrical measurements and optical
measurements (including Thomson scattering, time-resolved imaging, and optical
emission spectroscopy). Strategies to control and enhance plasma formation will
be determined including approaches that manipulate the crystal configuration
(local crystal polarization), crystal surface or geometry (sharp features), and
the way energy is input into the crystal (on versus off harmonic excitation).
Finally, ways to engineer plasma devices that operate only off mechanical or
thermal energy will be explored, and design rules will be developed for how to
most effectively couple vibrations or heat into a non-centrosymmetric crystal
for plasma generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.