* 1804737
* Ice nucleation properties of well characterized single particle-droplet pairs assessed using a microfluidic platform
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Shelley Anna, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 08/31/2021
* USD 250,000.00

Water droplets do not freeze spontaneously until -40 degrees C, unless there is
a particle surface to act as a nucleus for the freezing process. Ice nucleation
and the resulting freezing of water induced by particles and surfaces is
important in many processes. It plays a critical role in organ preservation and
in the manufacturing and purification of pharmaceuticals, food, biomolecules,
cosmetics, and nanomaterials. Ice nucleation also plays a key role in cloud
glaciation, the transformation of water droplets in a cloud to ice crystals.
Glaciated clouds are responsible for most precipitation over land. Atmospheric
ice nucleating particles that cause clouds to glaciate create significant
changes in the structure and behavior of the clouds. This cloud freezing
dramatically changes the lifetime of the cloud and increases its ability to
precipitate. However, we lack a rigorous understanding of this heterogeneous ice
nucleation process. We still do not understand what special properties make
these rare one-in-a-million atmospheric particles effective at nucleating ice
crystals. We also lack small transportable instruments that can determine the
concentration and freezing temperature of atmospheric ice nucleating particles
in real-time by sampling from suspended aerosol particles. This research
addresses many of these short-comings through the development of a new
microfluidic approach to continuously capture and measure ice nucleating
particles. Individual particles are activated into liquid droplets, which are
then captured into an oil flowing through a microchannel in a device fabricated
from a soft polymer. By sending the microdroplets through a temperature gradient
applied to the microfluidic device, the freezing temperature of each particle-
droplet pair is determined optically as each droplet turns opaque upon freezing.
The use of engineered carbon nanotubes and metal oxide nanoparticles as robust
ice nucleating particle standards with well-defined and reproducible freezing
temperatures will then be explored using our unique device. The importance of
heterogeneous ice nucleation and phase transitions will be communicated to the
public and to underrepresented K-12 students in particular by conducting hands-
on educational activities at several local public schools through after-school
programs. The students will conduct experiments where they induce freezing in a
small cloud chamber. These activities will be developed into self-contained
educational modules that will be shared with a larger number of
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new approach will be developed for
transferring individual size-selected aerosolized particles in microdroplets
into a continuous oil flow in a microfluidic chip. This will enable new
experimental avenues in numerous fields. The capture of particles - first
activated into droplets using a cloud condensation nuclei counter - into the
continuous oil flow will be optimized using scaling analysis to tune the aerosol
and oil flow rates to ensure droplet impaction and coalescence that avoids
bouncing or droplet shattering. A linear temperature gradient will be applied
along the microchannel using micro-Peltier elements, and measured using an array
of thin-film thermocouples. Temperature measurements along with numerical
simulations will provide the temperature gradient field along the chip, allowing
us to correlate the observed position of droplet freezing to its critical ice
nucleation temperature. The lattice and surface properties of engineered
nanoparticles will be determined and correlated to the ice nucleation ability we
determine using the microfluidic device. This will be used to test our
hypothesis that engineering nanoparticles will have tight and robust freezing
temperature spectra. The uniform characteristics of these engineered
nanoparticles should result in very reproducible freezing properties, creating
improved ice nucleating particle standards that are greatly needed for ice
nucleation measurements. This project brings together experts in aerosol science
and technology, atmospheric chemistry, transport phenomena, and microfluidics,
to perform truly interdisciplinary research. As this research focuses on
advancing fundamental understanding of a key phase transition, it will have
immediate impact on a wide range of fields in science and engineering, such as
materials synthesis and purification, physical chemistry, the geophysical
sciences, and anthropogenic climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.