* 1805157
* Tissue Engineered Model of Aging to Study the Role of Cellular Interdependence in Failing Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Dervis Vural, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2022
* USD 400,000.00

Though progress has been made, aging remains an unsolved problem in modern
biology. A number of mechanisms that lead to cell damage have been identified,
but organisms, i.e., living animals and plants, presumably die not because they
run out of cells, but because of failures of much larger scale. Cellular
failures spread into failure of tissues, organs and ultimately the organism.
This project focuses on the first intermediate step of this ordered collapse:
the spread of failure from cells to tissues. To this end, the project will
theoretically and experimentally establish the role of complex interactions
between cells in aging tissues, using tissue engineering strategies to
independently control both age and cell interactions. Experiments will be
supplemented by mathematical models and computer simulations that will output
mortality curves (plots of probability of death with increasing age) and life
expectancies of these tissues. Furthermore, the project will be able to quantify
the relative importance of cellular scale aging processes compared to those
stemming from larger scale interaction effects. In view of broader impacts,
aging affects everyone. With steadily increasing life expectancy, there is an
immediate need to better understand principles underlying aging to find ways to
decrease age-related diseases. This project will offer a fresh view to the
scientific and medical community on the multiple scales involved in aging,
paving the way for new approaches to delay or reverse aging and help attain
healthier old ages. The research findings will be disseminated to a broad
audience, from middle school to undergraduate and graduate students, and to the
local community, with specific emphasis on underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. Activities include workshops for middle school girls, regional science
fair projects for high school students and seminars at a local medical
center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although there exist a number of theories on cell
damage, very little is known about how microscopic failures cascade to macro
scale failure of tissues, organs and ultimately the organism. The goal of this
project is to bridge microscopic cell failure to macroscopic manifestations of
aging, by theoretically and experimentally establishing the role of complex
interdependence and interactions between cells in aging tissues. Based on strong
preliminary data from the investigators' labs, it is hypothesized that aging,
defined in terms of an increased probability of death with chronological age, is
due to failures cascading through an interdependent network of cells, rather
than a series of isolated cell failures. To test this hypothesis, the aims of
this project are to 1) Fabricate 3D engineered heart tissues consisting of
varying densities of (aged and young) single and multiple cell types of the
heart tissue (cardiac fibroblasts, cardiomyocytes and endothelial cells); 2) Age
the tissue for a month, both with and without oxidative stress, while measuring
the survival statistics of a population of tissues and cells within; and 3) Make
inferences regarding the role of interactions using a detailed analytical
theory. Specifically, the computational model studies spatial interdependence
networks whose edge weights are determined by the diffusion equation and first
order reaction kinetics. The nodes fail stochastically depending on their
interaction with others, in a percolation-like spread. The computational
framework will generate testable hypotheses for the proposed experiments, and in
return, experimental measurements will constrain the model parameters. Project
findings have the potential to transform aging research by introducing an
entirely new view that aging is a universal attribute of any (living or non-
living) system that has a sufficient number of components that strongly depend
on one other to carry out their microscopic functions. Furthermore, this view
enables, for the first time, the ability to quantify and simulate the
progression of aging, given a certain interdependence network structure to
predict how and when an interdependent system should be expected to
catastrophically collapse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.