* 1805315
* Collaborative Research: Cyclodextrin-Based 2D Materials for the Treatment of Legacy and Emerging Perfluoroalkyl Substances
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Wei Gao, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2023
* USD 180,000.00

The presence of per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs), compounds widely
used in consumer products, in water supplies are a threat to environmental and
human health. Standard water purification methods are generally ineffective for
PFAS removal. This research will explore a potentially transformative approach
to engineering environmentally compatible adsorbents for PFAS removal, and the
research activities will directly advance discovery and fundamental
understanding of materials that selectively remove PFASs from drinking water
sources. This research collaboration between Florida International University
(FIU) and North Carolina State University will promote teaching, training, and
learning by bringing together a research team composed of undergraduate
students, graduate students, a postdoctoral research associate, and researchers
from two institutions in different states. One of the collaborating
institutions. This project will provide a valuable environment for
underrepresented students through multidisciplinary research experiences,
participation in scientific workshops, professional development, and engagement
in outreach activities. Project results will be broadly disseminated through
peer-reviewed publications, presentations at scientific meetings, and special
presentations and seminars. Additional a web seminar series is planned to
enhance the public awareness of the health risks of PFASs and educate water
suppliers on effective methodologies for PFAS removal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall objective of the research is to explore the combination of
environmentally friendly amino beta-cyclodextrins (am-beta-CDs) and graphene
oxide-based materials for the remediation of legacy and emerging PFASs. Graphene
oxide will be linked to functionalized cyclodextrins (CDs) for the remediation
of legacy PFASs and emerging perfluoroalkylether acids, such as GenX, and short-
chain PFASs. Preliminary results show that beta-cyclodextrin (beta-CD) readily
encapsulates a variety of PFASs with association constants up to 10^5 M^-1,
resulting in complexation of up to 95% of PFAS in solution. While the team has
demonstrated enhanced removal of perfluoro octanoic acid (PFOA) using beta-CD in
combination with activated carbon, there is a lack in the fundamental
understanding about the CD complexation of PFASs and how the CD:PFAS complex
properties may be exploited for remediation. This knowledge gap prevents the
optimization of these systems for PFAS monitoring and water treatment. This
research will test the hypothesis that am-beta-CD:PFAS complexes will persist in
environmentally relevant conditions such that am-beta-CD-based graphene oxide
adsorbents can be utilized for PFAS remediation. Guided by strong preliminary
evidence and the extensive experience of the assembled researchers, the group
will pursue two specific objectives: (1) Determination of binding constants for
and detailed characterization of am-beta-CD:PFAS complexes; and (2) employ am-
beta-CD-attached graphene-oxide matrices for remediation of PFASs. Removal of
short-chain and emerging PFASs will be the highest priority. The study will
contribute to the fundamental understanding of the molecular interactions of
PFASs and CDs and the utility of CD-based two-dimensional nano-adsorbents. The
project is expected to provide information critical for the development of
sustainable strategies for PFAS remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.