* 1805692
* Collaborative Research: Aerodynamic-aeroacoustic performance of poroelastic wings inspired by the silent plumage of owls
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2022
* Justin Jaworski, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 319,484.00

Owls are extraordinary predators that are able to suppress their noise and
achieve silent flight while attacking prey/food. The wing fringe pattern of owls
is believed to contribute to their quiet flight. An understanding of the physics
of the flow over owl wings may lead to noise reductions for many engineering
designs, such as computer fans, propulsors, commercial airframes, and wind
turbines. The principal aim of this project is to analyze a series of analytical
and numerical model problems coordinated with experimental measurement to
elucidate the unsteady loading and noise generation of thin fluid-loaded
structures with graded poroelastic properties comparable to owl wings.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the above technical shortcomings
through an interactive theoretical-experimental program that distinguishes
itself in no fewer than three ways: (i) construction of analytical and numerical
frameworks to predict turbulence noise generation by graded poroelastic
structures, from first principles; (ii) experimental validation of acoustic
scaling laws for poroelastic edges, without background flow noise; and (iii)
development of a glider to measure wing noise on the fly in a manner consistent
with how owls hear their self-noise. The modeling and validation efforts aim to
transform a biologically-inspired noise solution into a rational paradigm for
passive aerodynamic noise control in low-speed flows and to create an
experimental platform for future bionic owl noise-reduction studies. This
project will also include K-12 educational outreach with the DaVinci Science
Center (Allentown, PA), as well as integrate undergraduate research involvement
through the Lehigh Biosystems Dynamics Summer Institute (in partnership with
Northampton Community College) and through a design-build-fly competition
between Lehigh and Penn State.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.