* 1805127
* Collaborative Research: WERF: Determining the role of organic matter quality on PFAS leaching from sewage sludge and biosolids
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Christopher Sales, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 89,957.00

Poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFASs) are a class of synthetic compounds
that have been widely used in a variety of industrial applications and consumer
products for over 50 years. PFASs are a national concern due to the negative
effects of these compounds on human health and ecosystems. Recently, PFASs were
found in wastewater treatment plant solids (sewage sludge), and laboratory and
field studies indicate that PFASs can leach from these solids. Since land
application of these solids, also known as biosolids, is a common practice to
fertilize and improve soil conditions, it is important to understand how solids
management and treatment practices affect the presence of PFASs in biosolids.
Additionally, little is known about how exposure to natural environments may
affect the potential leaching of PFASs from biosolids once they are applied to
soil. This research project will work with wastewater treatment plants to
experimentally determine the effects of sewage sludge management practices on
the amount and types of PFASs that end up in the biosolids. This project will
also study environmental factors, such as temperature, rainfall, and biological
decomposition, that may impact the release of PFASs into the environment
following land application of biosolids. In addition to better understanding the
fate of PFAS in biosolids, the outcomes of the project will likely lead to
better sludge management practices that minimize possible PFAS exposure to soil
ecosystems. The project will include outreach efforts to improve the
understanding of PFASs and land-application of biosolids for middle school, high
school, and university students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this
collaborative research project is to understand how solid characteristics and
water quality affect PFAS desorption from sewage-derived solids. The proposed
research will be the first effort to systematically identify solid phase
characteristics and water quality factors that govern PFASs sorption capacity in
sewage solids. The focus on sewage-derived sludge, namely secondary and
anaerobic digester sludges and biosolids, provides a same-sourced solid that
substantially changes in character over its production and its use. This
proposal will combine PFASs sorption isotherm and edge experiments, conducted in
concert with sewage-derived solid and leachate characterization and microbial
assessments, to identify the critical factors governing PFASs sorption. The
central hypotheses in this study are as follows: 1) sewage-derived solids
protein contents will be the key solid phase characteristics that affects PFASs
sorption capacity, and that sorption capacity will generally decrease with
microbiological processing; 2) the presence of increased dissolved polyvalent
cation concentration will increase PFASs sorption capacity, particularly for the
longer chain length compounds; and 3) the abiotic sequential leaching weathering
process will deplete the hydrophilic components of the biosolids, rendering the
remaining biosolids with a more hydrophobic character and thus increased PFASs
sorption capacity. If successful, this project will provide valuable information
that will aid in the safe use of biosolids produced from recycling sewage waste,
enabling a sustainable method of resource recovery from the Nation's wastewater
treatment processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.