* 1805400
* Selective Hydrocarbon Production from Carbon Dioxide Electro-reduction via Electrochemical Potential and Mass Transport Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Tobias Hanrath, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2023
* USD 400,000.00

The use of renewable electricity to convert water and carbon dioxide into
energy-dense fuels and high-valued chemicals can improve the storage and
utilization of intermittent solar and wind energy. This technology for "solar
fuels" has benefits in utilization of renewable energy sources and in
sequestering carbon from carbon dioxide into value added chemicals used to make
industrial products such as polymers. This project utilizes an electrochemical
conversion with carbon dioxide as a feedstock and an externally applied
electrical potential (voltage) to produce higher valued chemicals as a goal. The
researchers will investigate how to engineer the application of the
electrochemical potential to the device in order to improve the yield of
products such as ethylene in an energy efficient manner. The project will
involve investigations of the impact of using a series of pulses of electrical
potential rather than a steady application on the elementary reactions that
occur at the boundary of the electrode and electrolyte of the device. The goal
is that application of a series of voltage pulses and varying its frequency and
energy magnitude could tune the reactions occurring to favor production of
hydrocarbons over competing products such as carbon monoxide. For educational
broader impacts, the PIs will continue their commitment to fostering
undergraduate researchers through summer and academic year research projects.
The PIs will continue to sponsor a research ethics workshop for researchers in
energy and materials designed for both students and senior investigators. The
research outcomes will be integrated into Cornell chemical engineering capstone
course projects that are designed to integrate technological innovation,
intellectual property, practical engineering, entrepreneurship, and
communication in carbon dioxide processing technologies. These activities are
aimed at improving students' interests in chemical and materials engineering at
both undergraduate and graduate levels, especially for women and members of
underrepresented minorities to build diversity in the future STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will result in fundamental
understanding on how to control the selectivity of the carbon dioxide
electroreduction reaction by tailoring the temporal profile of the applied
electrochemical potential. A number of variables including surface adsorbates,
electrical double layer, and transport, play an important role in the carbon
dioxide electroreduction selectivity. The project's driving hypothesis is that
key reaction and transport phenomena in this system occur at varying timescales
that could be taken advantage of to impact the observed reaction selectivity.
This project seeks to control these variables by tuning the temporal profile of
the electrochemical potential pulse. The central focus is to identify the
principles for designing the temporal profile of the electrochemical potential
to promote hydrocarbon production and suppress the hydrogen evolution reaction.
In addition to selectivity control, the temporal control of the electrochemical
potential represents an opportunity to address open questions concerning
competing pathways in the carbon dioxide electroreduction and their rate
constants. Spectroscopy and simulations will be done in parallel to reveal the
thermodynamics and kinetics during the temporal control of the electrochemical
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.