* 1805554
* Topological Guidance of Self-Propelled Janus Locomotors Along Solid Boundaries
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Charles Maldarelli, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2022
* USD 380,000.00

This research studies self-propelling microbots. These are ultra-miniaturized
locomoting vehicles which are microns in size - the dimensions of a red blood
cell or a grain of pollen. Microbots travel independently in a liquid
environment such as water by consuming fuel present in the environment, and
converting the chemical energy of the fuel into mechanical motion. Due to their
small size and their ability to motor around by themselves as active matter,
self-propelled microbots are at the center of innovative applications on the
technological horizon. Their medical applications are the most promising:
Microbots are envisioned to be able to dock with sperm and assist their movement
towards an egg for fertilization, navigate blood vessels to unclog arteries, and
ferry drugs to targeted sites in the human body such as tumors or diseased
organs. The ability to steer microbots along prescribed pathways is essential.
While on board guidance systems which respond to external instructions can be
used for navigation, this research focuses on passive guidance in which the
microbot responds to cues in its environment to guide itself. In particular,
this research studies how a microbot can passively follow along a planar wall at
a fixed height above the wall, or steer around a post. The passive guidance
originates from how the boundary changes the conversion of the chemical energy
into mechanical motion, and how the microbot interacts fluid dynamically with
the boundary. Educationally, the grant will fund two graduate students, one on
theory and one on experiments; their synergistic effort will broaden each of
their academic horizons. An outreach effort to two local high schools, one in
New York and one in New Jersey, is in place, and this research will be
integrated into the research curriculum experience of these high
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research studies a model locomotor consisting
of a spherical particle in which one face of the particle is coated with a
platinum catalyst to form a two-faced Janus particle. The platinum reacts with
hydrogen peroxide, as a fuel, in the environment to produce oxygen and water.
The reaction of the peroxide on the active face creates gradients in the ionic
disassociation products of the peroxide across the particle which in turn
generates electrokinetic propulsive forces. While this mechanism explains the
locomotion of these Janus engines in free space, this study examines the
electrokinetic propulsion in the vicinity of boundaries and aims to determine
theoretically and experimentally if boundary guidance is possible with
electrokinetic propulsion. Two examples will be investigated, the ability of
Janus locomotors to be guided along a wall, and their ability to circumnavigate
a post attached (perpendicular) to a wall. Theoretically, the
electrohydrodynamic equations will be solved to obtain deterministic
trajectories, and Brownian dynamics simulations will be undertaken to understand
the stability of guided states to thermal fluctuations. Experiments will also be
undertaken on guidance on these two surface
topologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.