* 1805084
* Emerging Materials for Energy storage and environmental Research enabled through Atomic Layer Deposition, (EMERALD)
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2021
* Paul McIntyre, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 09/30/2021
* USD 380,000.00

There is a compelling need for an inexpensive, off-the-grid, technology in which
solar energy is captured and used to produce a fuel - hydrogen - for heating and
electricity when the sun does not shine and a disinfectant - hypochlorite
(chemical formula NaOCl) - to create potable water. The worldwide need for
potable water is great. A sixth of the world's population have no access to
improved water supplies and far more consume contaminated water every day. This
US-Republic of Ireland-Northern Ireland, United Kingdom research collaboration
project involves harvesting the energy of sunlight to split saltwater into its
chemical components: hydrogen, hypochlorite and another valuable product,
caustic (NaOH). This technology is amenable to a modular system approach which
would provide distributed power and potable water in areas with less
infrastructure or during natural disasters. The project provides an
international and multidisciplinary research experience for the involved
students. The project also leverages Stanford's RISE outreach program to inspire
students to consider further education and careers in the STEM fields using
hands-on research experiences relevant to photovoltaics, motivated by the goal
of advancing infrastructure in the developing world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is a multidisciplinary research project involving Stanford, Tyndall
National Institute/University College Cork, Republic of Ireland and Queens
University, Belfast, Northern Ireland United Kingdom. The collaboration involves
multidisciplinary research on novel catalysts, corrosion protections layers for
efficient earth-abundant light absorbers, and electrochemical cell design. Tasks
will be performed on 1) new, inexpensive materials that enable efficient
saltwater splitting, 2) methods for protecting silicon solar cell materials when
they are exposed to saltwater, and 3) optimized designs for saltwater splitting
devices. The project will investigate electrode materials selection and
composition optimization, atomic layer deposition (ALD) methods to control local
catalytic and electronic properties over highly porous electrodes, and the
impact these factors have on cell efficiency and durability while minimizing
platinum group metal use. The research will be related to two different devices,
one an integrated and highly-efficient silicon photoelectrochemical cell, and
the other an electrochemical cell which can be powered by an external
photovoltaic array. A multiphysics modelling effort will inform the design
details in order to optimize the cells for efficiency. Collectively, the team of
researchers in the US, Ireland and Northern Ireland will assemble and test
devices to demonstrate the performance and stability of the materials and device
designs developed in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.