* 1805914
* Exploring Thermally-Driven Occupant Behavior in Immersive Virtual Environments to Enhance the Design and Engineering of Sustainable Buildings
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2018,04/30/2023
* Yimin Zhu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

Buildings are a major consumer of energy in the U.S. The goal of this research
is to create a human-centered design and engineering environment for sustainable
buildings where occupant thermal state (sensation, comfort and acceptability)
and thermally-driven behaviors are effectively measured to reduce building
performance gaps between predicted and actual energy performance. Specifically,
this project examines if immersive virtual environments (IVEs) integrated within
a climate chamber, i.e., multi-sensory IVEs, are effective for observing
thermally-driven occupant behavior and for improving models of human-building
interactions. The findings could result in new and effective strategies for
reducing energy consumption in buildings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on
pilot studies by the PIs, this project will: 1) determine if the virtual
experience of participants significantly alters their thermal states and
thermally-driven behaviors compared to in-situ experience; 2) determine if
seasonal mismatch of immersive virtual environment and actual environment (i.e.,
simulating winter during summer data collection) significantly alters the
thermal state and thermally-driven occupant behaviors compared to those in
seasonally matched IVE conditions; and 3) create a mechanism of sharing IVE data
and analytics on the virtual information fabric infrastructure (VIFI) platform
to support the replication of science in a large multi-institutional research
community. Currently, designers and engineers rely on predictive models based on
data from existing buildings to make decisions about future building designs.
When the impact of context on occupants is ignored, performance gaps emerge
between the projected and actual energy performance of a building. Evidence from
both academic research and practice strongly suggests that IVEs are capable of
eliciting human responses to well-designed stimuli such as in
lighting&lt;br/&gt;design, but conventional IVEs alone cannot simulate cooling
or heating as in real buildings. Climate chambers have long been used as a
reliable apparatus for studying occupant thermal states, but they cannot easily
induce occupant behavior in response to design contexts. Multi-sensory IVEs
combine the strength of IVEs and climate chambers, but the effectiveness of
multi-sensory IVEs to produce comparable thermal state and thermally-driven
occupant behavior as in-situ experiments is unknown. This new knowledge will
enable the creation of context-sensitive, human-centered approaches using multi-
sensory IVEs for building design and engineering, and occupant behavior data
collection. Sustainable buildings are essential for sustaining the wellbeing of
individuals, families and the society. Buildings consume more than 30% of the
world's primary energy, largely for providing thermal comfort. A better
understanding of occupant's thermally-driven occupant behavior during design is
thus critical tosustainable buildings. Multi-sensory IVEs not only provide a new
tool to support the design and engineering of sustainable buildings, but also
present intellectual challenges to other scientific fields. To maximize the
impact of this research, the PIs will create a novel approach for data sharing
and research replication by collaborating with researchers in the VIFI team, a
research coordination network called sustainable human-building ecosystems
(SHBE), as well as with technical committees of
ASHRAE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.