* 1805103
* Collaborative Research: Establishing Design Principles for Molecular Engineering of High Concentration Redox Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2021
* Aman Preet Kaur, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 07/31/2021
* USD 185,503.00

This project focuses on a type of battery called non-aqueous redox flow
batteries (RFBs) that are promising for large-scale, stationary energy storage
applications. RFBs have advantages for electrical grid-scale energy storage
options that would reduce overall energy consumption when linked with an
electrical grid. Non-aqueous RFBs that contain organic electro-active species
have the following unique features relative to other RFB designs: higher
operating voltages, non-corrosive electrolytes, smaller size, and use of
scalable organic active materials (which are more environmentally friendly and
potentially lower cost). This collaborative project addresses fundamental
research to support the design of electrolytes for non-aqueous RFBs with high
energy density, better stability, and acceptable fluid flow properties. This
project will not only establish the foundational knowledge necessary to design
electrolytes for next-generation grid storage batteries but will also provide
fundamental insights into other electrochemical technologies necessary for a
sustainable energy economy. The Principal Investigators Brushett and Odom have
worked extensively with underrepresented groups in STEM fields and with
mentoring undergraduate and graduate students in both research groups. Further,
the PIs will establish summer student exchange programs with each other's
institutions. At MIT, Dr. Brushett will engage with the THINK program, which
seeks to foster exceptional innovation, networking, and knowledge in high school
students working on projects that benefit the community. At University of
Kentucky (UK), Dr. Odom will focus on Mixing Art &amp; Science, which will
introduce non-scientists to concepts and issues in energy collection and storage
by attracting them with an accessible activity and will continue to serve as a
co-organizer for UK's Expanding Your Horizons Annual Conference.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental knowledge gaps exist both in (1) the molecular
design of stable concentrated redox active solutions and (2) the electrochemical
characterization of these concentrated electrolytes. At present, most
investigations have focused on molecular discovery and electrochemical
characterization under dilute conditions followed by direct integration into an
unoptimized laboratory flow cell for preliminary cycling analysis. This approach
has led to uneven advances in the field as, to date, most nonaqueous flow cells
have shown poor performance and durability. It is unclear whether the observed
results are due to fundamental instabilities of the redox organic materials,
concentration-dependent changes in the physical and electrochemical properties
of redox electrolytes, or failures in cell design and engineering. This
collaborative research project focuses on the development of soluble and stable
redox active molecules, based on substituted phenothiazines, as a platform
chemistry for characterizing physical and electrochemical properties of
solutions containing high concentrations of redox active materials and
supporting salts in organic electrolytes - referred to as "redox electrolytes" -
for use in nonaqueous flow batteries. The major scientific outcome of this
research will be fundamental understanding of the role of chemical structure and
surrounding electrolytes on the performance and durability of redox active
organic materials at high concentrations in aprotic organic electrolytes.
Further, new electrochemical methods will be developed to enable unambiguous
characterization of concentrated nonaqueous redox
electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.