* 1805950
* GOALI: Next generation feature-based process monitoring for smart manufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2024
* Jin Wang, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2024
* USD 332,000.00

The goal of process monitoring is to detect the onset and identify the
underlying reasons that can cause a manufacturing environment to deviate from
its desired operation. If potential faults and failures are detected and
corrected while still incipient, reduction in plant downtimes of up to 50% in
five years and up to 90% in ten years can be achieved. However, achieving these
targets remains very challenging, as the current state-of-the-art process
monitoring solutions have limitations in addressing, for example, the process
dynamics and nonlinear of advanced manufacturing processes. The big data sets
that are generated from smart manufacturing processes pose additional
challenges. In this project a research team from Auburn University and Praxair
will develop and validate a next-generation feature-based statistical process
monitoring (SPM) framework as an effective way to address current challenges in
process monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
systematically examine the underlying connections between various features and
process characteristics, which will lay the foundation for the proposed feature-
based SPM framework. With the industrial Internet-of-things (IIoT) still in its
infancy, the research team aspires to develop lab scale IIoT-enabled
manufacturing technology testbeds (MTT), which will allow detailed understanding
of the dynamic behavior of IIoT sensors, and simulation models to accurately
capture the behavior of IIoT sensors. The team plans to develop a suite of
simulated IIoT-enabled MTTs and a comprehensive feature library, the associated
decision tree to guide the relevant feature identification, and the automated
feature selection algorithm to complement the feature-based SPM framework. The
suite of IIoT-enabled MTT simulators and the feature library will be made
publicly available in the form of open source codes. The proposed feature-based
monitoring methodology can be extended to other areas, such as feature-based
control, feature-based optimization and feature-based predictive maintenance.
The proposed educational and outreach efforts focus on preparing students for
careers in advanced manufacturing and providing research opportunities to
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.