* 1805274
* Bio-Based "Molectronic" Devices for Bidirectional Molecular-to-Electronic Signal Transduction
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Gregory Payne, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2021
* USD 383,613.00

Recent revelations have linked the human microbiome of the gastrointestinal
tract to disease, behavior, and even mental health. Yet, there are few
methodologies that enable study of these linkages, particularly the molecular
signaling processes between the molecules, cells, and tissues involved, let
alone their connection to behavior. Human and animal studies are expensive and
time consuming, and they typically do not provide information at the molecular
level. Importantly, it is at this level that information is needed. Culturing
human cells and tissues on miniature microfluidic devices to mimic actual
systems in the human body has been considered as one of the most promising
alternatives to human or animal studies. While potentially transformative, these
devices can be complex, as they sometimes include nutrient supplies, cells,
actuators, pumps, valves, and even detector systems. To simplify, the principal
investigator (PI) proposes a modular approach comprised of optimally designed
subsystems. Their approach will also provide new efficient avenues for
manipulating these cells and understanding their responses to molecular signals.
Microelectrodes will be integrated and directly connected to cells and tissues
for stimulating and interrogating cellular responses. Because the biological
systems are "wired" to electrodes, this enables "programmed" function and highly
accurate assessment of responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previously the PI's group
has developed methods to electronically actuate and record signaling processes
among bacteria and epithelial cells of human GI tract. While information
processing in biology is accomplished by the secretion and perception of
molecules, information processing within electronic devices is accomplished
using electrons. The methodologies they have developed interconvert information
content as it flows from molecules to electrons and back. To do this, they use
synthetic biology and thin film microfabrication methodologies to assemble
"smart" interfaces between biological systems and microelectronic devices. They
base their methods on redox-based signals that uniquely span communication
modalities. There are three specific aims in the proposed work. In Aim 1, the
PIs will develop actuator devices that transduce electrical inputs to molecular
signaling molecules, specifically bacterial quorum sensing autoinducers that
regulate behavior. In Aim 2, they will develop sensor devices that communicate
in the opposite direction - biomolecular information will be converted to
electrical outputs. The researchers will determine molecular concentrations
electronically, both directly and with the aid of enzymes and engineered cells
that are incorporated into the devices. In Aim 3, these sensor/actuator modules
will be integrated into a complete "animal-on-a-chip" system. Using this modular
approach, the complexity of the current systems will be reduced, the throughput
of these devices will be increased, and the efficiency of the entire process
will be dramatically enhanced.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PIs expect these
studies will vastly improve our ability to understand the ?communication?
between molecules, cells, and tissues in the human body. Most importantly, the
proposed work creates a new vantage point for interrogating biology at the
length and time scales associated with its function. Equally importantly,
because these systems incorporate techniques and methods from several
disciplines, and because the perceived benefits to society are so great, they
attract energetic and talented students who will become the innovators and
leaders of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.