* 1805874
* Fossil Coral Records of ENSO during the Last Glacial Period
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Pedro Di Nezio, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Candace Major
* 08/31/2020
* USD 476,634.00

This project seeks to recover fossil corals from the island of Espiritu Santo,
Vanuatu in the western tropical Pacific that will enable reconstruction of the
El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) during the last glacial period using coral
skeleton geochemistry. Few paleoclimate records exist that can resolve
interannual changes during the Last Glacial Maximum (LGM), a time that can be
used to help constrain the large uncertainty in ENSO's response to changes in
global temperature. Corals provide one such record but fossil corals still in
place from the LGM are normally found at water depths of 120-140 m below present
sea level, and hence require expensive and logistically complex offshore
approaches to obtain. In contrast, Vanuatu has experienced rapid rates of
tectonic uplift which has raised the LGM paleo-shoreline to the point where
glacial corals are expected to be near the surface and reachable by shallow
drilling from onshore sites. The project thus offers a rare and important
opportunity for the paleoceanographic community to acquire coral samples that
can be used to develop high resolution time-series of ENSO and investigate
western tropical Pacific variability during the LGM. The research team will
modify an existing drill system to make it portable enough to hand-carry into
hard to reach locations, and then conduct an extended field program to deploy
and drill a series of onshore coral transects along the Vanuatu coast. U-Th
dating will be used to confirm the ages of recovered corals and the samples
obtained will be assessed for their suitability for later geochemical studies.
The project will support an early career researcher as well as graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern coral geochemical records
from Vanuatu show a significant degree of skill in capturing the hydrological
imprint of ENSO. Confidence in modern coral records suggest that fossil coral
records can be used to estimate past changes in ENSO variability. On Vanuatu,
tectonic uplift has raised the LGM paleo-shoreline to near present sea level,
bringing old corals close to the surface as demonstrated by the research team's
preliminary fieldwork. As part of this project, the team will build a new drill
system that is portable, cost-efficient, and time-efficient for drilling shallow
holes (5-25 m), a system that currently does not exist. The strategy will be to
have a human-portable drill system that can be quickly moved to virtually any
site to drill as many holes as possible, increasing the likelihood of recovering
LGM coral material. The drilling operation will capitalize on an area where
previous surveys have identified corals as old as 14.25 kyrs within a few meters
of present sea level. A further advantage of applying this strategy to Vanuatu
is that LGM corals are most likely still submerged in seawater rather than being
uplifted completely onto dry land. This greatly reduces the chance for
diagenetic alteration that all too often affects the geochemistry of older
corals. The recovered coral samples will be dated using U-Th methods and
screened for their geochemical integrity. The successful recovery of pristine
glacial-age corals from Vanuatu will open the door for subsequent studies to
determine how ENSO and tropical climate may have responded during the LGM, a
time of greatly altered mean climate. An additional benefit for the larger
community will be development and fabrication of the modified Winkie drill
system. Such a portable system is expected to find considerable use by other
researchers for land-based drilling operations in rough
terrain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.