* 1805817
* Miscibility-immiscibility conundrum in air-liquid-vapor flow modeling: Bridging the gap by using the phase-field method
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Hector Gomez, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 359,655.00

Mixtures of air, liquid water, and water vapor are ubiquitous in nature and in
engineering processes. These mixtures occur in energy generation, transport of
marine vehicles, inhalation drug therapies, and in cloud formation in the
atmosphere. Currently, there is no general theory to describe the fluid dynamics
behavior of these mixtures, which limits a wide range of scientific and
technological advances. This research will develop a first-principles-based
computational model that will provide a theoretical framework for understanding
the physics of air, liquid water, and water vapor mixtures. The investigators
will use highly controlled experiments to provide physical insights and validate
the computational method. This research will deliver interdisciplinary
advancements at the interface of engineering, mathematics, and physics. The
research broader impacts will be complemented by outreach and educational
activities. These include an initiative to reshape the way fluid mechanics is
introduced to undergraduate students and recruiting and retention activities for
groups that are underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphase
flow dynamics has received significant attention from the scientific community
due to the captivating physics produced by the interplay of miscibility,
inertial forces, viscous forces, and surface tension. While there has been
significant progress in understanding single-component, two-phase flows (e.g.,
vaporization and condensation of a single chemical species), and single-phase,
two-component flows (for example, bubbly flows composed of air and water), the
dynamics of flows involving simultaneously two phases and two components are not
well understood. This project will develop a new first-principles-based
computational model that captures all physical factors relevant to air, liquid
water, and water vapor flows. The model will be validated through state-of-the-
art experiments monitoring the interface dynamics, velocity and pressure fields
in three dimensions. The model will be based on the phase-field theory that
allows a natural transition between miscible (air and water vapor) and
immiscible (air and liquid water) mixtures, providing an ideal enabling
theoretical framework. The integrated computational and experimental research to
be developed in this project promises to constitute a leap forward in our
ability to investigate flows involving air, liquid water, and water vapor and
will provide the enabling tools for transformative advances across numerous
engineering and science applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.