* 1805345
* An integrated study of ion dynamics and population distributions to understand the molecular underpinnings of charge transport through self-assembled solid polymer electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Luis Smith, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2023
* USD 428,995.00

The widespread adoption of intermittent renewable-produced electricity and
electric vehicles can be accelerated by access to reliable lithium-based energy
storage. Disruptive advances in these technologies face challenges stemming from
fundamental knowledge gaps that limit power density and durability in the
batteries. Both performance attributes are impacted by the nature of charge
transport within solid-like ionic conductors that would be used in these
batteries. A better understanding of these processes will benefit a wide range
of technologically and commercially promising areas beyond sustainable
electrical grid load-balancing and transportation. Specific additional examples
include deployable sensors, gas separation, actuators, ion exchange membranes,
and optoelectronic devices. This study will focus on understanding the
fundamental aspects of ion diffusion through nanostructured polymeric matrices,
and on using these insights to guide the design of solid polymer electrolytes
for high power density lithium-ion batteries. As part of education outreach
activities, the Principle Investigators will participate in the Academic Clark
Excellence, program, ACE. This effort focuses on preparing and mentoring
entering first-year students, especially those underrepresented in STEM, so that
they can take full advantage of the research opportunities available in the
sciences and can successfully fulfill the requirements of today's science
careers or post-graduate studies in chemistry. The PIs have structured a series
of activities and practices seeking to guide and mentor graduate students on
job-seeking best practices, intellectual property law, and scientific
writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to examine the
lithium-ion (Li+) dynamics and population distribution within nanostructured
polymeric ionic conductors to understand the mechanisms controlling charge
transport through matrices with solid-like mechanical properties and liquid-like
ion diffusion. The two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation
correlation experiments of the project are used to study a wide variety of ion
conductors in an effort to achieve a more complete understanding of the dynamic
processes controlling ion diffusion through polymers. This research plan aims to
use lithium-conducting, poly(ethylene-imine)-based, diblock copolymers as a
model system to study ion transport through mechanically robust membranes
containing "ion-permeable", yet mechanically reinforcing, domains. Since the
dynamics of most ion conducting processes through polymer matrices are governed
by the same fundamental principles, the results of this work will impact the
design of a wide variety of ion-transporting media. This research plan will
quantify the effect of polymer backbone structure and dielectric constant on the
effective concentration of charge carriers and their mobility through a
nanostructured polymeric matrix. The target copolymers will serve as model
compounds for fundamental phase behavior ion-bearing diblock copolymers. The
structure-property relationships derived from this study will help guide the
design of new ion conducting components for a variety of applications, such as
lithium-ion batteries, water-free polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
(PEMFC), non-aqueous redox flow batteries, dye sensitized solar cells, as
examples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.