* 1805528
* Engineering Carboxylic Acid Reductase for the Biosyntheses of Industrial Chemicals
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Mark Wilson, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 335,516.00

The structure of proteins determines their function. This project will attempt
to modify several structural features of enzymes in order to obtain more
productive functions and higher reaction rates. The enzymes are newly discovered
and could help convert biomass into valuable chemical products very efficiently.
The project will also provide interactive research experiences to students. The
PIs will continue recruiting undergraduate and graduate students from
underrepresented minorities to work on this project. The PIs will also be
assembling and distributing an educational kit through the Nebraska EPSCoR Young
Scientists Program, beginning with the HS level and expanding to the middle
school level. This will provide these students with hands-on experience
designing and creating different proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work focuses on the study and engineering of carboxylic acid reductases
(CARs). The goal of the project is to expand the substrate specificity of CARs
in order to efficiently reduce short-chain carboxylic acid metabolites into
aldehydes. These serve as common and versatile biosynthetic intermediates that
are readily to be further converted to alkanes, alkenes, alcohols, or amines.
This proposal specifically targets CAR mutants that function on the reduction of
three abundant carboxylic acid metabolites, including D- and L-lactic acids (C3
substrates), and glycolic acid (a two-carbon substrate). Further reduction of
the aldehyde products leads to the formation of R- or S-1,2- propanediol and
ethylene glycol, which are bulk industrial chemicals with broad applications,
especially in the production of polyesters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.