* 1805702
* New Perspectives on Paleo-ENSO Conditions in Coastal Peru as Seen Through Short-Lived Bivalves
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2023
* David Chicoine, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 411,493.00

El Niño and La Niña events, collectively called El Niño-Southern Oscillation
(ENSO), are the largest source of year-to-year climatic and environmental
variability that affects people around the world. For example, El Niños cause
droughts in Australia and Southeast Asia while producing damaging floods along
the west coast of the United States, Ecuador and Peru. La Niñas produce the
opposite effects and both can have significant economic and natural hazard
impacts. Recent studies have identified more than one type of ENSO event in the
instrumental record, called Central Pacific, Eastern Pacific, or Coastal El Niño
events based on the region with greatest rainfall. These different types of El
Niños may explain why ENSO reconstructions from the western, central, and
eastern Pacific do not always agree. Furthermore, questions remain whether or
not this diversity of ENSO events occurred before the 20th century when
temperatures were cooler, or occurred during prior warm periods. This project
seeks to fill a gap in our knowledge of past ENSO behavior by providing a new
record of ENSO variability in north-central Peru for the period 2800 to 2100
years ago, a critical area and time frame currently lacking records of ENSO
variability. Our understanding of past and present ENSO is important for
refining global climate models used to forecast future climate conditions and in
planning for short and long-term impacts from changing
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages the expertise of
paleoclimatologists and archaeologists while training students in a
multidisciplinary approach that will develop a new reconstruction method that
could be used in other locations with abundant shell material. The final product
will be a new record of ENSO variability in north-central Peru spanning 2800 to
2100 years before present. The study sites are three Early Horizon (800 to 100
BCE) archaeological sites (Caylán, Huambacho, and Samanco), all part of an early
urban society in the coastal Nepeña Valley, Peru. The project uses shells from
two short-lived bivalve species (Donax obesulus and Mesodesma donacium)
excavated from several archaeological units within these three sites. These two
species have different but complementary habitat preferences (warm vs. cold)
that make them useful to capture El Niño and La Niña events; however, both
species are short-lived (1 to 3 years). Instead of building a continuous record
of individual ENSO events, this project will reconstruct seasonal temperature
and salinity variability from modern and archaeological specimens for individual
time slices from intra-shell oxygen isotope measurements, similar to the single
foraminifer approach used in marine sediment cores. The integration of
archaeological data will provide a crucial perspective on the resilience or
vulnerability of coastal societies to ENSO variability on long time periods. The
project will support two relatively early career faculty (one female), a
graduate student, and one or more undergraduates who will work in the PIs' PAST
laboratory (Paleoclimate and Anthropology Studies), which brings natural and
social scientists together to foster interdisciplinary
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.