* 1805202
* Freezing Water with Sonoluminescing Bubbles
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* R Holt, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* William Olbricht
* 07/31/2022
* USD 328,876.00

It is an everyday occurrence for water to freeze into solid ice when the
temperature drops to 0 degrees Centigrade. But water can exhibit a variety of
frozen forms, sometimes crystalline solids, sometimes disordered gels, depending
on how (and how fast) it is frozen. These unique forms possess sometimes
fantastic properties, being very dense or very viscous. Creating these unusual
forms of water to study their remarkable properties usually requires confinement
in high-pressure chambers at extremely cold temperatures, and contact with the
chamber wall affects how the water freezes. This project seeks to create a novel
form of ice without requiring the use of pressure chambers. Focused lasers will
create individual nano-sized bubbles, and acoustic waves will grow these bubbles
to millimeter sizes. Then, the bubbles will be allowed to collapse in
pressurized water, a process often termed "acoustic cavitation". When the
bubbles collapse, the water moving with the bubble rapidly pressurizes because
it is contracting down to a tiny volume. By controlling the acoustics, water
pressures just outside the collapsing bubble can reach 10,000 atmospheres in
only a few nanoseconds, causing the water to freeze into a single ball of "ice"
with no contact with any container surface. By employing diagnostics such as
imaging ultrasound and laser scattering, researchers will probe both the
mechanical properties and molecular structure of these remarkable ice balls. By
learning about how water freezes at ultra-high pressures and nanosecond time
scales, researchers can use the knowledge in a variety of ways. First, since the
ice balls have such different properties from regular water, it may be possible
to create a hybrid "ice-water" having novel optical and acoustic properties that
change back to water properties in a few milliseconds. Second, there are many
biomedical and industrial processes that currently employ acoustic cavitation,
ranging from ultrasonic cleaners to contrast ultrasonic imaging to
emulsification and extraction of food products. By systematically studying these
violent bubble collapse events this research will shed light on similar but less
energetic processes commonly occurring in industry and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is ample data and theory in agreement that
the outcome for quasi-static near equilibrium compressions to GPa pressures at
cryogenic or more modest temperatures is a crystalline ice (Ice VII, for
example). There have been fewer studies of rapid compression, and while some of
these studies show an amorphous high density and/or high viscosity phase, a very
recent study of ns shock wave compression [Gleason et al., Compression freezing
kinetics of water to Ice VII. Phys. Rev. Lett. 119, 025701 (2017)] seems to
definitively show the formation of the crystalline Ice VII. In contrast, recent
experiments from the principal investigator's lab [Sukovich et al., Outcomes of
the Collapses of Large Single Bubbles in Water at High Ambient Pressures. Phys.
Rev. E. 95 (2017) 43101] indicate the water surrounding a collapsing,
sonoluminescing bubble "freezes" on the ns time scale. The result is an apparent
phase transition to a spherical ice ball which displays properties of either
hyper-elasticity or hyper-viscosity. However, the data are incomplete, as the
Sukovich et al. experiment had only high-speed imaging as a diagnostic, and a
parametric investigation was not carried out. This project will fill the gap in
knowledge by investigating the formation, duration, and material properties of
these ice balls resulting from high-pressure bubble collapse. Material
properties will be investigated by employing both high-frequency time-reversal-
aided acoustic scattering (probing the elastic modulus) and simultaneous
femtosecond laser scattering (probing the molecular bonding). These experimental
results will be complemented by molecular dynamics simulations at precisely the
nanosecond time scales and high strain rates exhibited by the experiments and
which are intrinsic to molecular dynamics simulations. These simulations will
help determine the nature of the phase transition observed. A graduate student
and several undergraduate students will be trained in research methods as a part
of this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.