* 1805930
* Mathematical modeling of accelerated thermal transport inside particulate liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Sukalyan Bhattacharya, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2023
* USD 377,064.00

Fluids laden with nano-particles have enhanced heat conduction properties, but
this phenomenon is still lacking explanation. This enhancement is quite dramatic
because introduction of very small amount of nano-particles can cause
disproportionately high increase in heat conduction. Advantages of the
accelerated conduction include quicker evaporation of a heated mass or faster
combustion of fuel drops. This project investigates the mechanism underlying
this remarkable phenomenon. If the underlying cause is identified, it can be
exploited in creating better coolant and energetic materials, leading to
improvements in devices like heat exchangers, gas turbines and internal
combustion engines. Moreover, it will help in energy efficiency and pollution
control in engines by ensuring fast and complete combustion of liquid fuels
while eliminating wasteful and harmful presence of the fuel in the exhaust.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key reason behind the accelerated thermal transport
can be attributed to the Brownian motion of the suspended nano-species. Randomly
moving submicron solids act like tiny stirrers inside the liquid manifesting an
analogous effect of a stirring spoon helping to cool down a hot cup of beverage.
Unfortunately, past studies have failed to properly quantify this Brownian
contribution by consistently underpredicting its influence. In the present
project, this deficiency would be addressed by a new statistical mechanics
description based on fluctuating hydrodynamics and heat transfer. Consequently,
the enhanced thermal flux can be accurately estimated from the micro-scale
convection by the liquid bulk due to the stochastic motion of the particles.
This would be coupled with a few other potentially significant factors like
creation of localized hot spots, thermophoretic drift and natural convection.
Thus, the study will reveal how the interplay among these processes combined
affects the energy transfer in nanofluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.