* 1805421
* Exploring Kinetic-Limited Capillary Evaporation in Nanopores
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Chuanhua Duan, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 05/31/2022
* USD 333,545.00

Evaporation from tiny nanopores, owing to its high mass/heat transfer fluxes,
has found widespread applications in electronics cooling, membrane distillation,
solar steam generation and materials synthesis. To further improve performance
of these nanopore-evaporation-associated applications, it is essential to
understand the ultimate transport limit of evaporation from nanopores. This has
been a long-lasting challenge because experimental investigation based on
existing nanoporous membranes cannot provide much insight due to difficulty in
measuring important parameters. This project will solve this big challenge by
directly measuring and studying evaporation from single nanopores. New insights
gained from this project will deepen our understanding of evaporation at the
nanoscale and shed light on developing optimized evaporative structures. This
project includes education/outreach activities for students at various academic
levels. Cartoon animations and hands-on lab kits will be developed for K-12
students. Research opportunities will be provided for K-12 students and
undergraduates, especially those from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objectives of this project are to
understand the kinetic-limited evaporation from nanopores and to achieve the
ultimate performance of evaporative nanoporous structures. A novel hybrid
nanopore-nanochannel device design will be developed for evaporation
measurements and the dependence of the kinetic-limited evaporation flux on
nanopore dimension, surface properties, and operating conditions will be
systematically investigated. To further understand the separate contributions of
the effective evaporation area and the evaporation coefficient on kinetic-
limited evaporation, evaporation from atomically thin nanopores will also be
investigated. Experimental results of these studies will be compared with MD
simulations to gain a complete understanding of the observed dependence.
Finally, nanoporous membrane based bi-porous evaporator with optimized pore
dimension and porosity will be created and the ultimate evaporation performance
of such membranes will be explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.