* 1805975
* Personalized In Vitro Nerve Model
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Boris Park, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 416,591.00

The more than 600 neurological diseases caused by genetic disorders,
injuries/infections and aging-related degeneration uniquely challenge the
quality of life as they typically impair cognitive, sensory and motor functions.
Although there is an exponential increase in the prevalence of such diseases,
partly due to the aging population, few effective treatments are available.
Though new technologies have enabled the rapid development of new therapeutics,
these often fail in clinical trials, largely due to inefficiency in
translating/validating animal-based results in humans. Thus, there is a growing
need for a humanized in vitro (outside the body) model for healthy and diseased
nerves in order to further the fundamental understanding of neuroscience and
develop potential interventions for neuro-abnormalities. This project addresses
this need by developing and validating a personalized nerve tissue model
composed of neurons and supporting cells derived from neural stem cells and
designed to structurally and functionally mimic native nerves. This outcome has
potential for broad society impact, including: 1) providing a scientific basis
to realize personalized regenerative medicine amid fast rising demand for long-
term efficacy in the current ageing society; 2) providing a personalized drug
test bed which could lead to the development of patient-tailored therapeutics;
3) leading to development of novel implants that enable currently unachievable
regeneration of damaged spinal nerves and 4) providing ideal platforms for many
fundamental neuroscience studies. Students associated with the project will be
trained at the interface of materials science, nanotechnology, neuroimaging and
neuroscience. The education and outreach initiatives center on under-represented
groups in STEM, including: 1) an undergraduate research partnership between the
University of California-Riverside (a Hispanic serving institution)) and
California Baptist University (a primarily undergraduate institution), 2)
various K-12 outreach programs, and 3) integration of research outcomes into
both undergraduate and graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to develop a tissue morphogenesis strategy to produce a tissue
structurally and functionally comparable to native nerve tissues and to validate
the structure/functionality by non-destructive imaging for longitudinal
observations. The work builds on the lab's recently developed technology to
enhance neural cell activities; simultaneous mechanical and electrical (mechano-
electrical) stimulation a) facilitated neurite elongation and b) activated glial
cells to express neourotropic factors. The research plan is organized under two
tasks. Task 1 is to develop a strategy to engineer spinal nerves structurally
and functionally comparable to the native tissues via mechano-electrical
stimulation by using electrospun piezoelectric PVDF-TrFE scaffolds that can be
vibrated acoustically. The initial step is to determine the optimal mechano-
electrical stimulation regimen for the functional enhancement of cellular
constituents of the nerve (neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes) derived
from human neural stem cells (NSCs) by adjusting the thickness of piezoelectric
scaffolds seeded with the cellular constituents (each cell type separately
seeded). The next step is to determine the effects of mechano-electrical
stimulation on the multi-phenotype differentiation of human NSCs by seeding
H9-derived NSCs on the scaffolds that will then undergo daily stimulations for 2
hrs/day for 6 days before being assessed by counting the number of cells of each
differentiated type. After optimization of the differentiation process, nerve
generation from bottom-up (neurons, oligodendrocytes and astrocytes allowed to
self-assemble the nerve structure) and top-down (simultaneously induce the
differentiation of NSCs towards the three cell phenotypes and structural
assembly) approaches will be compared after an appropriate stimulation duration,
i.e., after myelination and tissue morphogenesis has occurred. The cell/scaffold
constructs will then be rolled to form a cylindrical shape and subjected to
standard nerve conduction testing and histological examination. Task 2 is to
validate the morphological and functional characteristics of the engineered
nerve tissue via non-destructive polarization-sensitive optical coherence
tomography (PS-OCT). PS-OCT based biomarkers for nerve viability in the central
nervous system will be identified by comparing excised spinal cords from a mouse
model of multiple sclerosis (MS) with spinal cords from age matched controls.
PS-OCT, which is capable of imaging within and through the scaffolding material,
will then be used to quantitatively monitor the morphogenesis and structure of
the engineered nerve structures, which will enable optimization of the desired
end points for cell density and degree of myelination through comparison to
optical biomarkers obtained from the control spinal cord samples. Finally, PS-
OCT will be used to quantify the loss of structure and functionality resulting
from chemically induced (lysolecithin) degeneration in engineered nerve
structures. Changes in optical measures during degeneration are expected to lead
to parameters that can be optimized to model the degeneration observed in the
pathologic/MS spinal cord samples.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.