* 1805080
* Upgrading Biomass Using In Silico Designed Ionic Liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Jakub Kostal, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

The proposed work will develop integrated processes for deconstruction and
upgrading of lignocellulosic biomass using ionic liquids that are
computationally designed to be functional and environmentally benign. Despite
significant efforts in research aimed at valorization of lignocellulosic biomass
for producing liquid transportation fuels and chemicals, economically-viable and
efficient processes are still lacking. The proposed research project will
combine state-of-the-art computational methodology with synthetic and process
chemistry to iteratively design novel ionic liquids to enable direct conversion
of the biopolymers contained in lignocellulose to small-molecule building-block
(platform) chemicals. The ultimate objective is the development of a systematic
approach for computational design of task-specific ionic liquids for
lignocellulose processing that are optimized for function and environmental
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ionic liquids are 'designer' solvents that can
be tuned to facilitate key steps of lignocellulosic biomass processing. Their
potential has not materialized for three reasons: i) challenges in
simultaneously optimizing numerous physicochemical properties and reactivity
metrics that must be met for industrial use; ii) environmental toxicity of many
ionic liquids; and iii) significantly higher cost compared to conventional
solvents. Although computational methods are being applied to identify ILs with
specific functions, such as dissolution and de-crystallization of cellulose,
they are not used to iteratively design new ionic liquids with the goal of
simultaneously optimizing multiple performance criteria. Furthermore, there is
little to no systemic design of ionic liquids with minimal toxicity and high
biodegradability. The proposed research aims to develop data-driven
computational approaches, guided by insights from mechanism of function and
biological action, to effectively inform the design of new ILs with desirable
efficacy and reduced potential for human and environmental toxicity. The
proposed work, if successful, may lead to the development of safer ionic liquids
that can be used in biomass processing and next-generation processes for biomass
upgrading based on task-specific ionic liquids optimized for function. The
proposed research, if successful, can have important societal impact related to
environmental sustainability and economic development of rural areas. In
addition to training graduate students in research, the research team plans to
develop a toxicology coursework for chemistry students and a new MS program in
Environmental and Green Chemistry at George Washington University. The project
will involve outreach activities related to green and sustainable chemistry
aiming to promote STEM education, including a Green Chemistry, Public Health and
Science Policy forum at George Washington University and mentoring of local high
school teachers interested in integrating Green Chemistry concepts into their
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.