* 1805629
* P2C2: Speleothem Records of Permafrost and Climate from an Ice-Proximal, Mid-Continent Cave
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Shaun Marcott, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 359,231.00

The general aims of this project are to: 1) determine, using radiometric
Uranium-Thorium dating of carbonate drip-features in the cave (speleothems),
when past permafrost conditions occurred at Cave of the Mounds (CoM) in southern
Wisconsin; and 2) develop a proxy record of hydroclimate conditions at CoM by
measuring stable isotope ratios of oxygen in the speleothems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific project objectives are: 1) determining the timing
of permafrost development at CoM over the past 250,000 years using Uranium-
Thorium dating; 2) evaluating the hydroclimate conditions over this same
interval using oxygen isotope chemistry; 3) examining the amplitude of high-
frequency hydroclimate variability at CoM during ice-free and ice-proximal
settings; and 4) measuring the duration and magnitude of hydroclimate changes
across known abrupt climate transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permafrost
presently covers approximately 25 percent of the land surface in the northern
hemisphere and represents a significant sink of terrestrial organic carbon.
Climate projections into the future indicate a significant increase in global
average temperatures that will be amplified at high latitudes and could initiate
a positive climate feedback through the release of additional carbon during
permafrost thaw. One way to constrain the sensitivity of permafrost to warming
atmospheric temperatures is through the geologic record. Most paleo-permafrost
reconstructions in North America are derived from geomorphic features, but these
records do not provide continuous records of permafrost and/or climate
conditions. This research project aims to reconstruct the chronology of paleo-
permafrost and produce a record of hydroclimate over the past 250,000 years near
the terminal margin of the LIS. The CoM is in a unique position to provide a
North American paleoenvironmental record that also measures the sensitivity of
regional hydroclimate to glacial versus interglacial
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts include support
for a female graduate student and two early career researchers, leveraging
connections with the UW Geology Museum for outreach efforts, developing
tutorials for sample preparation and imaging techniques (e.g. fluorescent
imaging), and using the open-source, freeware, to collate imaging and
geochemical data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.