* 1805164
* Nonlinear Reduced Hamiltonian and Collisional Gyrokinetic Plasma Transport Models
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Alain Brizard, Saint Michael's College
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 06/30/2022
* USD 151,750.00

The primary purpose of this project is to derive tractable mathematically
accurate plasma physics models that are suitable for numerical implementation in
plasma simulation codes. The overwhelming complexity of the physical world makes
it very difficult to carry out accurate computer simulations that are faithful
to it. Fortunately, the physical laws that govern this world have mathematical
properties and structures that guarantee the existence of important conservation
laws, such as conservation of energy. Plasma physics has been at the cutting
edge of the derivation of several dynamical models, such as plasma gyrokinetic
models, that are successfully implemented in high-performance computer
algorithms developed at leading US universities and national laboratories. The
need to develop fast and efficient simulation algorithms must rely, however, on
our ability to derive reduced physical models that preserve the properties and
structures of the original physical laws. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to develop and implement structure-preserving Hamiltonian and
collisional gyrokinetic models for the purpose of studying turbulent
collisionless and irreversible collisional transport processes in strongly
magnetized plasmas. These reduced gyrokinetic models provide a theoretical
foundation for the future development of geometric and metriplectic algorithms
designed for advanced plasma simulations of laboratory and space plasmas. The
bracket properties of a reduced Vlasov-Maxwell bracket are guaranteed by the
application of Lie-transform methods used in its derivation. Since the
operations of truncation at finite order and gyroangle averaging are required
for any practical application of a reduced Vlasov-Maxwell bracket, however, it
is imperative to determine whether these operations preserve the brackets
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.