* 1805569
* Analysis to evaluate and improve model performance in the Central Arctic:  Unique perspectives from autonomous platforms during MOSAiC
* GEO,OPP
* 10/01/2018,09/30/2024
* Dale Lawrence, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,711,232.00

This study will use an emerging technology, unmanned aircraft systems, to
collect measurements with the goal of improving weather and climate models of
the Arctic system. It is part of the international MOSAiC (Multidisciplinary
drifting Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate) program, an extensive
field effort to freeze an icebreaker into sea ice for an entire year to serve as
a research platform for a comprehensive study of the atmosphere, ocean and ice
system in the high Arctic. The unique and potentially transformative aspect of
this project is that unmanned aircraft collect data at small spatial and
temporal scales, providing new information about variability in temperature,
humidity, and winds. In addition, direct measurements of these variables over
breaks in the sea ice have been very limited to date. Therefore, this study will
address a significant source of error in our current ability to forecast how
energy is transferred between the atmosphere and underlying ice and sea surface.
Together with information from collaborating scientists participating in the
MOSAiC field effort, the investigators will evaluate a series of hypotheses
related to the performance of model simulations of key processes over the
central Arctic Ocean. The investigators will also give pubic lectures at schools
and other venues, capitalizing on interest and excitement in use of new
technology though use of videos and photos of the unmanned aircraft systems.
They will support training for early career scientists by involving graduate
students and postdoctoral scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators
will deploy an unmanned aircraft system to measure atmospheric temperature,
winds, and humidity, as well as surface albedo. Flights will take place from
mid-winter (February) through late summer (August) to capture variable
conditions in both the atmosphere and sea ice surface and will include routine
profiling of the lower atmosphere, spatial mapping of thermodynamic quantities
and surface albedo, and mapping of the lower atmospheric structure over leads.
This data will be evaluated with measurements of the atmosphere, ocean and ice
collected by other scientists as part of the MOSAiC (Multidisciplinary drifting
Observatory for the Study of Arctic Climate) project to address hypotheses
related to the performance of modeling tools in simulating key processes over
the central Arctic Ocean. These include questions about sub-grid scale
variability of atmospheric and surface parameters and its influence on model-
simulated surface energy budget; the influence of leads in the sea ice on energy
transfer from the ocean to the atmosphere and how models represent this
transfer; and the importance of vertical resolution in simulation of the Arctic
atmosphere and its impact on the simulation of clouds and the surface energy
budget. The investigators will compare observations from unmanned aerial systems
to a variety of simulations, ranging from global products to fully-coupled
regional simulations completed using the Regional Arctic System Model (RASM) to
detailed single-column and 2D modeling at high
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.