* 1805776
* Roll stall and the vortex-induced aerodynamic of low-aspect-ratio fliers
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Kamran Mohseni, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 300,000.00

The design and development of highly-maneuverable aircraft has been a long-
standing engineering challenge. This challenge presents itself in almost all
flight regimes, from supersonic fighter jets down to low-speed, smaller-scale
unmanned aircraft. Despite the very different operating conditions, there is at
least one common feature among aircraft designs aiming to provide very agile,
yet stable, flight. Namely, the planforms (the shape and layout of an airplane's
wing) of such aircraft are of low aspect ratio. Recent studies suggest that the
aerodynamic and gust-response of such low aspect ratio fliers are significantly
different than larger flyers and not well understood. This issue constitutes a
critical gap in aerial vehicle development, and this research project addresses
a critical gap in the development of reliable and fully controllable aerial
drones. The researchers will also enhance course curricula with results from
this research, and a course on unsteady low Reynolds number aerodynamics will be
developed. A summer program is proposed that will enable local high school
students to learn aerodynamics and flight concepts and to participate in a
design/build/operate competition integrating fluid dynamics, aerodynamics, and
aircraft design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project takes a fresh look
into new features of steady and unsteady aerodynamics of low aspect ratio wings.
Recent discoveries of complex aerodynamic flow-structure interactions have been
attributed to an inherent coupling of lateral and longitude loadings and these
are unique to low aspect ratio flyers. These phenomena are, in turn, related to
the vortex-dominated flow generated by such wings. The proposed work is divided
into three main research thrusts. (i) The prediction of flow separation, (ii)
The connection between unsteady vortex generation of low-aspect-ratio surfaces
and the instantaneous loadings, and (iii) Understanding of how key changes to
the vortex topology over a wing in cross-flow modify the asymmetric wing
loading. Flow field measurements using digital particle image velocimetry and
direct force/moment measurements are correlated with the vortex structures in
the flow. Some theoretical modeling will also complement the experimental
effort. This knowledge may motivate unique flow control or wing morphing
strategies during flight in gusty environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.