* 1805210
* Microbubble-assisted Crispr/Cas9 Delivery in Retina for Photoreceptor Therapeutics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Mark Humayun, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 06/30/2022
* USD 479,995.00

This project will demonstrate the ability of microbubbles generated by
ultrasound to aid in gene editing of retinal cells. The goal is to restore light
sensitivity to blind retina tissues, as a step to toward curing blindness. The
proposed technology has the potential to circumvent safety concerns that arise
when utilizing other gene transport approaches that were recently attempted. The
transfer of proteins, DNA, polymer etc., within the microbubbles occurs during
the collapse of the bubble under the ultrasound field. This leads to repair of
damaged retinal cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a dire need of a nonrival
vehicle to efficiently transport therapeutic genes into the eye via a less
invasive route. The project will combine microbubbles and ultrasound to
facilitate the delivery of Crispr/Cas9 tools into retinal cells for the
treatment of ocular diseases. They will a: optimize the efficiency of RPE65
Crispr/Cas9 in vitro by modifications of microbubbles and acoustic parameters,
b: investigate targeted delivery with functionalized microbubbles and examine
the ability of the bubbles to pass through neural retina under radiation force,
and c: evaluate the therapeutic potential of RPE65 Crispr/Cas9 by testing light
sensitivity restoration of photoreceptors in RPE65 deficient rd12 mice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.