* 1805666
* Using Microbial Ecology Theory to Understand Microbial Community Dynamics and Improve Function of Anaerobic Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* Joel Ducoste, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2022
* USD 326,736.00

The goal of this project is to understand the interplay between members of the
microbial community in anaerobic digesters that convert food waste to useful
methane gas to maximize performance and increase the ability of the reactors to
handle various food waste types. The key to success is determining how the
microbial communities in the reactors that perform the waste-to-gas conversion
are assembled under different environmental conditions. The project will involve
a deeply integrated program of reactor experiments, molecular analysis, and
mathematical modeling. Graduate and undergraduate students, including students
from a historically black university, will be trained during the course of this
project. The results have the potential to transform our understanding of the
science of waste conversion, and benefit municipalities and waste treatment
industries as they seek realistic ways of converting waste to energy, thus
increasing our energy efficiency while simultaneously reducing waste
generation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Directly linking microbial communities to
bioreactor function and environmental conditions is a great challenge for
biological process engineers. This link can be accomplished by using the
ecological theory of microbial community assembly under dynamic conditions to
guide the design of hypothesis-driven experiments. The overall objective of this
project is to elucidate the relationships between anaerobic co-digester
operating conditions, microbial communities, and reactor functions, and to use
these insights to achieve faster transitions, higher methane yields, and develop
reactors that are more resilient and resistant to perturbations. The specific
objectives are: 1) To determine to what extent deterministic and stochastic
processes contribute to shaping the assembly in anaerobic co-digesters under
changing conditions; 2) To determine the key microbial populations,
interactions, and co-occurrences under different and dynamic conditions; 3) To
use the insights from microbial community assembly to increase resilience and
resistance in response to varying substrate types and loadings, and maintain
high methane yields; and, 4) To broaden participation of underrepresented
sectors in microbiology and engineering research, and to disseminate the
practical implications of the findings to the wastewater community. This study
will integrate a methodological and theoretical community assembly frameworks
with next generation DNA and RNA sequencing approaches, bioreactor studies, and
mathematical modeling to investigate and improve an engineered biological
process. This integrated approach represents a novel way of investigating
biological processes in engineered systems and opens up a new research field
that will address basic questions about anaerobic co-digestion and lead to a
better understanding of other biological processes involved in waste treatment,
energy production, and resource recovery. This project will contribute to the
education of graduate and undergraduate students, including one from St.
Augustine's University, for two summers in the areas of engineering,
microbiology, and molecular biology. This project will benefit municipal and
industrial wastewater treatment plants as they seek sustainable and realistic
ways of converting waste to energy. Results from this project will be
incorporated in microbiology workshops for wastewater treatment
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.