* 1805514
* Nanospiked Electrochemical Sensors in Acrylic Microfluidics for Clostridium difficile Toxin Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,04/30/2023
* Susan Zhou, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2023
* USD 349,859.00

Clostridium difficile (C. difficile) is the most common infectious cause of
diarrhea in hospitalized patients. Current commercially available tests cannot
meet all the requirements of being rapid, low cost, sensitive, and selective.
This proposed project will develop a novel platform to achieve the above goals.
The success of the proposed research will make several broad scientific impacts.
First, the proposed portable sensing platform will be extended for a broad range
of applications. Second, it will enrich the fundamental knowledge of how
nanostructured surfaces will affect the sensing performances. The acquired
knowledge of nanostructured electrodes on the acrylic microfluidic platform can
impact sensing research on other grand challenges, such as food safety and water
systems. Research results will be disseminated to reach broader audiences by a)
course development, b) incorporation into project-based learning for
undergraduate and graduate students, and c) involvement of underrepresented
groups, especially female students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
develop portable, easy-to-fabricate acrylic microfluidic devices based on novel
electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) analysis of C. difficile enabled by
nanospiked electrode surfaces. Specifically, we propose to combine engineering
of nanospiked surfaces with a soft lithography technique to fabricate repeatedly
controllable electrochemical electrode with low cost. We anticipate such
electrodes will enhance the sensitivity thanks to the high area-to-volume ratio
and small size of nanospikes on the surface. The nanospiked electrodes will be
implemented on an acrylic-tape microfluidic platform following a simple
fabrication process. The capability of the developed portable device for C.
difficile sensing will be evaluated to guide the device deign. We anticipate the
outcomes of the study will include 1) a thorough understanding of nanobiosensing
performance, 2) a transformative method for engineering nanospiked
electrochemical biosensors platforms, and 3) portable acrylic microfluidic
devices with nanospiked electrodes for point-of-care biosensing of C.
difficile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.