* 1805082
* Collaborative Research: Leveraging light scattering in tissues for improved biomedical imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Vasan Venugopalan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2022
* USD 399,950.00

Advances in laser-scanning optical microscopy, a high-resolution imaging
technique, have made it possible to image the chemical and structural details of
living cellular and tissue systems at high resolution. Unfortunately,
microscopic variations in tissue composition scatter the laser light, causing
degradation of the image quality and limits in imaging depth. In fact, light
scattering is the main limitation of using laser-scanning microscopy for tissue
imaging. A promising approach to improve image quality and depth is to use
adaptive optics (e.g. deformable mirrors) to shape the laser beam in a way that
counteracts the effects of light scattering in the tissue. While promising,
adaptive optics techniques currently use optimization schemes that do not
account for the mechanisms of scattering. This leaves the method prone to
artifacts, especially as scattering becomes more severe at greater depths. Thus,
a mechanistic (physical) insight into the scattering would be very helpful to
guide and fundamentally improve adaptive optics optimization schemes. The goal
of this project is to develop an integrated modeling, computational, and
experimental approach--a Virtual Microscopy Simulator (VMS)--to determine the
adaptive optics signal corrections necessary to fully correct for scattering
induced distortions relevant to laser scanning microscopy. The outcomes of this
work improve adaptive optics technics and allow imaging at greater depths in
tissue materials, which will dramatically improve the impacts of optical
microscopy in the biomedical sciences. Beyond making the VMS platform available
to the science community, Education and Outreach plans include participating in
a UC-HBCU summer research program and providing courses and mentorship within an
NSF IGERT program in Biophotonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This goal of this
project is to fundamentally improve optical imaging of tissues by delivering new
insights in counteracting the effects of light scattering in tissues using a
model-based approach to adaptive optics that will improve image quality and
penetration depth. This approach addresses many of the limitations encountered
by current technologies, including: a) constraint to superficial layers due to
light scattering, b) non-unique solutions and artifacts when deeper layers are
accessed via wavefront shaping based on empirically based optimization schemes,
c) lack of beacon sensors that could provide information to generate a
compensating phase pattern, d) production of distorted focal volumes, e)
iterative optimization methods that make imaging slow and, most important, f)
absence of methods to model wave-based light propagation in tissue materials of
meaningful volumes, leaving no model-based support for adaptive optics in tissue
imaging. The new framework will be used to compute the adaptive optics signal
corrections necessary to fully correct for scattering induced distortions
relevant to laser scanning microscopy, and nonlinear optical microscopy in
particular. The Research Plan is organized under three objectives. OBJECTIVE 1
is to develop a Virtual Microscopy Simulator (VMS) to model focused beam
propagation, (linear and nonlinear) signal generation, and signal detection in
turbid tissues. The input module will allow users to provide input data such as
microscopy type, lens data, incident beam parameters, scattering data, nonlinear
susceptibility data, detector specifications and adaptive optics data
(Deformable Mirrors or Spatial Light Modulators settings). The input data will
be fed into the computational engine to execute the computations. The
computational module will be designed to handle all computations: a) Signal
Generation, b) Signal Emission and Detection, and c) Adaptive Optics
Computations. The Output module will consist of text data files of 3D focal
volume data, far-field radiation data, and image data. OBJECTIVE 2 is to perform
experimental validation of the VMS in tissue-mimicking phantom systems with
well-defined scattering and signal generation elements. Four classes of phantoms
with nonlinear optical targets will be prepared to validate the VMS: a) agarose
or Sylgard only (Non-scattering), b) agarose or Sylgard with microspheres, c)
Collagen Hydrogel with and w/out microspheres, and d) hybrid specimens with a
layer of agarose or Sylgard matrix and a layer of collagen hydrogel with
microspheres. OBJECTIVE 3 is to establish model-based adaptive optics design
principles through usage of the VMS to predict the input wavefronts necessary to
counteract the dispersive effects of scattering media that impede diffraction-
limited focal volume formation and signal generation in scattering. The aims of
the objective are to a) examine potential differences between the corrected
focal volume and a theoretical, undistorted volume, b) study the performance of
the algorithms from the perspective of the ideal wavefront needed to correct the
image, and c) develop an adaptive algorithm that reproduces the undistorted
image, even in the presence of scatterers situated between the focal volume and
the collecting lens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.