* 1805893
* Collaborative Research: US-Ireland: Thermoelectric Concrete Envelope (ThermoConc)
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Hongxi Yin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2022
* USD 89,766.00

1805818 (Qu)/ 1805893 (Yin) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With building heating and
cooling systems accounting for a very significant portion of US energy
consumption, a nation-wide focus is on developing renewable energy-based heating
and cooling. While thermoelectric (TE) and solid state TE heat pumps (TEHP) are
key options for energy generation, a significant gap remains in reducing
inefficient system complexities. The objective of this project is to address the
systems-level challenge by developing proof-of-concept TE concrete material that
innately possesses TE properties and might result in an independent,
comprehensive, and renewably sourced heating and cooling system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The international team for this project will leverage
advances in thermoelectric materials, conductive concrete, and building model
predictive control to create a three-in-one thermoelectric concrete, called
ThermoConc, as a building envelope for electricity generation and space heating
and cooling. The goal is to develop fundamental understanding of the
characteristics, behaviors, operations, and controls of a thermoelectric
generation and heat pumping system as an energy efficient means to both
passively and actively control building interior temperature and harvest waste
heat while enhancing human thermal comfort. Objectives will be to: 1) identify
optimal design and control of ThermoConc and establish mathematical models for
performance evaluation; 2) characterize the new TE concrete and evaluate the
performance of ThermoConc both theoretically and practically; and 3) assess
environmental and economic benefits and quantify energy-saving potentials of
ThermoConc through full-scale testing and climate-sensitivity case study. The
vision is that ThermoConc will facilitate savings in building sector energy
consumption and accelerate adoption of &lt;br/&gt;renewable energy-based heating
and cooling systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.