* 1805608
* Collaborative Research: The Use of Amphiphilic Polypeptoids to Connect Nanoparticle containing Lipid Rafts onto Liposomes and Erythrosomes through Self-Assembly.
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,05/31/2023
* Vijay John, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 05/31/2023
* USD 255,999.00

Polypeptoids are small protein-like molecules that self-assemble to form
nanoparticles in solution. Polypeptoids can be synthesized with a high degree of
precision and are entirely biocompatible, leading to significant potential uses
in therapeutics and drug delivery. In such applications, the polypeptoid based
drug carriers must effectively deliver the drug within the cell, thus requiring
a detailed understanding of their interactions with cell membranes. This work
seeks to engineer the interactions of specific polypeptoid systems with cell
membranes using membrane models known as liposomes. These are small submicron
particles in solution that contain an interior compartment with a cell-wall-like
flexible external membrane. The investigators will experimentally study the
formation and disruption of single and multi-layer liposomes to engineer a
variety of systems to deliver drugs to cells in a targeted way. As part of this
work, undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in the use of
sophisticated experimental tools. In addition, the investigators are committed
to outreach activities to K-12 students through hands-on demonstrations. A
strong aspect of the outreach will be to expose process technology students in
the New Orleans Community College system to the molecular aspects that drive
chemical, petrochemical, and pharmaceutical operations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific class of polypeptoids that will be developed
in this work include the hydrophobically modified polypeptoids or HMPs, which
interact with the lipid bilayers through hydrophobe insertion into the bilayers,
and thus disrupt the bilayer to form HMP+lipid fragments or rafts. The
remarkable aspect of the manifestation of the hydrophobic effect is the
propensity of these HMP+lipid rafts to reattach onto intact liposomes to form
additional layers. Preliminary experimental observations indicate that there is
a sheet-like winding and assembly of these rafts onto liposomes leading to
double and multiple layers on liposomes. The connectivity of hydrophobes in a
polymeric amphiphile such as HMP brings about a high density of insertions
leading to rupture of liposomes into perhaps intact bilayer fragments. The
reattachment of fragments is also a previously unrecognized manifestation of the
hydrophobic interaction. Thus, a fundamental study of this phenomenon will lead
to control over building layers onto liposomes and therefore lead to the
development of new classes of fully biocompatible polymer-lipid assemblies. The
potential to build bilayers onto liposomes and erythrosomes using a designed
connective polymeric amphiphile has significant technical implications. These
concepts have relevance to the attachment of drug-containing lipid entities to
cell membranes and to vesicle systems. The ability of HMPs to remodel liposomes
is a novel aspect of multilayer self-assembly with significant applications to
using liposomes as multiple drug carriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.