* 1805785
* Understanding Reaction Mechanisms for the Design of RF Driven Catalytic Modular Reactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Kerry Dooley, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 316,073.00

The proposed project will investigate the concept of driving catalytic reactions
on the surface of iron oxide nanoparticles that are locally heated by exposure
to radio frequency (RF) radiation. The main objective is to develop a new
process that is more energy efficient than thermally-driven ones and to design a
modular reactor system for RF-driven catalytic reactions at low temperatures.
Low reaction temperatures are expected to prevent catalyst degradation by
reducing coke formation and particle sintering, while reducing the energy
consumption in chemical manufacturing processes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
fundamental principles behind the RF-driven oxidative dehydrogenation of alkanes
on Fe3O4 nanoparticles will be studied, including the effects of the energy
conversion/transfer on reaction mechanisms. The size and structure of the
nanoparticles will be optimized to maximize energy conversion. Chemical
reactions will be investigated using standard methods and neutron/synchrotron
characterization techniques. Interactions with magnetic fields will be modeled
using open-source software to elucidate the interaction between catalytically
active Fe surface sites, orientation within magnetic fields, and generated
energy. The fundamental knowledge on RF-driven catalytic reactions will be used
to design a modular reactor that can be scaled-up to industrial level. In
addition to training graduate students in an interdisciplinary research field,
the PIs plan to use magnetic nanoparticles to develop material for educational
and outreach activities to K-12 students from the Baton Rouge, LA, area and
undergraduate students from local HBCUs, with special emphasis on encouraging
students from underrepresented minority groups to pursue careers in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.