* 1805022
* Development of Hybrid Solid Materials for Stable Molecular Oxygen Anodes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* William Goddard, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2022
* USD 725,124.00

Electrocatalysts are materials that make electrically-driven chemical reactions
proceed faster, more efficiently, and/or with less input of electricity. This
project will involve discovery of new catalytic materials for efficient
electrochemical oxidation of water to produce hydrogen and oxygen, where the
hydrogen can be used directly as a fuel to produce electricity in hydrogen fuel
cells, or as a reactant to upgrade low-grade carbon-containing compounds to
high-value fuels and chemicals. The project will address a critical step in a
sustainable process for converting solar energy to chemical energy, thus
alleviating dependence on fossil resources. This is a collaborative effort that
brings together Professors Thomas Gunnoe and Sen Zhang from the University of
Virginia with Professor William Goddard from the California Institute of
Technology and scientists from the Max Planck Institute for Chemical Energy
Conversion, working under the MAXNET Energy consortium. The international
collaboration will enhance U.S. research eminence in the science and engineering
of sustainable energy. The project will also involve educational outreach to
primarily undergraduate institutions (PUIs) to increase interest among students
from diverse backgrounds in careers as scientists and engineers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project represents a cross-disciplinary effort to
develop, understand and test new carbon-supported copper and cobalt materials
for electrocatalytic water oxidation. It incorporates groups with expertise in
molecular catalysis, nanomaterials, computational modeling, and carbon materials
and catalyst characterization. The primary foundation is to develop and optimize
multi-nuclear molecular catalysts and then integrate these units into carbon-
based materials. Participation in the MAXNET Energy consortium will provide
assessment of new catalyst materials under a standardized set of protocols to
provide rigorous comparison and benchmarking to other heterogeneous catalytic
materials. To achieve these goals, three objectives will be pursued: 1) prepare
a series of multi-nuclear cobalt and copper complexes with variable molecular
and electronic structure - as guided by computational modeling - to provide an
understanding of structure-activity relationships; 2) support multi-nuclear
molecular complexes on conductive carbonaceous materials; 3) study the OER
activity and stability of carbon-supported catalysts. Educational outreach will
involve visits by graduate students to the PUIs to deliver short courses based
on their research, combined with participation of undergraduate students in
summer research internships in the PIs' laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.