* 1805721
* RAPID: Identification and Analysis of Key Dynamics Required for Sustainable Operations of Texas Food Banks after Hurricane Disasters
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2018,12/31/2018
* Eduardo Perez, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2018
* USD 50,000.00

This Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will provide support for data
collection efforts at the Central Texas Food Bank in Austin, Texas and the
Houston Food Bank in Houston, Texas in the aftermath of Hurricane Harvey. Food
banks are a critical support network for populations at-risk for hunger and
malnutrition. Their operations include wholesaling of surplus food from stores
and farms, procuring and warehousing bulk donations, and distribution of food
and household goods to a variety of charitable agencies. Most large urban food
banks provide meals for hundreds of thousands of people each week. In addition
to their normal operations, many food banks serve as disaster-relief agencies by
providing food and supplies to displaced residents. When a large food bank is
itself seriously impacted by a large-scale disaster, deliveries to the food bank
and distribution from the food bank to relief organizations must be rerouted to
neighboring food banks capable of serving the affected population. When
Hurricane Harvey disabled the Houston Food Bank, the largest Feeding America
food bank in the US, the Central Texas Food Bank in Austin and the San Antonio
Food Bank operated well past full capacity under challenging circumstances to
take up the slack. These food banks currently operate as an informal network
with no specific mechanisms or practices in place to guide a regional response
to a disaster of this magnitude.

The PI and his team of graduate and undergraduate students will collect data on
surge capacity, transient operating conditions, and performance at these
neighboring food banks as they worked to support the residents of southeastern
Texas affected by the hurricane. The research objectives are to: (1)
characterize the key logistic obstacles and bottlenecks when a major food bank
is disrupted; (2) identify staff capacity and limitations (including both paid
and volunteer staff) at neighboring food banks; (3) determine first aid products
needed by displaced individuals; and (4) identify what partnerships/agreements
(both formal and informal) between food banks were in place and utilized during
these operations. This project will enable study of how regional coordination
among food banks can be improved to deliver needed food and basic necessities to
communities affected by large scale disasters that disrupt a critical element of
the recovery effort.