* 1805924
* Understanding Thermal Transport through van der Waals Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Deyu Li, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Ying Sun
* 06/30/2021
* USD 359,990.00

van der Waals (vdW) crystals demonstrate many novel and desirable properties
such as highly anisotropic electrical and thermal transport capabilities along
different directions. It has been projected that these materials could
revolutionize flexible electronic devices, photovoltaic energy converters, and
biomedical devices. However, a thorough understanding of their electrical and
thermal properties has to be achieved first. This project explores how different
factors influence thermal transport through various vdW nanowires. Systematic
studies will be conducted to understand how energy carriers interact with each
other and how thermal properties of these nanowires vary as the wire size
changes, which will provide new insights into tuning the materials properties
for novel devices with improved performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal
properties of vdW crystals are extremely important for the proper function of
vdW materials-based devices; however, the understanding of thermal transport
mechanisms in vdW crystals is far from complete. This project measures electron
and phonon transport through individual quasi-one-dimensional vdW nanowires to
provide insights into fundamental questions including how to correctly construct
phonon dispersion for vdW crystals, what is the relation between dimensionality
transition and the relative strength of intra-chain/inter-chain bonding, and how
different phonon scattering mechanisms, especially electron-phonon coupling,
affect thermal transport in vdW materials. Three different kinds of vdW
crystals, Ta2Pd3Se8, NbSe3, and TaSe3, which represent a wide spectrum of vdW
interaction strength and electrical properties, is examined to dissect the
effects of these parameters. The project generates the urgently-needed knowledge
of thermal transport in vdW materials that is critical for various
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.