* 1805819
* P2C2: A 20,000 Year Ice Core-Derived Record of Paleoclimate and Environmental Variability in the Tropical Andes: Nevado Huascaran, Cordillera Blanca, Peru
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2018,06/30/2023
* Paolo Gabrielli, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 06/30/2023
* USD 1,424,990.00

The researchers intend to drill two 165-meter long cores to bedrock from the col
(i.e., the lowest point on a mountain ridge between two peaks) at 6,050 meters
above sea level masl) and two 70-meter cores from the South Peak summit at 6,756
masl). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the col was surveyed and successfully
drilled to bedrock in 1993, summit drilling was not possible, and only a few
dating techniques were available to help establish a valid time scale for the
last 20,000 years. Stable isotope records from Huascaran will provide histories
of mid-troposphere temperature and precipitation, and the site's proximity to
the Amazon Basin will allow the reconstruction of environmental changes in the
vast rainforest by analyzing biological parameters (microbial populations,
pollen and methane concentrations).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers aim to
address the following objectives: (1) document and characterize abrupt climate
and environmental variations with emphasis on mid-Holocene events and the
deglaciation; (2) assess how the climate and environment have changed over the
past century in response to anthropogenic forcing; (3) establish tightly
constrained timescales for each of the ice cores; (4) determine tropical
atmospheric and climatological dynamics on multi-decadal, decadal, and ENSO time
scales; (5) assess the regional characteristics of climatic and environmental
variability during the Holocene and Last Glacial Stage (LGS) with a focus on
changes in the Amazon Basin and determine how they compare to contemporaneous
conditions elsewhere; and (6) provide one-quarter of the Huascaran col core for
archival at the U.S. National Ice Core Laboratory for future investigations by
the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts
(B.I.) includes strong science and educational aspects. Mid-tropospheric warming
in the Peruvian Andes, enhanced by recent strong El Ninos, is accelerating
glacier retreat. Currently this retreat is increasing dry season water discharge
which is not sustainable. Most of Peru's population lives in the west coast
desert which relies on glacier streams for agriculture, hydroelectricity, and
municipal water supplies. Retreating glaciers also exacerbate geohazards and
impact ecosystems, tourism and recreation. Understanding the impact of this
acceleration of glacier loss on future water resources requires information
about past changes in high elevation glacier mass balance which is virtually
unknown, except from a few point-estimates based on ice core studies. Such
information is urgently needed by policymakers, governmental agencies, and
public resource administrators to help guide mitigation and adaptation
strategies. Educational and public outreach will be conducted through Ohio State
University's Education and Outreach Program recently established educational and
outreach programs in Peru. Such programs are dedicated to providing climatic and
environmental information to students, the public, and policymakers at all
levels. The project would support early career scientists and continue to foster
international collaborations in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.