* 1805112
* Atomic layer etching through controlled surface chemistry
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Jane Chang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 405,000.00

Complex multi-layer structures (heterostructures) of thin metal films are
essential for developing advanced nano-electronic and nano-photonic devices that
have important applications in sensors, high-density information storage and
magneto-optical devices. Since many metals that are suitable for such devices
have low reactivity, their controlled etching is a very challenging task. The
objective of the proposed research is to understand the underlying surface
reaction kinetics that produce directional changes in metal composition and
properties, thereby enabling the development of a controlled etching process
with the chemical contrast needed to selectively remove the materials with
atomic level precision. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project will
focus on: a) delineating the reaction mechanisms underlying a viable directional
atomic layer etch process to control the etch rate and selectivity in the
patterning of complex metal heterostructures, b) characterizing the surface
reactions leading to self-limited reaction and tailored composition, c)
measuring the type and concentration of the reaction products to confirm the
reaction mechanisms, and d) integrating these sequential reaction steps with a
complex metal heterostructure to examine the attainable profiles. A successful
completion of the project may lead to atomic level control in metal removal,
greater selectivity in patterning complex metal heterostructures, better control
in achieving high density in device integration, and will lay the foundation to
systematically improve the precise patterning of even more complex material
systems and architectures. The data generated from the proposed research will be
broadly disseminated to the research community. Research outcomes will be
integrated into an existing graduate and undergraduate course on Plasma
Processing. Two graduate students will be supported to pursue Ph.D. degrees in
the multidisciplinary field of Plasma Science and Engineering. Undergraduate and
high school students from underrepresented groups will be recruited to pursue
senior research projects and summer research internships. Projects will be
offered to female high school students participating in a Technology Camp to
promote their interests in pursuing careers in Science and
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.