* 1805921
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and numerical study on the Reynolds number dependence of surfaces in von Karman turbulent swirling flows
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Fabrizio Bisetti, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 250,000.00

The growth of surfaces, thought of as infinitely thin interfaces that separate
regions occupied by fluids with different properties, is a process of intrinsic
and practical interest with wide ranging applications in nature, science, and
technical devices. As dissimilar fluids mix and interact at interface that
separates them, the quantitative characterization of the rates of growth and
destruction of surfaces is of critical importance. A comprehensive theory that
describes these processes in turbulent flows, which are the most common flows
encountered, is unavailable at present. The end goal of the project is to
formulate a systematic theory that describes the dynamics of surfaces in
turbulent flows depending on the state of the motion of the fluid. A
comprehensive theory on the dynamics of surfaces will augment the general theory
of turbulent flows, including flows with mixing and chemical reaction, which are
found in chemical and energy conversion systems. In addition, this project will
improve the understanding of physical processes observed in nature, such as
cloud formation, where the evolution of interfaces is the rate limiting process.
Thus, although the work is fundamental in nature, it has the potential for broad
impacts in science and technology. The project will support the education of two
graduate students, and it will also include significant outreach educational
activities, which will focus on engaging grades 4-7 students in scientific
discovery by investigating the properties of fluid
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the project is to quantify
the dependence of the evolution of surfaces in turbulent flows on the Reynolds
number. We combine direct numerical simulations and measurements in a novel von
Karman turbulent swirling flow setup featuring a shear-driven closed flow
between counter-rotating impellers with fully developed turbulence at high
Reynolds numbers. The evolution of surfaces in this canonical laboratory flow is
tracked quantitatively, while the parameters that describe the flow
configuration are varied judiciously to probe a broad range of conditions in the
parameter space where different effects are believed to play a role on the
evolution of surfaces. The project will fill this broad goal by focusing on two
thrusts: (i) Prove or disprove the Reynolds number dependence of the area and
growth rates of large surfaces in turbulent flows; (ii) Identify the parameters
that scale the evolution of surfaces in turbulent flow through a detailed
analysis of the terms in the transport equation for surfaces in turbulence. The
direct numerical simulations of the entire device include all geometrical
complexities, while experiments feature a novel manner of generating surfaces on
demand and state-of the art volumetric measurements of the velocity field and 3D
representation of the turbulent. This novel and unique research program is
unprecedented as it includes both the broadest range and highest Reynolds
numbers ever considered in the study of surfaces in turbulent
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.