* 1805786
* Collaborative Research: LES and RANS simulations of estuarine flows: Understanding and parameterizing the role of Langmuir turbulence
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2023
* Andres Tejada-Martinez, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 07/31/2023
* USD 199,179.00

Langmuir circulation is recognized as pairs of parallel counter-rotating
vortices (or cells) oriented approximately in the direction of the wind,
characterizing the wave- and wind-driven turbulence (i.e. the Langmuir
turbulence) within the upper ocean, lakes and estuaries. Its role in lakes and
estuaries lacks understanding. The overarching goal of this project is to
provide a fine-scale numerical study of Langmuir circulation, its interaction
with other coherent flow structures and the resulting influence on vertical
mixing and lateral dispersion within estuaries. Estuaries are briefly defined as
coastal areas where freshwater and saltwater mix. Estuarine ecosystems are one
of the most productive in the world made up of a myriad of habitats including
oyster reefs, coral reefs, submerged aquatic vegetation, marshes and mangroves.
The proposed numerical simulations will enhance understanding of flow dynamics
that have direct impact on estuarine ecosystems. These dynamics govern the
spatial distribution of water constituents such as dissolved organic matter,
phytoplankton, suspended sediments and spilled contaminants that influence the
health of estuarine ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed studies
consist of large-eddy simulations (LES) of the interaction between submesoscale
coherent flow structures such as fronts and eddies and the smaller scale wind
and wave-driven Langmuir circulation in idealized estuarine settings. LES will
be used to investigate the idealized tidal intrusion front entering an estuary
and an idealized river plume propagating through an estuary and discharging to a
coastal ocean. The LES will allow investigations of (a) the role of turbulent
mixing induced by Langmuir circulation in exchanges between the estuary and the
coastal ocean via tidal intrusion fronts and river plumes and (b) the role of
Langmuir circulation and its interaction with eddies and fronts determining the
lateral and vertical mixing throughout the estuary. LES will allow for the
development of improved turbulence closures able to account for the vertical
mixing of the Langmuir turbulence regime. These closure models will then be used
in Reynolds-averaged Navier-Stokes (RANS) simulations of the idealized flows and
these results will be compared with the LES. This will allow for assessment of
current turbulence closures for the RANS equations in the presence of Langmuir
circulation. (3) Turbulence closures will be updated to account for Langmuir
turbulence in RANS simulations. To date Langmuir turbulence closures have not
been implemented for the three-dimensional RANS equations in coarse-scale
estuarine flow simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.