* 1805510
* Collaborative Research: Understanding and exploiting the structure-function link between fatty acid biosynthesis and degradation enzymes for functionalized small molecule synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Justin Siegel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 08/31/2022
* USD 301,409.00

Commercially important products are often built up from small molecules.
Bacteria and other microbes are proficient at producing such molecules. Many are
synthesized from fats and fatty acids. Understanding how the cells make and
modify fats will help determine how to make renewable fuels and chemicals in
large amounts using microbes. The project will also help educate our society in
the challenges and opportunities on the road to a sustainable future. This
includes advising and training of undergraduate and high school students from
school districts serving predominantly minority populations. Together, these
efforts will provide academic and industrial training in areas of strategic
national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insight into the evolutionary
divergence of fatty acid biosynthesis (FAB) and beta-oxidation (BOX) pathways
will be sought by characterizing enzyme/substrate interactions and the unique
characteristics of enzymes from various organisms. Using non-decarboxylative
condensation and &amp;#946;-reduction reactions, molecules with novel
functionalities will be generated. Type II FAB and BOX enzymes will be used
interchangeably to capitalize on the advantageous characteristics of each set of
enzymes. An integrated approach in which computational protein modeling and
design will guide experimentation through molecular modeling of the FAB and BOX
enzymes with a wide array of biosynthetically accessible compounds will be
undertaken. The specific objectives of the project are: 1) computational protein
modeling and design of type II FAB and BOX enzymes; 2) in vitro characterization
of type II FAB and BOX enzymes; and 3) in vivo construction and characterization
of combinations of type II FAB and BOX enzymes. Medium chain (C5-C8)
dicarboxylic and methyl-branched carboxylic acids, specifically dicarboxylates
adipic (C6) and suberic (C8) acids and methyl-branched unsaturated tiglic acid
(C5) will be produced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.