* 1805244
* Formation and Transport Dynamics of High Speed Gas-Liquid Droplet Microfluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2023
* Carlos Hidrovo Chavez, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 06/30/2023
* USD 291,001.00

The goal of this project is to understand liquid droplet formation and transport
dynamics in gaseous microfluidic systems, including compressibility effects.
Understanding liquid droplet formation and transport in gaseous microchannels
will have significant impact on the general area of droplet microflows,
particularly for gas sampling and dry particle aerosol generation. The knowledge
gained will have major implications for next generation microfluidic systems in
portable gaseous biochemical diagnostics and sensing applications, as well as in
larger scale spray and atomization systems. The rich engineering, physics, and
materials challenges tackled here represent a great cross-disciplinary project
for the students involved. The results of the project will provide new classroom
materials for courses that the PI teach, as well as outreach activities geared
towards elementary school audiences. An undergraduate summer internship program
aimed at underrepresented Northeastern University freshmen/sophomores will be
established to prepare them as multidisciplinary leaders of future engineering
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The governing physics behind the liquid droplet
formation, detachment, transport, and interaction with the continuous gas phase
flow for different geometries and flow conditions will be studied and analyzed.
A multi-task research program will be put in place that includes hydraulic and
optical diagnostics characterization of droplet formation, detachment and
transport interactions, alongside numerical simulations of these processes. The
research program includes the following specific thrusts: (1) Experiments and
numerical simulation of droplet formation in the dripping and jetting regimes
will be conducted for different flow conditions and geometries, including 3D
microfluidic flow architectures. The conditions for transition between these two
regimes and possible hysteresis effects will also be explored. (2)
Characterization and control of the aerodynamics of droplet transport will be
conducted after formation and detachment, including electrostatic based control
strategies. Droplet evaporation, absorption of vapor species, and internal flow
dynamics and mixing characteristics of the droplets will also be addressed. (3)
An assessment will be made of the gas phase compressibility effects in terms of
flow acceleration and the presence of shock waves. Changes in flow regimes and
transitions as well as the droplet transport dynamics due to these effects will
be assessed. Similarly, droplet interaction with standing shock waves in the
microchannel will be studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.