* 1805143
* Collaborative Research: P2C2--A Model/Proxy Synthesis of Walker Circulation Trends During the Last Millennium
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2018,12/31/2023
* Samantha Stevenson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* David Verardo
* 12/31/2023
* USD 341,402.00

The Pacific Walker circulation alters weather and climate extremes around the
world, but its sensitivity to external climate forcings remains unknown. In
particular, observational estimates of 20th century trends in the Walker
circulation provide conflicting results, with some suggesting a strengthening
and others a weakening or no trend, complicating the attribution of these trends
to any specific forcing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleoclimate records can improve
the detection and attribution of trends by providing longer-term context, but
their use has been hindered by the lack of multi-proxy synthesis products and
climate model simulations covering the last millennium. This project aims to
create new quantitative reconstructions of multiple Walker circulation metrics
using the recently constructed PAGES Iso2k database, and to evaluate the
mechanisms for variability and trends in these metrics using the Community Earth
System Model Last Millennium Ensemble (LME) and new simulations with its
isotope-enabled complement (iLME). The research seeks to apply these new tools
to answer one central question: What are the mechanisms underlying Walker
circulation variability and trends from the Last Millennium through the 20th
century, and what are the relative roles of external forcings and internal
variability?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The potential Broader Impacts (B.I.) includes
strong science and educational aspects. Climate variability in the tropical
Pacific affects societies and ecosystems; understanding long-term variability of
the Walker circulation is thus critical for improving projections of the impacts
of 21st century climate change. This scientifically-interdisciplinary research
team is composed entirely of early-career researchers, two of whom are female.
The project will support a graduate student and postdoctoral researcher. High
school students from underrepresented demographics will be recruited for summer
internships and mentoring through a program that targets diversity in STEM.
Finally, the project will produce multi-proxy synthesis reconstructions of
tropical Pacific climate variability and iLME ensemble members, all of which
will be made available as resources to the wider scientific and civil
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.