* 1805805
* Condensation and Droplet Dynamics Under Shear at Superhydrophobic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Brian Iverson, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2023
* USD 371,962.00

When a water droplet meets a surface, it can spread and wet the surface or bead
up. This depends on the wetting property of the surface. When waxing a car, it
is desirable to prepare the surface such that droplets bead up and roll off.
Droplet spreading, however, is desirable if paint is sprayed on a surface. A
surface that causes the droplets to bead up is called superhydrophobic. Such
surfaces exist in nature (for example, the lotus leaf) and can be also
engineered artificially. If a cold surface is in contact with hot vapor, water
droplets will condense on it. This is the principle used in many industrial
processes that use condensers, such as in power plants. These droplets can merge
to form a thin film. If the condenser surface is designed to be
superhydrophobic, the condensed droplets will roll off and do not form a film.
This will enhance the efficiency of the condenser. This project investigates the
condensation process on superhydrophobic surfaces. It explores droplet formation
and growth, droplet detachment, and heat transfer on superhydrophobic surfaces.
This award provides opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students to
participate in research. The team of investigators will also prepare learning
modules for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on an
investigation to characterize convective thermal transport and fluid dynamics of
condensed droplets at superhydrophobic (SH) surfaces in shear flow. The
fundamental hydrodynamic and convective thermal transport physics for liquid in
contact with SH walls exhibit radical departures from classical behavior due to
distinct alterations to the boundary conditions at the surface. Previous work in
the principal investigator's lab has shown dramatic departures from classical
behavior for quiescent droplets and reduced pressure drop for adiabatic, two-
phase flows with superhydrophobic boundaries. It is expected that two-phase
condensing flows in contact with SH surfaces will experience significant
departure from classical behavior for two reasons. First, superhydrophobicity
exerts enormous influence on the liquid-solid surface tension, especially for
thin films and droplets, which dominate large portions of two-phase flow
systems. Second, when drop-wise condensation occurs, the condensing heat
transfer coefficient experiences an order of magnitude increase compared to that
associated with film-wise condensation. If SH walls are employed where
condensation is occurring, the length of channel over which drop-wise
condensation prevails may be significantly increased due to alteration of
surface adhesion forces, reduction in nominal droplet size, and increased
droplet mobility. These effects have the potential to provide transformative
breakthroughs in next generation condenser technologies. No previous study has
systematically explored the influence of SH channel walls on the droplet
behavior under shear in condensing flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.