* 1805636
* Active turbulence from polymer additives: Theory, modeling and high fidelity simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2018,08/31/2022
* Yves Dubief, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 300,000.00

Complex fluids define a wide variety of fluids encountered in pharmaceutical,
food, petroleum, biological industries. The manner in which many of these fluids
flow challenges the predictive models currently used by engineers and scientists
for the design and optimization of engineering applications and understanding of
physical phenomena. For instance, the addition of polymers in a liquid, the
complex fluid of interest here, can reduce drag when transporting water or oil
in pipes, but also increase heat transfer and mixing in microfluidics. It can
promote formation of emulsion between two immiscible solutions under conditions
at which an emulsion is not otherwise possible, or it can control droplet sizes
in spray to improve agricultural irrigation or combustion in liquid fuel
injection engines. Polymer additives offer, and in some of the applications
mentioned above, deliver large returns on investment, however the modeling or
predictability of these phenomena remains poor owing to the absence of sound
theoretical understanding. The main objective of this project is to develop
high-fidelity predictive computational models that will benefit a large range of
industries dealing with complex fluids. The project will also have an education
component, encompassing training of a graduate student in complex fluid dynamics
and numerical simulation, and the development of open-source tools used in
turbulence and computational fluid dynamics
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymer additives offer a unique window of
investigation into complex energy transfers involving direct and inverse energy
cascades between large and small scales, between turbulence and polymer
molecules. Polymer additives have been identified as responsible for elastic
turbulence in inertialess flows, elasto-inertial turbulence in subcritical wall-
bounded flows and drag reduction in supercritical wall-bounded flows up to an
asymptotic, non-laminar state called maximum drag reduction. None of these
states are well understood. The objectives of the proposed research effort are
to fully characterize the statistical properties of the above mentioned
turbulent states, to investigate the energy transfer between polymers and flows
in all turbulent states in search for universal properties and to leverage the
cumulative sum of knowledge acquired within this project into high fidelity
computational models of non-Newtonian turbulent flows at very low to large
Reynolds numbers. The numerical simulations used to support this project are
state-of-the-art viscoelastic direct numerical simulations developed to capture
the targeted dynamics. This project will create a unique and extensive database
of elastic and elasto-inertial turbulent flows which will be made available to
the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.