* 1805228
* P2C2: Collaborative Research: New Estimates of Atmospheric pCO2 for the Paleocene-Eocene
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2018,09/30/2022
* Scott Wing, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 09/30/2022
* USD 796,955.00

How global temperature responds to changes in atmospheric carbon dioxide is a
central question in Earth science with enormous societal significance. The deep-
time history of carbon dioxide in Earth's atmosphere may help us quantify the
role of this greenhouse gas in abrupt climate change events in the geological
past, giving a better perspective towards climate projections under future
scenarios of increasing atmospheric carbon dioxide. This project will refine
proxy estimates of atmospheric carbon dioxide that are based on an understanding
of how the properties of stomatal pores in the leaves of Ginkgo trees respond to
elevated carbon dioxide concentration. This proxy relationship, established
using controlled experiments on cultivated Ginkgo leaves, will then be applied
to the ancient record of atmospheric carbon dioxide using fossil Ginkgo leaves
that are common in sediments deposited during periods when Earth's atmospheric
carbon dioxide concentration and climate varied substantially. These more
precise estimates of ancient atmospheric carbon dioxide will thus help to refine
our understanding of the sensitivity of Earth's climate system to greenhouse gas
concentrations and facilitate more accurate projections of changes in climate,
ice volume and sea level that will result from anthropogenic carbon dioxide
emissions. More accurate projections of these future scenarios will have
significant societal and economic implications for infrastructure and food
production. The project will also educate students and citizen scientists about
the scientific method and insights from this research by involving them in
collecting specimens, making measurements and analyzing
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sensitivity of global temperature to atmospheric pCO2
is difficult to determine by direct atmospheric measurements because feedbacks
in the Earth system play out over millennia or longer. This research will
develop a reliable, temporally dense proxy record of pCO2 for the late Paleocene
and Early Eocene period of warm climates (~60-53 Ma) using stomatal properties
of fossil Ginkgo leaves. The researchers will first refine a proxy relationship
between Ginkgo leaf stomatal properties, and then apply this proxy to dense and
temporally well-constrained fossil records of Ginkgo. To establish the response
of modern Ginkgo to elevated pCO2 concentrations, trees will be cultivated under
experimental conditions at three elevated CO2 concentrations in open-top
chambers, while monitoring stomatal density, size and index, as well as carbon
isotopic composition and rates of photosynthetic assimilation and transpiration,
temperature, relative humidity, and photosynthetically active radiation. These
data from experimental cultivation will be used along with survey data of modern
Ginkgo leaves, to allow the researchers to evaluate modeled relationships
between paleo-pCO2 and fossil stomata. Once this response is calibrated for
modern Ginkgo biloba, the results will be applied to extensive collections of
fossil Ginkgo wyomingensis from the terrestrial sediments of the Paleogene in
the Rocky Mountains. This record, combined with records of paleotemperature from
the marine and terrestrial realms will be used to evaluate the role of
atmospheric CO2 during episodes of geologically rapid temperature increases
(hyperthermals). Better estimates of paleo-pCO2 will contribute substantially to
refining our understanding of Earth's climate sensitivity to carbon dioxide and
increase our understanding of controls on past warm climates in the geological
record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.