* 1805317
* Engineering nanoparticles and nanostructures with precise and tunable modalities of interaction with the autophagy-lysosome system
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2022
* Laura Segatori, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2022
* USD 342,042.00

Nanotechnology has led to improvements in many products. These include
electronic displays, computer memory chips, lithium ion batteries, whiteners,
and stronger carbon fibers, to name a few. Human exposure to these particles has
skyrocketed in recent years. Surprisingly, human cells are able to take up and
process these particles. This project will investigate the effect that these
types of particles have on human cell metabolism. The project will also engage
with local area high school students, and HS teachers, many who serve
underrepresented minority (URM) populations. Doing so will strengthen the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) infrastructure,
encourage greater participation in STEM careers by URM students, and support the
expansion of a high-tech workforce in biomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
variety of engineered nanomaterials (ENMs) are processed by pathways evolved to
recycle and degrade intracellular nano-sized materials. Evidence points to the
activation of the autophagy-lysosome (AL) system as an adaptive response to ENM
uptake. We hypothesize that the AL system responds to ENMs through molecular
mechanisms similar to those activated in response to natural nanomaterials.
Inspired by the rules of naturally occurring nanomaterials, this project will 1)
generate synthetic nanoparticles and genetically encoded nanostructures that
mimic natural nanosized particles and their autophagy-evoking mechanisms; 2)
elucidate the impact of these novel bio-inspired nanomaterials on the lysosomal
system by monitoring lysosomal biogenesis, function, and integrity; and 3)
characterize the response to these bio-inspired nanomaterials by utilizing in
vitro model systems specially designed to evaluate the impact of ENMs on every
step of this pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.