* 1805892
* Collaborative Research: Holocene glacier length variations along the spine of the American Cordilleras and their climatic significance
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2018,06/30/2021
* Brent Goehring, Tulane University
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2021
* USD 152,977.00

The worldwide retreat of glaciers over the past century is one of the clearest
signals of global warming, but it raises two basic questions that remain hazy:
how anomalous are current glacier extents, and what were long-term glacier
trends prior to the industrial era? This project will reconstruct how often
during the Holocene (the last 11,000 years) a dozen glaciers down the length of
the Americas, from the Arctic to Patagonia, were larger versus smaller than
today. We take a community-based approach to reduce cost, with active glacier
scientists collecting samples gratis during their own field campaigns to
contribute to this project. Our results will provide a geologic lens through
which to view modern climate change, and offer a paleo-test for computer models
used to simulate glacier responses to future warming -- important to freshwater
resources in some areas and global sea level rise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will reconstruct glacier histories by
applying the in situ 14C-10Be chronometer to several samples of proglacial
bedrock at each glacier terminus. This technique is able to determine what
portion of the Holocene a glacier advanced beyond and retreated behind its
current terminus by quantifying the buildup of both 14C and 10Be during periods
of exposure and the preferential loss of 14C during episodes of ice cover due to
its much shorter half-life. Our latitudinal transect is designed to maximize
understanding of how glaciers responded to orbital variations, as well as how
climate may have been coupled between the low and high latitudes and across the
hemispheres. Given that Holocene glacier trends may have varied substantially
with latitude, the broad scale of our reconstructions will also provide the
context needed for evaluating current glacier retreat around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.