* 1805829
* Particle Acceleration During Collisionless Magnetic Reconnection
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2018,07/31/2022
* James Drake, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 07/31/2022
* USD 375,000.00

This research project will focus on the origins of particle acceleration in
magnetized astrophysical plasmas. The sun and other stars, many planetary
systems and other astronomical objects produce magnetic fields. Observations
reveal that when magnetic fields pointing in opposite directions come together
in these systems, they can annihilate each other and explosively release
magnetic energy. These explosions are revealed in solar and stellar flares,
flares in astrophysical objects, storms in Earth's space environment and
disruptions in laboratory fusion experiments. Magnetic energy release is also
the driver of space weather, which can negatively impact satellite
communications and threaten astronauts in space. Magnetic reconnection is the
fundamental process that describes how magnetic fields annihilate. Great
progress has been made on understanding the mechanisms for the fast release of
magnetic energy seen in nature and the laboratory. The mechanisms for particle
acceleration are not well understood and are the focus of this research grant.
The active involvement of undergraduate students and the training of graduate
students, including female graduate students, furthers the broad educational
goals of NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research program is to
understand electron and ion heating and acceleration during magnetic
reconnection and to develop a model for particle acceleration that can be
compared with observations. Particle-in-cell simulations coupled with an
analytic effort will be used to address two key issues related to electron and
ion acceleration during magnetic reconnection: (1) the mechanism for ion
acceleration with application to abundance enhancements in impulsive flares, and
(2) the physics basis for the ubiquitous observations of powerlaw spectra of
energetic electrons and ions. A novel computational model will be implemented to
explore particle acceleration in macro-scale systems that can be used to predict
the spectra and photon and radio signatures of energetic particles in
astrophysical plasmas. Collaborations will be continued and expanded with
scientists working on laboratory experiments, satellite data and ground-based
data to benchmark the theoretical predictions with
observations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.