* 1805808
* Innovations at the Nexus of Food, Energy, and Water Systems (INFEWS: U.S.-China): A multi-scale integrated modeling approach to managing the transition to sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2018,04/30/2024
* Jing Liu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2024
* USD 499,341.00

As global population rises to 7.5 billion people and beyond, concern is growing
about the planet's carrying capacity across the multiple and interacting
dimensions of food, water and energy systems (FEWS). The overarching goal of
this project is to enable the transition to sustainable FEWS by achieving the
multi-factorial assessment of tradeoffs needed to achieve sustainability. This
project will build a U.S.- China collaboration framed as a Virtual Research
Center (FEWS-VRC) between Purdue University and three Chinese academic
institutions (Center for Energy and Environmental Policy Research, State Key
Laboratory of Hydrology-Water Resources and Hydraulic Engineering, and Center
for Chinese Agricultural Policy). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FEWS-VRC will push the
frontier of quantitative systems sustainability analysis in two directions: 1)
assessing the role of heterogeneity by extending the use of gridded modeling of
agricultural production coupled with land-water use; and 2) analysis of
interactions between agriculture and new sources of energy, particularly bio-
based energy. The tools developed will be built on a Science Gateway platform
(FEWS-HUB) that will provide a quantitative, extensible basis for solving
crucial future research and planning problems thus improving decision-making
capabilities in FEWS topics within the world's two largest economies. Though the
integrated assessment approach, this project will add to existing knowledge in
several dimensions: gridded modeling of agricultural production; and coupling of
the gridded agricultural model to a detailed general equilibrium model. Spatial
models at a national level are too coarse to deal with the heterogeneity of
agricultural production. Moreover, as water is ever more becoming a constraining
factor for agriculture, it is vital to link agricultural production and
hydrological models at basin scale. An expected outcome of this study is a
framework to assess the importance of gridded-level heterogeneity as well as
potential 'hotspots' linked to water availability. A second goal is coupling the
Purdue-developed ENVISAGE Model to SIMPLE-G thus extending the latter model to
include energy systems. ENVISAGE is an integrated assessment model with a large
energy sub-module that provides an assessment of changes in bio-based energy
including land-use implications. Coupling these two disparate models will allow
new research questions to be addressed in a tractable and traceable framework.
Sustainable development is a globally acknowledged grand challenge problem so
improving observational and predictive capabilities in the FEWS framework will
have positive impacts on food, water, energy, and national
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.