* 1805451
* Collaborative Research: Nanofluidics Enabled Attenuation of Dynamic Impacts and Stress Waves
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Baoxing Xu, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 235,000.00

Dynamic impacts can cause stress waves within solid materials, resulting in
damage to infrastructure, personnel, or devices. However, current approaches to
mitigate stress waves are inadequate in that they rely on energy absorption
associated with unrecoverable buckling and/or plastic deformation of materials
and structures. Moreover, the time required to deform these materials is
typically much longer than the time needed for dynamic impacts and stress waves
to propagate through these protection materials. Nanofluidics, in which the
liquid is forced into nanoscale channels by an external pressure or stress, is
expected to attenuate stress waves and offers a entirely new paradigm for the
design of protection materials and structures. The overarching goal of this
project is to investigate and understand nanofluidics-enabled mitigation of
dynamic impacts and stress waves with particular focus on nanofluidics in three-
dimensional nanoporous networks. This collaborative project will also provide a
broad impact on education including professional trainings to both graduate and
undergraduate students, and on outreach including inspiring interactions with
local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this collaborative
project is to systematically investigate the science of nanofluidics in non-
wetting liquid-solid nanoporous composite materials, and to explore its
underlying protection mechanism for mitigating dynamic impacts and stress waves.
To this end, the proposed research will focus on three tasks: (i) to investigate
and unveil the science of nanofluidics in non-wetting liquid-solid nanoporous
structures under a high speed loading using atomistic simulations, (ii) to
develop a theoretical model of nanofluidic energy capture mechanism to quantify
nanofluidic responses to dynamic impacts and stress waves, and (iii) to design
and carry out verification experiments at high strain rates by employing non-
wetting liquid-solid nanoporous materials platforms. The nanofluidic energy
capture mechanism will refresh existing design strategies of protection
materials and structures subjected to stress waves, thereby revolutionizing both
fundamental nanofluidics and application technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.