* 1805179
* Electrowetting-assisted Dropwise Condensation on Hybrid Superhydrophobic-Hydrophilic Surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Alan Lyons, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2022
* USD 360,742.00

Water consumed by thermal power generation stations accounts for 40% of total US
freshwater withdrawal. This is non-sustainable; hence, electric utilities need
more water-efficient methods for cooling. Heating, ventilation and air
conditioning (HVAC) systems also suffer from inefficient cooling technologies,
resulting in excessive energy demands. In these applications, waste heat is
removed when water vapor condenses on a metal surface forming a continuous
liquid film. This layer of water conducts heat poorly, compared to the metal,
and so decreases system efficiency. However, if the metal surface is modified to
repel water, the vapor will condense in the form of droplets that roll-off the
surface before forming a continuous liquid film. After rolling off, the metal
surface is re-exposed. This results in enhanced performance that reduces cooling
water consumption; increases electrical efficiency; and lessens the
environmental impact of the process. These benefits result in smaller condensers
and reduced capital and operational expenditures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
NSF project, we fabricate novel condenser surfaces that increase energy
efficiency in thermal power generation and HVAC by promoting dropwise
condensation through a combination of superhydrophobicity and electro-wetting.
The influence of phenomena like electrowettability, gas diffusion, thermal
transport and Marangoni convection on the stability of the Cassie state are
studied using a combination of modeling and experiments. This requires capturing
the effects of deforming menisci and, once the liquid phase reaches the
advancing contact angle, moving triple contact lines. EW-induced pumping on
textured superhydrophobic surfaces is studied. Novel pumping configurations are
analyzed, wherein AC electric fields induce a body force and a torque on the
droplet to initiate its ?rolling? on superhydrophobic surfaces.
Materials/manufacturing issues associated with the development of durable,
scalable, polymer coatings for dropwise condensation are also investigated and
will be shared through outreach to local high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.