* 1805677
* Oligomers vs. Phenolics from Hydrolytic Lignin Pyrolysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2023
* Lavrent Khachatryan, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 291,341.00

Understanding and controlling lignin pyrolyis is an important problem whose
solution may enable cost-effective production of biofuels and high-value
chemicals from biomass feedstocks. Lignin is a complex material and its
pyrolytic decomposition is a rich field for scientific inquiry. Conventional
methods of studying lignin pyrolysis are limited by the inability to know or set
the residence time of the lignin samples in the reaction zone, unknown
temperature profile, and inability to differentiate between secondary and
primary products. Reactors used in the proposed study are capable of rapid
heating to well-defined temperatures and holding the lignin at these
temperatures for specific time intervals. The outcome of the proposed research
has the potential to enhance the fundamental knowledge of lignin chemistry and
provide guidelines for the controlled deconstruction of natural lignin to bio-
oil and value-added products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims to
develop fundamental knowledge concerning the underlying chemistry of homogeneous
lignin depolymerization in the gas phase. A key objective is to investigate the
primary processes of depolymerization, while avoiding the challenges posed by
conventional pyrolysis, including mass and heat transport limitations, that
depend om sample size, and surface effects, that affect product distribution in
the post pyrolysis secondary tar reactions. The proposed research will focus on
understanding the priority of formation of oligomers vs. phenolic compounds in
unconventional laser powered homogeneous pyrolysis and continuous droplet
evaporation reactors. The ultimate objective is a better fundamental
understanding of the depolymerization mechanism of lignin and the role of
intermediate species (oligomers) in the products distribution obtained from
batch pyrolysis reactors. The research results will be incorporated into
educational and outreach programs at Louisiana State University with special
emphasis on engaging underrepresented minority students and mentoring them into
pursuing careers in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.