* 1805724
* Globally convergent optimization for data-dependent systems enabled through a novel data-driven branch-and-bound framework
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2020
* Fani Boukouvala, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2020
* USD 300,284.00

Decision-making for complex engineering systems depends on the development of
algorithms for data-driven optimization based on data generated either by high
fidelity simulations and/or experiments. Despite the high potential of data-
driven optimization, there is currently a lack of efficient and scalable methods
that can provide high quality solutions for a general class of data-dependent
problems. The proposed work is motivated by the increasing number of
applications that can benefit from data-driven optimization and control,
including chemical process synthesis, enhanced oil recovery, carbon dioxide
sequestration, energy efficiency of buildings, and many
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is focused on the integration
of traditional process systems engineering with machine learning and uncertainty
quantification concepts to overcome key challenges of data-dependent
optimization which currently hinder their efficiency and scalability in
applications with a high number of dimensions and constraints. The objectives of
the proposed research are (a) the identification of efficient space and variable
decomposition strategies for creating tractable optimization sub-problems, (b)
the formulation of theoretically overestimating and underestimating
approximating functions for data-dependent correlations by leveraging data and
model uncertainty, and (c) the study of convergence rates and optimality bounds
of data-driven branch-and bound optimization for a large set of challenging
benchmark problems, as well as challenging case studies for oil-field
operations, enhanced oil recovery and building design and efficiency. The
central idea of this work is the formulation of novel under/over-estimating
approximations, which will be incorporated within a novel customized branch
&amp; bound search to systematically identify optimal solutions with a tractable
number of samples and improved convergence rates. Scalable data-driven
optimization tools and a benchmarking library will be created and made publicly
available with examples drawn from prominent fields, such as mechanical and
structural design, chemical flowsheet design, oilfield control, parameter
estimation, and protein folding. There is also a plan to incorporate data-
science concepts into the chemical engineering education in the form of teaching
modules that will be made available to the academic community at large. A
Vertically Integrated Projects (VIP) program is also proposed aimed at
attracting undergraduate students from science and engineering disciplines to
work as members of interdisciplinary teams towards solving challenging data-
driven optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.