* 1805764
* Kinetic Effects in Nonlinear Plasma Waves
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2021
* Thomas O'Neil, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 08/31/2021
* USD 510,000.00

This award supports a program of experiments, simulations, and theory on a new
type of instability of large amplitude plasma waves - waves in a gas of freely
interacting electrically charged particles. The studies will focus on and
characterize novel 'kinetic' effects that appear to dominate this instability in
waves that propagate with nearly constant wave speed. Such waves are ubiquitous
in both naturally-occurring and laboratory plasmas. The new instability
mechanism is quite simple and general, and therefore has application to a range
of scenarios, including space plasmas and fusion plasmas for power
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiments will be performed on non-neutral
plasmas, utilizing an electron trap and an ion trap with a broad range of
operating regimes and diagnostics. The simplicity of these systems allows a
depth of understanding and a precision of comparison between theory and
experiment which is rarely possible for quasi-neutral plasmas in complex
geometry. The goal is to verify applicability of the theory, and to stimulate
new theory where needed. Recent analysis has found that, surprisingly, standard
fluid theory is inadequate to describe parametric instability for near-acoustic
Trivelpiece-Gould [TG] plasma waves. A new kinetic instability mechanism,
involving a small fraction of plasma that is trapped in the wave troughs, will
be studied and applied to understand parametric instabilities observed both in
TG waves and in electron-acoustic waves. Experiments and simulations will be
used to characterize the particle distribution under the action of the wave,
including trapped particles, for direct comparison to
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.