* 1805618
* Temperature and variability of the Atlantic Warm Pool during and since the Little Ice Age
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2018,12/31/2020
* Anne Cohen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Steven A. Hovan
* 12/31/2020
* USD 553,178.00

Surface ocean heat in the western tropical Atlantic, specifically the Atlantic
Warm Pool (AWP) region, fuels Atlantic hurricane activity and exerts strong
influence on rainfall in the northeastern Pacific, Central America, and
southeastern United States. How the size and temperature of the AWP responds to
climate change, however, is not well-understood, in large part because the
instrumental record of ocean temperature is too short to enable accurate
evaluation of variability on the decadal and multi-decadal timescales over which
climate change occurs. Massive long-lived corals that grew on reefs in the AWP
record this information in the geochemistry of their skeletons. This project
will utilize a newly developed coral paleothermometer, Sr-U, to reconstruct
continuous records of temperature in the AWP during and since the Little Ice Age
(the last ~500 years). The project includes mentorship of a postdoctoral
researcher and two graduate students from the Autonomous University of Mexico
(UNAM) and University of Puerto Rico (UPR) who will participate in fieldwork,
laboratory analyses and manuscript preparation. A successful outcome will
provide the data needed to characterize the influence of anthropogenic warming
on the AWP and to evaluate the skill of model projections of future climate
change in the Atlantic sector. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the second largest body
of warm water on the planet, the AWP exerts a significant influence on climate.
Sea surface temperatures (SST) in the western tropical AWP are correlated to the
Atlantic Multidecadal Oscillation (AMO), hurricane intensities and precipitation
anomalies in the northeastern Pacific, Central America, and southeastern United
States. Yet, the pre-20th century SST evolution of the AWP is poorly
constrained, limiting our understanding of the sensitivity of AWP temperature,
size, and variability to the natural and anthropogenic forcing of climate. This
project will apply a novel new coral paleothermometer, Sr-U, to reconstruct
continuous records of SST over the past 500 years using corals sampled at three
locations ideally placed to study the expansion and contraction of the AWP on
multidecadal time scales. The new data, from corals collected near the eastern
Yucatan Peninsula, US Virgin Islands and Bahamas, will enable evaluation of the
timing and nature of the anthropogenic imprint on the AWP, the persistence of
multi-decadal variability in the AWP, the sensitivity of AWP SSTs to solar,
volcanic and internal forcing, and the link between AWP and Atlantic hurricane
variability. SST records from these three sites will also provide new evidence
for the overall magnitude of LIA cooling in the WTA, a subject of great
uncertainty, and be used to evaluate the skill of model projections of future
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.