* 1805584
* Quantify the roles of the different key factors in the Houston flood during Hurricane Harvey
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Huilin Gao, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 159,391.00

Coastal flooding threatens environmental sustainability globally. Recently,
Hurricane Harvey unleashed catastrophic flooding and associated losses on Harris
County, Texas. In particular, the area north-west of Houston was overwhelmed by
the release of water from the Barker and Addicks Reservoirs. Mitigation of the
impacts of coastal urban flooding relies on untangling the hydrological
processes under a series of factors - namely, urbanization, weather prediction,
and reservoir flow regulation. Therefore, the research goal of this project is
to quantify the roles of the different key factors in the Houston area flooding
that occurred during Hurricane Harvey. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
research objectives are: 1) Quantifying the role of urbanization in exacerbating
the flooding; 2) Evaluating the skill of precipitation forecasting, and its
impact on streamflow prediction; and 3) Investigating the effectiveness of
reservoir flow regulation during the event.The research will take advantage of a
high-performance hydrological model with a newly implemented reservoir
component. The research using this integrated modeling framework will help close
existing knowledge gaps, and will improve future decision making under extreme
flood events. First, the additional streamflow attributed to urban development
during Harvey will be quantified by comparing hydrological model outputs under a
series of historical land covers. Second, the performance of the operational
precipitation and streamflow forecasts will be evaluated, and their associated
uncertainties will be quantified. Third, the reservoir module of the
hydrological model will be optimized under various land cover and precipitation
forecast scenarios, such that a better understanding about flow regulation under
various uncertainties can be gained. Furthermore, the project not only
seeks&lt;br/&gt;to untangle the complex interactions among urbanization, weather
prediction, and reservoir flow regulation, it also seeks solutions amidst
combined uncertainties. The research approaches and results are target to not
only benefit future decision making in the Houston area, but also to bring
insight for mitigating floods in other megacities along the world's coastlines.
The educational objective is to enhance environmental sustainability education
through involving students at all levels - from K-12 to undergraduate and
graduate students. These activities will center on different aspects of
Hurricane Harvey, and will engage students according to age and education
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.