* 1805052
* Fundamental Understanding of Redox Characteristics of Carbonyl Materials for Energy Storage Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,02/28/2022
* Seung Soon Jang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 02/28/2022
* USD 479,999.00

Cost-effective and high-performance electrochemical energy storage is
increasingly needed for stationary, large-scale applications such as for grid
load leveling and for energy storage for intermittent renewable energy sources.
However, current cost and performance of rechargeable lithium-ion batteries
limit their use in large-scale energy storage applications. Carbon-based organic
compound electrodes have the potential to serve as large-scale energy storage
systems, owing to their advantages, including high energy density, beneficial
environmental footprint, and use of earth-abundant resources. Current organic
electrode materials suffer from slow rate-performance and poor cycling
stability. This fundamental research project will result in new knowledge for
designing new organic electrodes with superior charge storage performance. The
research will establish the structure-performance property relationships of
organic electrode materials by combining computations and experiments. The key
innovation is that the new organic electrodes will be designed at the nanoscale
on highly conductive carbon substrates to achieve both high energy and high-
power densities. High-performance organic electrodes can also be used for energy
storage applications including portable power and electric vehicles. The future
energy science workforce will benefit through a research experience involving
nanoscience, electrochemistry and electrochemical engineering, materials
science, and computational science. The outreach activities will include
graduate and undergraduate student research projects based on synergistic
computational-experimental activities and the development of an educational
module on rechargeable batteries targeted towards K-12 students from diverse
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic electrode materials have advantages
over conventional inorganic electrodes for rechargeable lithium-ion battery
applications in terms of high theoretical capacity and low-cost. Recent research
efforts on organic electrode materials have been focused on carbonyl materials.
However, these organic materials generally have slow rate-performance and poor
cycling stability. Charge storage performance of carbonyl compounds may be
significantly improved through the molecular design on conductive carbon
substrates, such as carbon nanotubes and graphene. The goal of this research is
to understand the relationship of the multiscale chemical structures of
carbonyl-polymers on conductive carbon substrates with their charge storage
properties and performances. To achieve this goal, the research team will 1)
synthesize carbonyl-polymers on the conductive substrates using electrochemical
polymerization processes; 2) investigate the most probable structure of
carbonyl-polymer using the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation method; 3) predict
the charge storage properties of carbonyl-polymer using Density Functional
Theory (DFT) methods; and 4) evaluate charge storage properties/performance of
carbonyl-polymer electrodes using electrochemical techniques. This fundamental
study will be used to identify the ideal carbonyl-based electrodes for superior
charge storage properties/performances, which can be directly used for high-
performance and cost-effective rechargeable batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.