* 1805804
* Adhesion and Resuspension of Biological Particulate Matter in Early-Childhood Indoor Microenvironments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2018,08/31/2022
* Brandon Boor, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2022
* USD 315,476.00

Infants and toddlers spend over 90% of their time indoors and are thus exposed
to numerous agents in the indoor environment. House dust is heavily enriched
with an incredible diversity of microbes and allergens. Early-life inhalation
exposures to the microbial and allergenic content of indoor dust can play a
significant role in both the development of, and protection against, asthma and
allergic diseases. As infants crawl, play, and learn to walk, they stir-up
(resuspend) concentrated clouds of biological particulate matter (bioPM:
bacteria, fungi, pollen) from settled dust. The resuspension and adhesion of
indoor bioPM remains poorly characterized. New research is needed to uncover the
underlying transport mechanisms that govern bioPM exposures during this critical
period in human immunological development. The goal of this project is to
explicitly elucidate the fundamental mechanisms governing the adhesion,
resuspension, and airborne transport of bioPM in early-childhood
microenvironments. Exposure will be determined using a novel robot designed to
simulate the movement of infants in the indoor environment and exposure to
bioPM. This research has the potential to transform our understanding of infant
exposure to bioPM at a critical stage in their development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a mechanistic framework, this project will make
substantial contributions towards a fundamental understanding of the complex
adhesion and human-driven resuspension processes that control the emissions,
airborne transport, and fate of bioPM from settled dust in indoor environments.
The specific objectives are: 1) investigate the adhesive interactions between
bioPM and indoor surfaces through atomic force microscopy and explore the impact
of bioPM morphology, hydrophobicity, charge, and humidity on adhesion forces; 2)
develop a novel robotic platform to simulate infant/toddler movements informed
by biometric data collected at the Purdue Miller Child Development Laboratory
School (MCDLS) and to investigate aerodynamic, vibrational, and electrostatic
bioPM removal forces; and 3) discover how infant/toddler movements resuspend
bioPM through chamber experiments with the robot and develop a material balance
model to predict bioPM fate and transport. This research will create new
knowledge on how bioPM physiochemical properties affect adhesion forces to
indoor surfaces. For the first time, bioPM removal mechanisms induced by forms
of locomotion unique to infants will be determined. This project will generate
extensive empirical data on bioPM adhesion forces and resuspension fractions.
The novelty of the research is further exemplified by the integration of
accelerometry data collected in a childcare center with infants/toddlers from 6
weeks to 3 years of age into the design of a robot for use in research at the
interface of aerosol physics and microbiology. Lastly, the study will make
innovative use of a Raspberry Pi-based low-cost particle sensor array to explore
spatiotemporal variations in concentrations of resuspended bioPM which will
infom the development of a multi-zone material balance model. Undergraduate
students will participate in the bioPM experiments, in service learning projects
on indoor air quality issues in K-12 schools as part of an interdisciplinary
Engineering Projects in Community Service (EPICS) team, and in the development
of the Raspberry Pi-based sensors and robot. New graduate course content on
bioPM material balance modelling will be created. The project will actively
involve Purdue MCDLS teachers, parents, custodial staff, and building facility
managers to engage those who interact directly with infants and their indoor
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.