* 1805340
* Collaborative Research: Connecting local stormwater decision-making to environmental outcomes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2018,05/31/2022
* Aditi Bhaskar, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2022
* USD 63,366.00

1805319 (Jefferson) / 1805340 (Bhaskar). Stormwater management is a multi-
billion dollar enterprise in the United States that depends on human decisions
at local to regional scales to achieve watershed scale environmental goals. This
research aims to determine how decision-making processes influence actions taken
to manage stormwater and the subsequent environmental outcomes at the watershed
scale. The project will compare the Cleveland and Denver metropolitan regions,
which are characterized by distinct institutional and environmental conditions,
in order to distill general lessons about stormwater management dynamics in
urbanizing regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will determine how
individual and institutional decision-making processes influence stormwater
management actions through analysis of policy documents and a survey of
stormwater managers (Objective 1). The research team will quantify how
stormwater management actions influence flow regime at watershed scales through
a combination of field monitoring and modeling (Objective 2). Further, the team
will evaluate how flow regime modifies the ecosystem health status of urban
watersheds (Objective 3). Findings from these objectives will be integrated to
predict environmental outcomes from stormwater management strategies through a
Bayesian network model linking decision-making to environmental outcomes
(Objective 4). This study presents an integrative framework to empirically
establish the cascading effects of decisions on stormwater management actions
and environmental outcomes, both within and across regions. New scientific
insight into stormwater management for urban aquatic ecosystem health is
targeted to inform future directions of stormwater programs in US urban areas.
This research will provide education and training opportunities around
engineered stormwater systems and urban watersheds for K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students through hands-on research and data-based course activities.
Science communication training, through a workshop that culminates in writing a
"Data Nugget", will be provided to research team members, university
researchers, and regional environmental education partners. Data Nuggets are
exercises for K-12 classrooms that use real data to provide students with
practice making scientific claims based on quantitative evidence. Data Nuggets
developed by the research team will be tailored to the needs of Cleveland
Metroparks and Denver KIC-NET partners and will also be made available online.
Data will be made available through the CUAHSI Hydrologic Information
System.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.