* 1805167
* Manipulating Supramolecular Assembly in Water and Aqueous Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2018,07/31/2022
* Bruce Gibb, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2022
* USD 320,000.00

Deep cavity cavitands are container-shaped supramolecular complexes that contain
a one-nanometer, rigid, non-polar binding pocket and a hydrophilic exterior
coating that bestows good water solubility. Cavitands have proven useful "hosts"
because of their ability to bind other molecules, or "guests", within their
pockets and assemble in well-defined stoichiometries. They have applications in
studies of protein solubility, in controlled release of pharmaceuticals, in
separations, in the precise control of photochemical reactions, and as gelling
agents. The fundamental understanding of these supramolecular complexes requires
a molecular-level understanding of the interactions between hosts and guests in
solution. A collaborative research project is proposed that combines molecular
simulation and experimental studies aimed at investigating the impact of aqueous
mixtures with co-solvent and polymeric additives on the forces driving cavitand
assembly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the proposed research is
to develop molecular tools for controlling supramolecular cavitand assembly by
manipulating the solvent properties that mediate host/guest interactions. The
following topics will be studied: 1) How do alcoholic co-solvents moderate
cavitand binding and assembly thermodynamics for a series of amphiphilic and
non-polar guests? 2) How do changes in the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of
the functional groups ringing the cavitand host pocket portals impact pocket
hydration thermodynamics, drying/filling kinetics, and guest binding affinities?
3) What is the impact of water-soluble polymer crowding agents on the stability
of moderately stable dimeric cavitand complexes? Molecular dynamics simulations
of guest binding and cavitand complex formation will be performed over a range
of solvent conditions and cavitand functions to examine water and alcohol
structural correlations with host/guest complexes, complexation thermodynamics,
wetting of host binding pockets, and osmotic stresses to gain molecular-scale
insights into the forces stabilizing these assemblies. Complementary experiments
will be performed to examine the effects of host functions and aqueous mixture
compositions on the resulting cavitand complexes, using Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance and light scattering, and the underlying assembly thermodynamics,
using calorimetry. In addition to graduate and undergraduate student training,
the proposed project will include an outreach program to the New Orleans Charter
Science and Mathematics High School that serves a predominantly underrepresented
minority student base.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.